Skip to main content

Full text of "John Ploughman's talk;"
See other formats
*       o 


\^p     °^/       'V 


*o 


H  O 
.  '  •  •-         Cv  0^ 


^     ..- 


\ 


'bV 


5  <!>      *  o  „  o  '       o? 


C.     H.     SPURGEON 


JOHN  «*  •*  •*  •*  •*  •* 
LOUGHMAN'So.  * 

JL     fj   I    >*l\^  «£*     e£*     vF     vP     «£* 

OR,  PLAIN  ADVICE  FOR  PLAIN  PEOPLE 

/ 

by  C.  H.  SPURGEON 



4*^ 


Philadelphia  &  £  &  *#  & 



is? 


Copyrighted,  1896,  by  Henry  Altemus. 


HENRY  ALTEMUS,  MANUFACTURER, 
PHILADELPHIA. 


PREFACE. 

IN  "John  Ploughman's  Talk"  I  have 
written  for  ploughmen  and  common 
people.  Hence  refined  taste  and  dainty 
words  have  been  discarded  for  strong  pro- 
verbial expressions  and  homely  phrases.  I 
have  aimed  my  blows  at  the  vices  of  the 
many,  and  tried  to  inculcate  those  moral 
virtues  without  which  men  are  degraded. 
Much  that  needs  to  be  said  to  the  toiling 
masses  would  not  well  suit  the  pulpit  and 
the  Sabbath ;  these  lowly  pages  may  teach 
thrift  and  industry  all  the  days  of  the  week, 
in  the  cottage  and  the  workshop ;  and  if 
some  learn  these  lessons  I  shall  not  repent 
the  adoption  of  a  rustic  style. 

Ploughman  is  a  name  I  may  justly  claim. 
Every  minister  has  put  his  hand  to  the 
plough :  and  it  is  his  business  to  break  up 

(3) 


4  PREFACE. 

the  fallow  ground.  That  I  have  written  in 
a  semi-humorous  vein  needs  no  apology, 
since  thereby  sound  moral  teaching  has 
gained  a  hearing  from  at  least  300,000  per- 
sons. There  is  no  particular  virtue  in  be- 
ing seriously  unreadable. 

A  pickle  jar  has  these  words  upon  it :  "  If 
you  like  our  pickles,  try  our  sauce,"  and 
so  I  would  add,  if  you  like  "  John  Plough- 
man's Talk,"  try  his  "  Pictures;  "  which  is  a 
second  volume  of  the  same  character  as  the 
present. 

C.  H.  SPURGEON. 


CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

To  the  Idle 7 

On  Religious  Grumblers 22 

On  the  Preacher's  Appearance 33 

On  Good  Nature  and  Firmness 39 

On  Patience 50 

On  Gossips 57 

On  Seizing  Opportunities 62 

On  Keeping  One's  Eyes  Open 69 

Thoughts  about  Thought 76 

Faults S3 

Things  not  worth  Trying 89 

Debt 96 

Home Ill 

Men  who  are  Down 123 

Hope 131 

Spending 140 

A  Good  Word  for  Wives 148 

Men  with  Two  Faces 163 

Hints  as  to  Thriving 1 73 

Tall  Talk 185 

Things  I  would  not  Choose      ........  197 

Try 204 

Monuments 213 

Very  Ignorant  People 221 

(5) 


JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S  TALL 


IT  is  of  no  more  use  to  give  advice  to  the 
idle  than  to  pour  water  into  a   sieve  ; 
and    as  to   improving  them,  one  might  as 

(7) 


8  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

well  try  to  fatten  a  greyhound.  Yet,  as 
The  Old  Book  tells  us  to  "  cast  our  bread 
upon  the  waters,"  we  will  cast  a  hard  crust 
or  two  upon  these  stagnant  ponds ;  for  there 
will  be  this  comfort  about  it,  if  lazy  fellows 
grow  no  better,  we  shall  be  none  the  worse 
for  having  warned  them  ;  for  when  we  sow 
good  sense,  the  basket  gets  none  the 
emptier.  We  have  a  stiff  bit  of  soil  to 
plough  when  we  chide  with  sluggards,  and 
the  crop  will  be  of  the  smallest ;  but  if  none 
but  good  land  were  farmed,  ploughmen 
would  be  out  of  work  ;  so  we'll  put  the 
plough  into  the  furrow.  Idle  men  are  com- 
mon enough,  and  grow  without  planting, 
but  the  quantity  of  wit  among  seven  acres 
of  them  would  never  pay  for  raking:  noth- 
ing is  needed  to  prove  this  but  their  name 
and  their  character ;  if  they  were  not  fools 
they  would  not  be  idlers ;  and  though  Solo- 
mon says,  "  The  sluggard  is  wiser  in  his 
own  conceit  than  seven  men  that  can  ren- 
der a  reason,"  yet  in  the  eyes  of  every  one 
else  his  folly  is  as  plain  as  the  sun  in  the 
sky.  If  I  hit  hard  while  speaking  to  them, 
it  is  because  I  know  they  can  bear  it ;  for 
if  I  had  them  down  on  the  floor  of  the  old 


TO    THE  IDLE.  9 

barn,  I  might  thresh  many  a  day  before  I 
could  get  them  out  of  the  straw,  and  even 
the  steam  thresher  could  not  do  it,  it  would 
kill  them  first;  for  laziness  is  in  some 
people's  bones,  and  will  show  itself  in  their 
idle  flesh,  do  what  you  will  with  them. 

Well,  then,  first  and  foremost,  it  strikes 
me  that  lazy  people  ought  to  have  a  large 
looking  glass  hung  up,  where  they  are 
bound  to  see  themselves  in  it ;  for  sure, 
if  their  eyes  are  at  all  like  mine,  they  would 
never  bear  to  look  at  themselves  long  or 
often.  The  ugliest  sight  in  the  world  is 
one  of  those  thorough-bred  loafers,  who 
would  hardly  hold  up  his  basin  if  it  were 
to  rain  porridge ;  and  for  certain  would 
never  hold  up  a  bigger  pot  than  he  wanted 
filled  for  himself.  Perhaps,  if  the  shower 
should  turn  to  beer,  he  might  wake  him- 
self up  a  bit ;  but  he  would  make  up  for  it 
afterwards.  This  is  the  slothful  man  in  the 
Proverbs,  who  uhideth  his  hand  in  his 
bosom ;  it  grieveth  him  to  bring  it  again  to 
his  mouth."  I  say  that  men  the  like  of  this 
ought  to  be  served  like  the  drones  which 
the  bees  drive  out  of  the  hives.  Every 
man  ought  to  have  patience  and  pity  for 


io  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

poverty;  but  for  laziness,  a  long  whip;  or 
a  turn  at  the  treadmill  might  be  better. 
This  would  be  healthy  physic  for  all  slug- 
gards;  but  there  is  no  chance  of  some  of 
them  getting  their  full  doze  of  this  medi- 
cine, for  they  were  born  with  silver  spoons 
in  their  mouths,  and  like  spoons,  they  will 
scarce  stir  their  own  tea  unless  somebody 
lends  them  a  hand.  They  are,  as  the  old 
proverb  says/*  as  lazy  as  Ludham's  dog,  that 
leaned  his  head  against  the  wall  to  bark  ;" 
and,  like  lazy  sheep,  it  is  too  much  trouble 
for  them  to  carry  their  own  wool.  If  they 
could  see  themselves,  it  might  by  chance  do 
them  a  world  of  good;  but  perhaps  it 
would  be  too  much  trouble  for  them  to 
open  their  eyes  even  if  the  glass  were  hung 
for  them. 

Everything  in  the  world  is  of  some  use  ; 
but  it  would  puzzle  a  doctor  of  divinity,  or 
a  philosopher,  or  the  wisest  owl  in  our 
steeple,  to  tell  the  good  of  idleness :  that 
seems  to  me  to  be  an  ill  wind  which  blows 
nobody  any  good — a  sort  of  mud  which 
breeds  no  eels,  a  dirty  ditch  which  would 
not  feed  a  frog.  Sift  a  sluggard  grain  by 
grain,  and  you'll  find  him  all  chaff.     I  have 


TO    THE   IDLE.  II 

heard  men  say,  "  Better  do  nothing  than  do 
mischief,"  but  I  am  not  even  sure  of  that: 
that  saying  glitters  well,  but  I  don't  believe 
it's  gold.  I  grudge  laziness  even  that  pinch 
of  praise,  I  say  it  is  bad  and  bad  altogether  ; 
for  look  ye,  a  man  doing  mischief  is  a  spar- 
row picking  the  corn — but  a  lazy  man  is  a 
sparrow  sitting  on  a  nest  full  of  eggs,  which 
will  all  turn  to  sparrows  before  long,  and  do 
a  world  of  hurt.  Don't  tell  me,  I'm  sure 
of  it,  that  the  rankest  weeds  on  earth  don't 
grow  in  the  minds  of  those  who  are  busy  at 
wickedness,  but  in  foul  corners  of  idle  men's 
imaginations,  where  the  devil  can  hide  away 
unseen  like  an  old  serpent  as  he  is.  I  don't 
like  our  boys  to  be  in  mischief,  but  I  would 
sooner  see  them  up  to  their  necks  in  the 
mud  in  their  larks,  than  sauntering  about 
with  nothing  to  do.  If  the  evil  of  doing 
nothing  seems  to  be  less  to-day,  you  will 
find  it  out  to  be  greater  to-morrow ;  the 
devil  is  putting  coals  on  the  fire,  and  so  the 
fire  does  not  blaze,  but,  depend  upon  it,  it 
will  be  a  bigger  fire  in  the  end.  Idle  peo- 
ple, you  had  need  be  your  own  trumpeters, 
for  no  one  else  can  find  any  good  in  you  to 
praise.     I'd  sooner  see  you  through  a  tele- 


12  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

scope  than  anything  else,  for  I  suppose  you 
would  then  be  a  long  way  off;  but  the  big- 
gest pair  of  spectacles  in  the  parish  could 
not  see  anything  in  you  worth  talking 
about.  Moles,  and  rats,  and  weasels,  there 
is  something  to  be  said  for,  though  there's 
a  pretty  sight  of  them  nailed  up  on  our  old 
barn,  but  as  for  you — well,  you'll  be  of  use 
in  the  grave,  and  help  to  make  a  fat  church- 
yard, but  no  better  song  can  I  sing  in  your 
favor  than  this  verse,  as  the  parish  clerk 
said,  "  all  of  my  own  composing  :  " 

A  good-for-nothing  lazy  lout, 
Wicked  within  and  ragged  without, 
Who  can  bear  to  have  him  about  ? 
Turn  him  out !     Turn  him  out ! 

"As  vinegar  to  the  teeth,  and  as  smoke  to 
the  eyes,"  so  is  the  sluggard  to  every  man 
who  is  spending  his  sweat  to  earn  an  hon- 
est living,  while  these  fellows  let  the  grass 
grow  up  to  their  ankles,  and  stand  cumber- 
ing the  ground,  as  the  Bible  says. 

A  man  who  wastes  his  time  and  his 
strength  in  sloth  offers  himself  to  be  a  tar- 
get for  the  devil,  who  is  a  wonderfully  good 
rifleman,  and  will  riddle  the  idler  with  his 


TO    THE   IDLE.  13 

shots :  in  other  words,  idle  men  tempt  the 
devil  to  tempt  them.  He  who  plays  when 
he  should  work,  has  an  evil  spirit  to  be 
his  playmate;  and  he  who  neither  works 
nor  plays  is  a  workshop  for  Satan.  If  the 
devil  catch  a  man  idle,  he  will  set  him  to 
work,  find  him  tools,  and  before  long  pay 
him  wages.  Is  not  this  where  the  drunken- 
ness comes  from  which  fills  our  towns  and 
villages  with  misery  ?  Idleness  is  the  key 
of  beggary,  and  the  root  of  all  evil.  Fellows 
have  two  stomachs  for  eating  and  drinking 
when  they  have  no  stomach  for  work.  That 
little  hole  just  under  the  nose  swallows  up 
in  idle  hours  that  money  which  should  put 
clothes  on  the  children's  backs,  and  bread 
on  the  cottage  table.  We  have  God's  word 
for  it,  that  "  the  drunkard  and  the  glutton 
shall  come  to  poverty ; "  and  to  show  the 
connection  between  them,  it  is  said  in  the 
same  verse,  "  and  drowsiness  shall  clothe  a 
man  with  rags."  I  know  it  as  well  as  I 
know  that  moss  grows  on  old  thatch,  that 
drunken,  loose  habits  grow  out  of  lazy 
hours.  I  like  leisure  when  I  can  get  it,  but 
that's  quite  another  thing ;  that's  cheese 
and  the  other  is  chalk ;  idle  folks  never  know 


14  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

what  leisure  means ;  they  are  always  in  a 
hurry  and  a  mess,  and  by  neglecting  to 
work  in  the  proper  time,  they  always  have 
a  lot  to  do.  Lolling  about  hour  after  hour, 
with  nothing  to  do,  is  just  making  holes  in 
the  hedge  to  let  the  pigs  through,  and  they 
will  come  through,  and  no  mistake,  and  the 
rooting  they  will  do  nobody  knows  but 
those  who  have  to  look  after  the  garden. 
The  Lord  Jesus  tells  us  himself  that  when 
men  slept  the  enemy  sowed  the  tares  ;  and 
that  hits  the  nail  on  the  head,  for  it  is  by 
the  door  of  sluggishness  that  evil  enters 
the  heart  more  often,  it  seems  to  me,  than 
by  any  other.  Our  old  minister  used  to 
say,  "A  sluggard  is  fine  raw  material  for' 
the  devil ;  he  can  make  anything  he  likes 
out  of  him,  from  a  thief  right  up  to  a  mur- 
derer." I'm  not  the  only  one  that  con- 
demns the  idle,  for  once  when  I  was  going 
to  give  our  minister  a  pretty  long  list  of  the 
sins  of  one  of  our  people  that  he  was  asking 
after,  I  began  with  "  he's  dreadfully  lazy." 
"  That's  enough,"  said  the  old  gentleman; 
"all  sorts  of  sins  are  in  that  one,  that's 
the  sign  by  which  to  know  a  full-fledged 
sinner." 


TO    THE    IDLE,  15 

My  advice  to  my  boys  has  been,  get  out 
of  the  sluggard's  way,  or  you  may  catch  his 
disease,  and  never  get  rid  of  it.  I  am  al- 
ways afraid  of  their  learning  the  ways  of  the 
idle,  and  am  very  watchful  to  nip  anything 
of  the  sort  in  the  bud ;  for  you  know  it  is 
best  to  kill  a  lion  while  it  is  a  cub.  Sure 
enough  our  children  have  all  our  evil  nature 
about  them,  for  you  can  see  it  growing  of 
itself  like  weeds  in  a  garden.  Who  can 
bring  a  clean  thing  out  of  the  unclean  ?  A 
wild  goose  never  lays  a  tame  egg.  Our 
boys  will  be  off  to  the  green  with  the  ne'er- 
do-wells  unless  we  make  it  greener  still  at 
home  for  them,  and  train  them  up  to  hate 
the  company  of  the  slothful.  Never  let 
tjiem  go  to  the  "  Rose  and  Crown;"  let 
them  learn  to  earn  a  crown  while  they  are 
young,  and  grow  the  roses  in  their  father's 
garden  at  home.  Bring  them  up  bees  and 
they  will  not  be  drones. 

There  is  much  talk  about  bad  masters 
and  mistresses  nowadays,  and  I  dare  say 
that  there  is  a  good  deal  in  it,  for  there's  bad 
of  all  sorts  now  as  there  always  was  ;  another 
time,  if  I  am  allowed,  I  will  have  a  say 
about  that  matter ;  but  I  am  sure  there  is 


16  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

plenty  of  room  for  complaint  against  some 
among  the  working  people  too,  especially 
upon  this  matter  of  slothfulness.  You  know 
we  are  obliged  to  plough  with  such  cattle 
as  we  have  found  for  us ;  but  when  I  am 
set  to  work  with  some  men,  I'd  as  soon 
drive  a  team  of  snails,  or  go  out  rabbit  hunt- 
ing with  a  dead  ferret.  Why,  you  might 
sooner  get  blood  out  of  a  gatepost,  or 
juice  out  of  a  cork,  than  work  out  of  some 
of  them ;  and  yet  they  are  always  talking 
about  their  rights  ;  I  wish  they  would  give 
an  eye  to  their  own  wrongs,  and  not  lean 
on  the  plough-handles.  Lazy  lie-a-beds 
are  not  working  men  at  all,  any  more  than 
pigs  are  bullocks,  or  thistles  apple  trees. 
All  are  not  hunters  that  wear  red  coats, 
and  all  are  not  working  men  who  call 
themselves  so.  I  wonder  sometimes  that 
some  of  our  employers  keep  so  many  cats 
who  catch  no  mice.  I  would  as  soon  drop 
my  halfpence  down  a  well  as  pay  some 
people  for  pretending  to  work,  who  only 
fidget  you  and  make  your  flesh  crawl  to 
see  them  all  day  creeping  over  a  cabbage 
leaf.     Live  and  let  live,  say  I,  but  I  don't 


TO    THE   IDLE.  1 7 

include  sluggards  in  that  license ;  for  they 
who  will  not  work,  neither  let  them  eat. 

Here,  perhaps,  is  the  proper  place  to  say 
that  some  of  the  higher  classes,  as  they 
are  called,  set  a  shamefully  bad  example  in 
this  respect :  our  great  folks  are  some  of 
them  quite  as  lazy  as  they  are  rich,  and 
often  more  so ;  the  big  dormice  sleep  as 
long  and  as  sound  as  the  little  ones.  Many 
a  parson  buys  or  hires  a  sermon,  so  that  he 
may  save  himself  the  trouble  of  thinking. 
Is  not  this  abominable  laziness  ?  They 
sneer  at  the  Ranters  ;  but  there  is  not  a 
Ranter  in  the  kingdom  but  what  would  be 
ashamed  to  stand  up  and  read  somebody 
else's  sermon  as  if  it  were  his  own.  Many 
of  our  squires  have  nothing  to  do  but  to 
part  their  hair  in  the  middle ;  and  many 
of  the  London  grandees,  ladies  and  gentle- 
men both  alike,  as  I  am  told,  have  no  bet- 
ter work  than  killing  time.  Now,  they  say 
the  higher  a*  monkey  climbs,  the  more  his 
tail  is  seen ;  and  so,  the  greater  these 
people  are,  the  more  their  idleness  is 
noticed,  and  the  more  they  ought  to  be 
ashamed  of  it.  I  don't  say  they  ought  to 
plough,  but  I  do  say  that  they  ought  to  do 


18  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

something  for  the  state,  besides  being  like 
the  caterpillars  on  the  cabbage,  eating  up 
the  good  things  ;  or  like  the  butterflies, 
showing  themselves  off,  but  making  no 
honey.  I  cannot  be  angry  with  these  peo- 
ple somehow,  for  I  pity  them  when  I  think 
of  the  stupid  rules  of  fashion  which  they 
are  forced  to  mind,  and  the  vanity  in  which 
they  weary  out  their  days.  I'd  sooner  by 
half  bend  my  back  double  with  hard  work 
than  be  a  jack-a-dandy,  with  nothing  to 
do  but  to  look  in  the  glass  and  see  in  it 
a  fellow  who  never  put  a  single  potato  into 
the  nation's  pot,  but  took  a  good  many 
out.  Let  me  drop  on  these  Surrey  hills, 
worn  out  like  my  master's  old  brown 
mare,  sooner  than  eat  bread  and  cheese 
and  never  earn  it ;  better  die  an  honorable 
death  than  live  a  good-for-nothing  life. 
Better  get  into  my  coffin,  than  be  dead  and 
alive,  a  man  whose  life  is  a  blank. 

However,  it  is  not  much  e^se  that  lazy 
people  get  by  all  their  scheming,  for  they 
always  take  the  most  pains  in  the  end; 
they  will  not  mend  the  thatch,  and  so 
they  have  to  build  a  new  cottage ;  they  will 
not  put  the  horse  in  the  cart,  and  so  have 


TO    THE    IDLE.  19 

to  drag  it  themselves.  If  they  were  wise, 
they  would  do  their  work  well,  so  as  to  save 
doing  it  twice  ;  and  tug  hard  while  they  are 
in  harness,  so  as  to  get  the  work  out  of  the 
way.  My  advice  is,  if  you  don't  like  hard 
work,  just  pitch  into  it,  settle  it  off,  and  have 
your  turn  at  rest. 

I  wish  all  religious  people  would  take  this 
matter  under  their  consideration  ;  for  some 
professors  are  amazingly  lazy,  and  make  sad 
work  for  the  tongues  of  the  wicked.  I  think 
a  godly  ploughman  ought  to  be  the  best 
man  in  the  field,  and  let  no  team  beat  him. 
When  we  are  at  work,  we  ought  to  be  at  it, 
and  not  stop  the  plough  to  talk,  even  though 
the  talk  may  be  about  religion;  for  then  we 
not  only  rob  our  employers  of  our  own  time, 
but  of  the  time  of  the  horses  too.  I  used  to 
hear  people  say,  "  Never  stop  the  plough  to 
catch  a  mouse,"  and  it's  quite  as  silly  to  stop 
for  idle  chat ;  besides,  the  man  who  loiters 
when  the  master  is  away  is  an  eye-server, 
which,  I  take  it,  is  the  very  opposite  of 
a  Christian.  If  some  of  the  members  of  our 
meeting  were  a  little  more  spry  with  their 
arms  and  legs  when  they  are  at  labor,  and  a 
little  quieter  with  their  tongues,  they  would 


20  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

say  more  for  our  religion  that  they  now 
do.  The  world  says  the  greatest  rogue  is 
the  pious  rogue ;  and  I'm  sorry  to  say  one 
of  the  greatest  sluggards  I  know  of  is  a  pro- 
fessing man  of  the  "  Mr.  Talkative  "  kind. 
His  garden  is  so  overgrown  with  weeds 
that  I  feel  often  half  a  mind  to  weed  it  for 
him,  to  save  our  meeting  the  shame  which 
he  brings  upon  it :  if  he  were  a  young  lad, 
I'd  talk  to  him  about  it  and  try  to  teach 
him  better,  but  who  can  be  schoolmaster  to 
a  child  sixty  years  old  ?  He  is  a  regular 
thorn  to  our  good  minister,  who  is  quite 
grieved  about  it,  and  sometimes  says  he 
will  go  somewhere  else  because  he  cannot 
bear  such  conduct ;  but  I  tell  him  that 
wherever  a  man  lives  he  is  sure  to  have  one 
thornbush  near  his  door,  and  it  is  a  mercy 
if  there  are  not  two.  However,  I  do  wish 
that  all  Christians  would  be  industrious,  for 
religion  never  was  designed  to  make  us 
idle.  Jesus  was  a  great  worker,  and  his 
disciples  must  not  be  afraid  of  hard  work. 

As  to  serving  the  Lord  with  cold  hearts 
and  drowsy  souls,  there  has  been  too  much 
of  it,  and  it  causes  religion  to  wither.  Men 
ride  stags  when  they  hunt  for  gain,  and 


TO    THE   IDLE.  21 

snails  when  they  are  on  the  road  to  heaven. 
Preachers  go  on  see-sawing,  droning,  and 
prosing,  and  the  people  fall  to  yawning  and 
folding  their  arms,  and  then  say  that  God  is 
withholding  the  blessing.  Every  sluggard, 
when  he  finds  himself  enlisted  in  the  ragged 
regiment,  blames  his  luck;  and  some 
churches  have  learned  the  same  wicked 
trick.  I  believe  that  when  Paul  plants  and 
Apollos  waters,  God  gives  the  increase,  and 
I  have  no  patience  with  those  who  throw 
the  blame  on  God  when  it  belongs  to  them- 
selves. 

Now  I  have  come  to  the  end  of  my 
tether.  I  am  afraid  I  have  been  watering 
a  dead  stake,  but  I  have  done  my  best,  and 
a  king  can  do  no  more.  An  ant  can  never 
make  honey  if  it  work  its  heart  out,  and  I 
shall  never  put  my  thoughts  so  prettily  to- 
gether as  some  do,  book-fashion  ;  but  truth 
is  truth,  even  when  dressed  in  homespun, 
and  so  there  is  an  end  of  my  rigmarole. 


ON   RELIGIOUS    GRUMBLERS. 


No  piper  ever  suited  all  ears." — Page  28 


WHEN  a  man  has  a  particularly  empty 
head  he  generally  sets  up  for  a  great 
judge,  especially  in  religion.     None  so  wise 
as  the  man  who  knows  nothing.     His  igno- 
rance is  the  mother  of  his  impudence,  and 
(22) 


ON  RELIGIOUS   GRUMBLERS.  23 

the  nurse  of  his  obstinacy ;  and  though  he 
does  not  know  B  from  a  bull's  foot,  he  set- 
tles matters  as  if  all  wisdom  were  at  his  fin- 
gers' ends — the  Pope  himself  is  not  more 
infallible.  Hear  him  talk  after  he  has  been 
at  meeting  and  heard  a  sermon,  and  you 
will  know  how  to  pull  a  good  man  to  pieces 
if  you  never  knew  it  before.  He  sees  faults 
where  there  are  none,  and  if  there  be  a  few 
things  amiss,  he  makes  every  mouse  into 
an  elephant.  Although  you  might  put  all 
his  wit  into  an  egg-shell,  he  weighs  the 
sermon  in  the  balances  of  his  conceit  with 
all  the  airs  of  a  bred-and-born  Solomon, 
and  if  it  be  up  to  his  standard,  he  lays  on 
his  praise  with  a  trowel ;  but  if  it  be  not  to 
his  taste,  he  growls  and  barks  and  snaps  at 
it  like  a  dog  at  a  hedgehog.  Wise  men  in 
this  world  are  like  trees  in  a  hedge,  there  is 
only  here  and  there  one ;  and  when  these 
rare  men  talk  together  upon  a  discourse,  it 
is  good  for  the  ears  to  hear  them ;  but  the 
bragging  wiseacres  I  am  speaking  of  are 
vainly  puffed  up  by  their  fleshly  minds,  and 
their  quibbling  is  as  senseless  as  the  cackle 
of  geese  on  a  common.  Nothing  comes 
out  of  a  sack  but  what  was  in  it,  and  as  their 


24  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

bag  is  empty  they  shake  nothing  but  wind 
out  of  it.  It  is  very  likely  that  neither 
ministers  nor  their  sermons  are  perfect — 
the  best  garden  may  have  a  few  weeds  in  it, 
the  cleanest  corn  may  have  some  chaff — 
but  cavillers  cavil  at  anything  or  nothing, 
and  find  fault  for  the  sake  of  showing  off 
their  deep  knowledge  :  sooner  than  let  their 
tongues  have  a  holiday,  they  would  com- 
plain that  the  grass  is  not  a  nice  shade  of 
blue,  and  say  that  the  sky  would  have 
looked  neater  if  it  had  been  whitewashed. 

One  tribe  of  these  Ishmaelites  is  made 
up  of  highflying  ignoramuses  who  are  very 
mighty  about  the  doctrine  of  a  sermon — 
here  they  are  as  decisive  as  sledge-hammers 
and  as  certain  as  death.  He  who  knows 
nothing  is  confident  in  everything ;  hence 
they  are  bullheaded  beyond  measure.  Every 
clock,  and  even  the  sundial,  must  be  set  ac- 
cording to  their  watches ;  and  the  slightest 
difference  from  their  opinion  proves  a  man 
to  be  rotten  at  heart.  Venture  to  argue 
with  them,  and  their  little  pot  boils  over  in 
quick  style;  ask  them  for  reason,  and  you 
might  as  well  go  to  a  sand-pit  for  sugar. 
They  have  bottled  up  the  sea  of  truth,  and 


ON  RELIGIOUS   GRUMBLERS,  25 

carry  it  in  their  waistcoat  pockets;  they 
have  measured  heaven's  line  of  grace,  and 
have  tied  a  knot  in  a  string  at  the  exact 
length  of  electing  love ;  and  as  for  the 
things  which  angels  long  to  know,  they  have 
seen  them  all  as  boys  see  sights  in  a  peep- 
show  at  our  fair.  Having  sold  their  mod- 
esty and  become  wiser  than  their  teachers, 
they  ride  a  very  high  horse,  and  jump  over 
all  five-barred  gates  of  Bible-texts  which 
teach  doctrines  contrary  to  their  notions. 
When  this  mischief  happens  to  good  men, 
it  is  a  great  pity  for  such  sweet  pots  of 
ointment  to  be  spoiled  by  flies,  yet  one 
learns  to  bear  with  them  just  as  I  do  with 
old  Violet,  for  he  is  a  rare  horse,  though  he 
does  set  his  ears  back  and  throw  out  his 
legs  at  times.  But  there  is  a  black  brag- 
ging lot  about,  who  are  all  sting  and  no 
honey ;  all  whip  and  no  hay ;  all  grunt 
and  no  bacon.  These  do  nothing  but  rail 
from  morning  to  night  at  all  who  cannot 
see  through  their  spectacles.  If  they  would 
but  mix  up  a  handful  of  good  living  with 
all  their  bushels  of  bounce,  it  would  be 
more  bearable ;  but  no,  they  don't  care  for 
such  legality;  men    so  sound  as    they  are 


26  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

can't  be  expected  to  be  good  at  anything 
else ;  they^  are  the  heavenly  watch-dogs  to 
guard  the  house  of  the  Lord  from  those 
thieves  and  robbers  who  don't  preach 
sound  doctrine,  and  if  they  do  worry  the 
sheep,  or  steal  a  rabbit  or  two  by  the  sly, 
who  would  have  the  heart  to  blame  them  ? 
The  Lord's  dear  people,  as  they  call  them- 
selves, have  enough  to  do  to  keep  their 
doctrine  sound  ;  and  if  their  manners  are 
cracked,  who  can  wonder!  no -man  can  see 
to  everything  at  once.  These  are  the 
moles  that  want  catching  in  many  of  our 
pastures,  not  for  their  own  sakes,  for  there 
is  not  a  sweet  mouthful  in  them,  but  for 
the  sake  of  the  meadows  which  they  spoil. 
I  would  not  find  half  a  fault  with  their  doc- 
trine, if  it  were  not  for  their  spirit ;  but 
vinegar  is  sweet  to  it,  and  crabs  are  figs  in 
comparison.  It  must  be  very  high  doc- 
trine that  is  too  high  for  me,  but  I  must 
have  high  experience  and  high  practice  with 
it,  or  it  turns  my  stomach.  However,  I 
have  said  my  say,  and  must  leave  the  sub- 
ject, or  somebody  will  ask  me,  "  What  have 
you  to  do  with  Bradshaw's  windmill  ?  " 
Sometimes   it   is   the   way  the   preacher 


ON  RELIGIOUS  GRUMBLERS.  27 

speaks  which  is  hauled  over  the  coals,  and 
here  again  is  a  fine  field  for  fault  hunting, 
for  every  bean  has  its  black,  and  every  man 
has  his  failing.  I  never  knew  a  good  horse 
which  had  not  some  odd  habit  or  other,  and 
I  never  yet  saw  a  minister  worth  his  salt 
who  had  not  some  crotchet  or  oddity  :  now, 
these  are  the  bits  of  cheese  which  cavillers 
smell  out  and  nibble  at :  this  man  is  too  slow, 
and  another  too  fast ;  the  first  is  too  flow- 
ery, and  the  second  is  too  dull.  Dear  me, 
if  all  God's  creatures  were  judged  in  this 
way,  we  should  wring  the  dove's  neck  for 
being  too  tame,  shoot  the  robins  for  eating 
spiders,  kill  the  cows  for  swinging  their 
tails,  and  the  hens  for  not  giving  us  milk. 
When  a  man  wants  to  beat  a  dog,  he  can 
soon  find  a  stick ;  and  at  this  rate  any 
fool  may  have  something  to  say  against  the 
best  minister  in  England.  As  to  a  preach- 
er's manner,  if  there  be  but  plain  speaking, 
none  shall  cavil  at  it  because  it  wants  pol- 
ish, for  if  a  thing  is  good  and  earnestly 
spoken,  it  cannot  sound  much  amiss.  No 
man  should  use  bad  language  in  the  pul- 
pit— and  all  language  is  bad  which  com- 
mon people  cannot  make  head  or  tail  of — 


28  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

but  godly,  sober,  decent,  plain  words  none 
should  carp  at.  A  countryman  is  as  warm 
in  fustian  as  a  king  in  velvet,  and  a  truth 
is  as  comfortable  in  homely  words  as  in 
fine  speech.  As  to  the  way  of  dishing  up 
the  meat,  hungry  men  leave  that  to  the 
cook,  only  let  the  meat  be  sweet  and  sub- 
stantial. If  hearers  were  better,  sermons 
would  be  better.  When  men  say  they  can't 
hear,  I  recommend  them  to  buy  a  horn, 
and  remember  the  old  saying,  u  There's  none 
so  deaf  as  those  who  will  not  hear."  When 
young  speakers  get  down-hearted  because 
of  hard,  unkind  remarks,  I  generally  tell 
them  of  the  old  man  and  his  boy  and  his 
ass,  and  what  came  of  trying  to  please  every- 
body. No  piper  ever  suited  all  ears.  Where 
whims  and  fancies  sit  in  the  seat  of  judg- 
ment, a  man's  opinion  is  only  so  much  wind, 
therefore  take  no  more  notice  of  it  than  of 
the  wind  whistling  through  a  keyhole. 

I  have  heard  men  find  fault  with  a  dis- 
course for  what  was  not  in  it;  no  matter 
how  well  the  subject  in  hand  was  brought 
out,  there  was  another  subject  about  which 
nothing  was  said,  and  so  all  was  wrong; 
which  is  as  reasonable  as  finding  fault  with 


ON  RELIGIOUS   GRUMBLERS.  29 

my  ploughing  because  it  does  not  dibble 
the  holes  for  the  beans,  or  abusing  a  good 
corn-field  because  there  are  no  turnips  in  it. 
Does  any  man  look  for  every  truth  in  one 
sermon  ?  As  well  look  for  every  dish  at 
one  meal,  and  rail  at  a  joint  of  beef  because 
there  are  neither  bacon,  nor  veal,  nor  green 
peas,  nor  parsnips  on  the  table.  Suppose  a 
sermon  is  not  full  of  comfort  to  the  saint, 
yet  if  it  warn  the  sinner,  shall  we  despise  it  ? 
A  handsaw  would  be  a  poor  tool  to  shave 
with,  shall  we  therefore  throw  it  away  ? 
Where  is  the  use  of  always  trying  to  hunt 
out  faults  ?  I  hate  to  see  a  man  with  a  fine 
nose  smelling  about  for  things  to  rail  at  like 
a  rat-catcher's  dog  sniffing  at  rat  holes.  By 
all  means  let  us  down  with  error,  root  and 
branch,  but  do  let  us  save  our  billhooks 
till  there  are  brambles  to  chop,  and  not  fall 
foul  of  our  own  mercies. 

Judging  preachers  is  a  poor  trade,  for  it 
pays  neither  party  concerned  in  it.  At  a 
ploughing  match  they  do  give  a  prize  to 
the  best  of  us;  but  these  judges  of  preach- 
ing are  precious  slow  to  give  anything  even 
to  those  whom  they  profess  to  think  so 
much  of.     They  pay  in  praise,  but  give  no 


30  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK. 

pudding.  They  get  the  gospel  for  nothing, 
and  if  they  do  not  grumble,  think  that  they 
have  made  an  abundant  return. 

Everybody  thinks  himself  a  judge  of  a 
sermon,  but  nine  out  of  ten  might  as  well 
pretend  to  weigh  the  moon.  I  believe  that, 
at  bottom,  most  people  think  it  an  uncom- 
monly easy  thing  to  preach,  and  that  they 
could  do  it  amazingly  well  themselves. 
Every  donkey  thinks  itself  worthy  to  stand 
with  the  king's  horses  ;  every  girl  thinks 
she  could  keep  house  better  than  her  mother; 
but  thoughts  are  not  facts  ;  for  the  sprat 
thought  itself  a  herring,  but  the  fisherman 
knew  better.  I  dare  say  those  who  can 
whistle  fancy  that  they  can  plough  ;  but 
there's  more  than  whistling  in  a  good 
ploughman,  and  so  let  me  tell  you  there's 
more  in  good  preaching  than  taking  a  text, 
and  saying,  firstly,  secondly,  and  thirdly. 
I  try  my  hand  at  preaching  myself,  and  in 
my  poor  way  I  find  it  no  very  easy  thing  to 
give  the  folks  something  worth  hearing ;  and 
if  the  fine  critics,  who  reckon  us  up  on  their 
thumbs,  would  but  try  their  own  hands  at 
it,  they  might  be  a  little  more  quiet.  Dogs, 
however,  always    will    bark,  and  what    is 


ON  RELIGIOUS   GRUMBLERS.  31 

worse,  some  of  them  will  bite  too ;  but  let 
decent  people  do  all  they  can,  if  not  to 
muzzle  them,  yet  to  prevent  them  doing 
any  great  mischief.  It  is  a  dreadful  thing 
to  see  a  happy  family  of  Christians  broken 
up  by  talkative  fault-finders,  and  all  about 
nothing,  or  less  than  nothing.  Small  is  the 
edge  of  the  wedge,  but  when  the  devil  han- 
dles the  beetle,  churches  are  soon  split  to 
pieces,  and  men  wonder  why.  The  fact  is, 
the  worst  wheel  of  the  cart  creaks  most,  and 
one  fool  makes  many,  and  thus  many  a 
congregation  is  set  at  ears  with  a  good  and 
faithful  minister,  who  would  have  been  a 
lasting  blessing  to  them  if  they  had  not 
chased  away  their  best  friend.  Those  who 
are  at  the  bottom  of  the  mischief  have  gen- 
erally no  part  or  lot  in  the  matter  of  true 
godliness,  but,  like  sparrows,  fight  over  corn 
which  is  not  their  own,  and,  like  jackdaws, 
pull  to  pieces  what  they  never  helped  to 
build.  From  mad  dogs,  and  grumbling 
professors,  may  we  all  be  delivered,  and  may 
we  never  take  the  complaint  from  either  of 
them.  Fault-finding  is  dreadfully  catching : 
one  dog  will  set  a  whole  kennel  howling, 
and  the  wisest  course  is  to  keep  out  of  the 


32  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK. 

way  of  a  man  who  has  the  complaint 
called  the  grumbles.  The  worst  of  it  is, 
that  the  foot  and  mouth  disease  go  to- 
gether, and  he  who  bespatters  others  gen- 
erally rolls  in  the  mud  himself  before  long. 
"  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love/'  and  this 
is  a  very  different  apple  from  the  sour  Si- 
berian crab  which  some  people  bring  forth. 
Good  bye,  all  ye  sons  of  Grizzle,  John  Plough- 
man would  sooner  pick  a  bone  in  peace 
than  fight  over  an  ox  roasted  whole. 


ON     THE     PREACHER'S    APPEAR- 
ANCE. 


"  You  cannot  judge  a  horse  by  his  harness." — Page  37. 

A  GOOD  horse  cannot  be  a  bad  color, 
and  a  really  good  preacher  can  wear 
what   he   likes,  and  none  will  care  much 
3  (33) 


34  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

about  it ;  but  though  you  cannot  know  wine 
by  the  barrel,  a  good  appearance  is  a  letter 
of  recommendation  even  to  a  ploughman. 
Wise  men  neither  fall  into  love  nor  take  a 
dislike  at  first  sight,  but  still  the  first  im- 
pression is  always  a  great  thing  even  with 
them  ;  and  as  to  those  weaker  brethren  who 
are  not  wise,  a  good  appearance  is  half  the 
battle.  What  is  a  good  appearance  ?  Well, 
it's  not  being  pompous  and  starchy,  and 
making  one's  self  high  and  mighty  among 
the  people,  for  proud  looks  lose  hearts,  and 
gentle  words  win  them.  It's  not  wearing 
fine  clothes  either,  for  foppish  dress  usually 
means  a  foul  house  within,  and  the  door- 
step without  fresh  whitened ;  such  dressing 
tells  the  world  that  the  outside  is  the  best 
part  of  the  puppet.  When  a  man  is  proud 
as  a  peacock,  all  strut  and  show,  he  needs 
converting  himself  before  he  sets  up  to 
preach  to  others.  The  preacher  who 
measures  himself  by  his  looking  glass 
may  please  a  few  silly  girls,  but  neither 
God  nor  man  will  long  put  up  with  him. 
The  man  who  owes  his  greatness  to  his 
tailor  will  find  that  needle  and  thread  cannot 
long  hold  a  fool  in  a  pulpit.      A  gentleman 


ON  THE   PREACHER'S  APPEARANCE.  35 

should  have  more  in  his  pocket  than  on  his 
back,  and  a  minister  should  have  more  in 
his  inner  man  than  on  his  outer  man.  I 
would  say,  if  I  might,  to  young  ministers, 
do  not  preach  in  gloves,  for  cats  in  mit- 
tens catch  no  mice ;  don't  curl  and  oil 
your  hair  like  dandies,  for  nobody  cares 
to  hear  a  peacock's  voice ;  don't  have  your 
own  pretty  self  in  your  mind  at  all,  or 
nobody  else  will  mind  you.  Away  with 
gold  rings,  and  chains,  and  jewelry ;  why 
should  the  pulpit  become  a  goldsmith's 
shop  ?  For  ever  away  with  surplices  and 
gowns,  and  all  those  nursery  doll  dresses — 
men  should  put  away  childish  things.  A 
cross  on  the  back  is  the  sign  of  a  devil  in 
the  heart ;  those  who  do  as  Rome  does 
should  go  to  Rome  and  show  their  colors. 
If  priests  suppose  that  they  get  the  respect 
of  honest  men  by  their  fine  ornamental 
dresses,  they  are  much  mistaken,  for  it  is 
commonly  said,  "  Fine  feathers  make  fine 
birds,"  and 

"An  ape  is  ne'er  so  like  an  ape 
As  when  he  wears  a  popish  cape." 

Among  us  Dissenters  the  preacher  claims 


36  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

no  priestly  power,  and  therefore  should 
never  wear  a  peculiar  dress ;  let  fools  wear 
fools'  caps  and  fools'  dresses,  but  men  who 
make  no  claim  to  be  fools  should  not  put 
on  fools'  clothes.  None  but  a  very  silly 
sheep  would  wear  wolf's  clothing.  It  is  a 
singular  taste  which  makes  honest  men 
covet  the  rags  of  thieves.  Besides,  where's 
the  good  of  such  finery  ?  Except  a  duck  in 
pattens,  no  creature  looks  more  stupid  than 
a  dissenting  preacher  in  a  gown  which  is 
of  no  manner  of  use  to  him.  I  could  laugh 
till  I  held  my  sides  when  I  see  our  doctors 
in  gowns  and  bands,  puffed  out  with  their 
silks,  and  touched  up  with  their  little  bibs, 
for  they  put  me  so  much  in  mind  of  our  old 
turkey-cock  when  his  temper  is  up,  and  he 
swells  to  his  biggest.  They  must  be  weak 
folks  indeed  who  want  a  man  to  dress  like 
a  woman  before  they  can  enjoy  his  sermon  ; 
and  he  who  cannot  preach  without  such 
milliner's  trumpery  may  be  a  man  among 
geese,  but  he  is  a  goose  among  men.  At 
the  same  time,  the  preacher  should  en- 
deavor, according  to  his  means,  to  dress 
himself  respectably ;  and,  as  to  neatness,  he 
should  be  without  spot,  for  kings  should 


ON  THE  PREACHER'S  APPEARANCE.  37 

not  have  dirty  footmen  to  wait  at  their 
table,  and  they  who  teach  godliness  should 
practise  cleanliness.  I  should  like  white 
neckties  better  if  they  were  always  white, 
but  dirty  brown  is  neither  here  nor  there. 
From  a  slovenly,  smoking,  snuff-taking, 
beer-drinking  parson  may  the  church  be  de- 
livered. Some  that  I  meet  with  may,  per- 
haps, have  very  good  manners,  but  they 
did  not  happen  to  have  them  about  them 
at  the  time :  like  the  Dutch  captain  with 
his  anchors,  they  had  left  them  at  home ; 
this  should  never  be  the  case,  for,  if  there 
be  a  well-behaved  man  in  the  parish,  it 
should  be  the  minister.  A  worn  coat  is  no 
discredit,  but  the  poorest  may  be  neat,  and 
men  should  be  scholars,  rather  than  teach- 
ers, till  they  are  so.  You  cannot  judge  a 
horse  by  his  harness  ;  but  a  modest,  gentle- 
manly appearance,  in  which  the  dress  is 
just  such  as  nobody  could  make  a  remark 
upon,  seems  to  me  to  be  the  right  sort  of 
thing.  This  little  bit  of  my  mind  is  meant 
to  warn  you  young  striplings  who  have  just 
started  in  the  ministry ;  and  if  any  of  you 
get  cross  over  it,  I  shall  tell  you  that  sore 
horses   cannot    bear    to   be   combed,   and 


38  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

again,  "  those  whom  the  cap  fits  must  wear 
it."  John  Ploughman,  you  will  say,  had 
better  mend  his  own  smock,  and  let  the 
parsons  alone  ;  but  I  take  leave  to  look 
about  me  and  speak  my  mind,  for  a  cat  may 
look  at  a  king,  and  a  fool  may  give. wise 
men  good  advice.  If  I  speak  too  plainly, 
please  remember  that  an  old  dog  cannot  al- 
ter his  way  of  barking,  and  he  who  has  long 
been  used  to  plough  a  straight  furrow  is 
very  apt  to  speak  in  the  same  straightfor- 
ward manner. 


ON  GOOD  NATURE  AND  FIRMNESS. 


"Long  before  they  know  whether  it  is  a  thief  in  the  farmyard,  or 
the  old  mare  got  loose,  they  up  with  the  window,  and  fire  off  the 
old  blunderbuss." — Page  45. 

O  not  be   all    sugar,  or  the  world  will 


D 


suck    you  down ;  but  do   not  be  all 
vinegar,    or  the    world  will  spit   you   out. 

(39) 


40  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

There  is  a  medium  in  all  things,  only  block- 
heads go  to  extremes.  We  need  not  be 
all  rock  or  all  sand,  all  iron  or  all  wax. 
We  should  neither  fawn  upon  everybody 
like  silly  lapdogs,  nor  fly  at  all  persons  like 
surly  mastiffs.  Blacks  and  whites  go  to- 
gether to  make  up  a  world,  and  hence  on 
the  point  of  temper  we  have  all  sorts  of 
people  to  deal  with.  Some  are  as  easy  as 
an  old  shoe,  but  they  are  hardly  ever  worth 
more  than  the  other  one  of  the  pair ;  and 
others  take  fire  as  fast  as  tinder  at  the 
smallest  offence,  and  are  as  dangerous  as 
gunpowder.  To  have  a  fellow  going  about 
the  farm  as  cross  with  everybody  as  a  bear 
with  a  sore  head,  with  a  temper  as  sour  as 
verjuice  and  as  sharp  as  a  razor,  looking  as 
surly  as  a  butcher's  dog,  is  a  great  nuisance, 
and  yet  there  may  be  some  good  points 
about  the  man,  so  that  he  may  be  a  man  for 
all  that ;  but  poor  soft  Tommy,  as  green  as 
grass,  and  as  ready  to  bend  as  a  willow,  is 
nobody's  money  and  everybody's  scorn.  A 
man  must  have  a  backbone,  or  how  is  he  to 
hold  his  head  up  ?  but  that  backbone  must 
bend,  or  he  will  knock  his  brow  against  the 
beam. 


ON  GOOD  NATURE  AND  FIRMNESS.  41 

There  is  a  time  to  do  as  others  wish,  and 
a  time  to  refuse.  We  may  make  ourselves 
asses,  and  then  everybody  will  ride  us  ;  but 
if  we  would  be  respected,  we  must  be  our 
own  masters,  and  not  let  others  saddle  us 
as  they  think  fit.  If  we  try  to  please  every- 
body, we  shall  be  like  a  toad  under  a  harrow, 
and  never  have  peace  ;  and  if  we  play  lac- 
quey to  all  our  neighbors,  whether  good  or 
bad,  we  shall  be  thanked  by  no  one,  for  we 
shall  soon  do  as  much  harm  as  good.  He 
that  makes  himself  a  sheep,  will  find  that 
the  wolves  are  not  all  dead.  He  who  lies 
on  the  ground  must  expect  to  be  trodden 
on.  He  who  makes  himself  a  mouse,  the 
cats  will  eat  him.  If  you  let  your  neigh- 
bors put  the  calf  on  your  shoulder,  they 
will  soon  clap  on  the  cow.  We  are  to 
please  our  neighbor  for  his  good  to  edifi- 
cation, but  this  is  quite  another  matter. 

There  are  old  foxes  about  whose  mouths 
are  always  watering  for  young  geese,  and  if 
they  can  cozen  them  to  do  just  what  they 
wish,  they  soon  make  their  market  out  of 
them.  What  a  jolly  good  fellow  you  will 
be  called  if  you  will  make  yourself  a  hack 
for  your   friends,  and    what   a   Benjamin's 


42  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

mess  will  they  soon  bring  you  into  ?  Out 
of  that  mess  you  will  have  to  get  all  alone, 
for  your  old  friends  will  be  sure  to  say  to 
you,  "  Good-bye,  basket,  I've  carried  all  my 
apples,"  or  they  will  give  you  their  good 
wishes  and  nothing  more,  and  you  will  find 
out  that  fair  words  won't  feed  a  cat,  nor  but- 
ter your  bread,  nor  fill  your  pocket.  Those 
who  make  so  very  much  of  you  either  mean 
to  cheat  you,  or  else  are  in  need  of  you : 
when  they  have  sucked  the  orange  they 
will  throw  the  peel  away.  Be  wise,  then, 
and  look  before  you  leap,  lest  a  friend's  ad- 
vice should  do  you  more  mischief  than  an 
enemy's  slander.  "  The  simple  believeth 
every  word  ;  but  the  prudent  man  looketh 
well  to  his  going."  Go  with  your  neighbor 
as  far  as  good  conscience  will  go  with  you, 
but  part  company  where  the  shoe  of  con- 
science begins  to  pinch  your  foot.  Begin 
with  your  friend  as  you  mean  to  go  on,  and 
let  him  know  very  early  that  you  are  not  a 
man  made  of  putty,  but  one  who  has  a  judg- 
ment of  his  own,  and  means  to  use  it.  Pull 
up  the  moment  you  find  you  are  out  of  the 
road,  and  take  the  nearest  way  back  at  once. 
The  way  to  avoid  great  faults  is  to  beware 


ON  GOOD  NATURE  AND  FIRMNESS.  43 

of  small  ones,  therefore  pull  up  in  time  if 
you  would  not  be  dragged  into  the  ditch  by 
your  friend.  Better  offend  your  acquaint- 
ance than  lose  your  character  and  hazard 
your  soul.  Don't  be  ashamed  to  walk 
down  Turnagain  Lane.  Never  mind  being 
called  a  turncoat  when  you  turn  from  bad 
courses :  better  to  turn  in  time  than  to  burn 
in  eternity.  Do  not  be  persuaded  to  ruin 
yourself — it  is  buying  gold  too  dear  to 
throw  oneself  away  to  please  our  company. 
Put  your  foot  down  where  you  mean  to 
stand,  and  let  no  man  move  you  from  the 
right.  Learn  to  say,  "  No,"  and  it  will  be 
of  more  use  to  you  than  to  be  able  to  read 
Latin. 

A  friend  to  everybody  is  often  a  friend  to 
nobody,  or  else  in  his  simplicity  he  robs  his 
family  to  help  strangers,  and  becomes 
brother  to  a  beggar.  There  is  wisdom  in 
generosity,  as  in  everything  else,  and  some 
had  need  go  to  school  to  learn  it.  A  kind- 
hearted  soul  may  be  very  cruel  to  his  own 
children,  while  he  takes  the  bread  out  of 
their  mouths  to  give  to  those  who  call  him 
a  generous  fellow,  but  laugh  at  his  folly. 
Very  often  he  that  his  money  lends  loses 


44  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK. 

both  his  gold  and  his  friends,  and  he  who  is 
surety  is  never  sure.  Take  John  Plough- 
man's advice,  and  never  be  security  for  more 
than  you  are  quite  willing  to  lose.  Remem- 
ber the  word  of  God  says,  "  He  that  is 
surety  for  a  stranger  shall  smart  for  it :  and 
he  that  hateth  suretiship  is  sure." 

When  we  are  injured,  we  are  bound  as 
Christians  to  bear  it  without  malice ;  but  we 
are  not  to  pretend  that  we  do  not  feel  it,  for 
this  will  but  encourage  our  enemies  to  kick 
us  again.  He  who  is  cheated  twice  by  the 
same  man  is  half  as  bad  as  the  rogue ;  and 
it  is  very  much  so  in  other  injuries — unless 
we  claim  our  rights,  we  are  ourselves  to 
blame  if  we  do  not  get  them.  Paul  was 
willing  to  bear  stripes  for  his  Master's  sake, 
but  he  did  not  forget  to  tell  the  magistrates 
that  he  was  a  Roman ;  and  when  those 
gentlemen  wished  to  put  him  out  of  prison 
privately,  he  said,  "  Nay,  verily,  let  them 
come  themselves  and  fetch  us  out."  -A 
Christian  is  the  gentlest  of  men,  but  then 
he  is  a  man.  A  good  many  people  don't 
need  to  be  told  this,  for  they  are  up  in  a 
moment  if  they  think  anybody  is  likely  to 
illtreat     them ;   long     before     they    know 


ON  GOOD  NATURE  AND   FIRMNESS.  45 

whether  it  is  a  thief  in  the  farmyard,  or 
the  old  mare  got  loose,  they  up  with  the 
window,  and  fire  off  the  old  blunderbuss. 
Dangerous  neighbors  these;  a  man  might 
as  well  make  a  seat  out  of  a  bull's  fore- 
head, as  expect  to  find  comfort  in  their 
neighborhood.  Make  no  friendship  with 
an  angry  man ;  and  with  a  furious  man 
thou  shalt  not  go.  "  He  that  is  slow  to 
wrath  is  of  great  understanding ;  but  he  that 
is  hasty  of  spirit  exalteth  folly."  "  Seest 
thou  a  man  that  is  hasty  in  his  words  ? 
there  is  more  hope  of  a  fool  than  of  him." 
In  my  day  I  have  seen  a  few  downright 
obstinate  men,  whom  neither  sense  nor  rea- 
son could  alter.  There's  a  queer  chap  in 
our  village  who  keeps  a  bulldog,  and  he 
tells  me  that  when  the  creature  once  gives 
a  bite  at  anything,  he  never  lets  go  again, 
and  if  you  want  to  get  it  out  of  his  mouth, 
you  must  cut  his  head  off;  that's  the  sort 
of  man  that  has  fretted  me  many  a  time 
and  almost  made  me  mad.  You  might 
sooner  argue  a  pitchfork  into  a  threshing 
machine,  or  persuade  a  brickbat  to  turn 
into  marble,  than  get  the  fellow  to  hear  com- 
mon sense.     Scrubbing  blackamoors  white, 


46  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK. 

and  getting  spots  out  of  leopards,  is  nothing 
at  all  compared  with  trying  to  lead  a  down- 
right obstinate  man.  Right  or  wrong,  you 
might  as  easily  make  a  hill  walk  to  Lon- 
don, as  turn  him  when  his  mind  is  made  up. 
When  a  man  is  right,  this  sticking  to  his 
text  is  a  grand  thing;  our  minister  says, 
"  it  is  the  stuff  that  martyrs  are  made  of; " 
but  when  an  ignorant,  wrongheaded  fellow 
gets  this  hard  grit  into  him,  he  makes  mar- 
tyrs of  those  who  have  to  put  up  with  him. 
Old  Master  Pighead  swore  he  would  drive 
a  nail  into  an  oak  board  with  his  fist,  and 
so  lamed  his  hand  for  life;  he  could  not 
sell  his  corn  at  his  own  price,  and  so  he  let 
the  rats  eat  up  the  ricks.  You  cannot  ride 
by  his  fields  without  noticing  his  obstinacy, 
for  he  vows,  "  He  won't  have  none  of  these 
'ere  new-fangled  notions,"  and  so  he  grows 
the  worst  crops  in  the  parish  ;  and  worst  of 
all,  his  daughter  went  among  the  Metho- 
dists, and,  in  a  towering  rage,  he  turned 
her  out  of  doors ;  and  though  I  believe  he 
is  very  sorry  for  it,  he  will  not  yield  an 
inch,  but  stands  to  it  he  will  never  speak  to 
her  so  long  as  he  lives,  and  meanwhile  the 
dear  girl  is  dying  through  his  unkindness. 


ON  GOOD  NATURE  AND  FIRMNESS.  47 

Rash  vows  are  much  better  broken  than 
kept.  He  who  never  changes  never  mends; 
he  who  never  yields,  never  conquers. 

With  children  you  must  mix  gentleness 
with  firmness ;  they  must  not  always  have 
their  own  way,  but  they  must  not  always 
be  thwarted.  Give  to  a  pig  when  it  grunts, 
and  to  a  child  when  it  cries,  and  you  will 
have  a  fine  pig  and  a  spoiled  child.  A 
man  who  is  learning  to  play  on  a  trumpet, 
and  a  petted  child,  are  two  very  disagreeable 
companions  even  as  next-door  neighbors; 
but  unless  we  look  well  to  it,  our  children 
will  be  a  nuisance  to  others  and  a  torment 
to  ourselves.  "  The  rod  and  reproof  give 
wisdom :  but  a  child  left  to  himself  bring- 
eth  his  mother  to  shame."  If"  we  never 
have  headaches  through  rebuking  our  little 
children,  we  shall  have  plenty  of  heartaches 
when  they  grow  up.  Strict  truthfulness 
must  rule  all  our  dealings  with  the  young ; 
our  yea  must  be  yea,  and  our  nay  nay,  and 
that  to  the  letter  and  the  moment.  Never 
promise  a  child  and  then  fail  to  perform, 
whether  you  promise  him  a  bun  or  a  beat- 
ing. Be  obeyed  at  all  costs — disobedient 
children    are    unhappy  children;  for    their 


48  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK. 

own  sakes  make  them  mind  you.  If  you 
yield  up  your  authority  once,  you  will 
hardly  ever  get  it  again,  for  he  who  says 
A  must  say  B,  and  so  on.  We  must  not 
provoke  our  children  to  anger,  lest  they  be 
discouraged,  but  we  must  rule  our  house- 
hold in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  in  so  do- 
ing may  expect  a  blessing. 

Since  John  Ploughman  has  taken  to 
writing,  he  has  had  a  fine  chance  of  showing 
his  firmness,  and  his  gentleness  too,  for  he 
has  received  bushels  of  advice,  for  which 
he  begs  to  present  his  compliments,  as  the 
squire's  lady  says,  and  he  does  not  mind 
either  returning  the  advice  or  some  of  his 
own  instead,  by  way  of  showing  his  grati- 
tude ;  for  he  is  sure  it  is  very  kind  of  so 
many  people  to  tell  him  so  many  different 
ways  in  which  he  might  make  a  stupid  of 
himself.  He  means  to  glean  as  many  good 
hints  as  he  can  from  the  acres  of  his  friends' 
stubble ;  and  while  sticking  to  his  own  style, 
because  it  suits  his  hand,  he  will  touch  him- 
self up  a  bit  if  he  can.  Perhaps  if  the 
minister  will  lend  him  Cowper  or  Milton,  he 
may  even  stick  a  sprig  of  poetry  into  his 
nosegay,  and  come  out  as  fine  as  the  flowers 


ON  GOOD  NATURE  AND  FIRMNESS.  49 

in  May ;  but  he  cannot  promise,  for  the 
harvest  is  just  on,  and  reaping  leaves  no 
time  for  rhyming.  The  worst  of  it  is, 
the  kind  friends  who  are  setting  John  to 
rights,  contradict  one  another ;  one  says  it's 
very  poor  stuff,  and  all  in  an  assumed 
name,  for  the  style  is  not  rough  enough 
for  a  ploughman;  and  another  says  the 
matter  is  very  well,  but  really,  the  expres- 
sions are  so  coarse,  he  wonders  the  editor 
puts  it  in  the  magazine.  John  means  to 
pay  his  advisers  all  the  attention  which  they 
deserve,  and  as  some  of  the  mice  have  been 
bold  enough  to  make  a  nest  in  the  cat's  ear, 
he  means  to  be  after  them  and  write  a  pa- 
per upon  giving  advice  gratis,  in  which 
they  will  be  likely  to  get  a  flea  in  their  ear 
in  return  for  their  instructions. 


ON    PATIENCE. 


"  Blow  the  wind  never  so  fast,  it  will  lower  at  last." — Page  54. 

PATIENCE  is  better  than  wisdom  :  an 
ounce  of  patience   is  worth    a  pound 
of  brains.     All  men  praise  patience,  but  few 
(50) 


ON  PATIENCE.  51 

enough  can  practise  it;  it  is  a  medicine 
which  is  good  for  all  diseases,  and  therefore 
every  old  woman  recommends  it :  but  it  is 
not  every  garden  that  grows  the  herbs  to 
make  it  with.  When  one's  flesh  and  bones 
are  full  of  aches  and  pains,  it  is  as  natural 
for  us  to  murmur  as  for  a  horse  to  shake 
his  head  when  the  flies  tease  him,  or  a  wheel 
to  rattle  when  a  spoke  is  loose;  but  nature 
should  not  be  the  rule  with  Christians,  or 
what  is  their  religion  worth  ?  If  a  soldier 
fights  no  better  than  a  ploughboy,  off  with 
his  red  coat.  We  expect  more  fruit  from 
an  apple-tree  than  from  a  thorn,  and  we 
have  a  right  to  do  so.  The  disciples  of  a 
patient  Saviour  should  be  patient  them- 
selves. Grin  and  bear  it  is  the  old-fashioned 
advice,  but  sing  and  bear  it  is  a  great  deal 
better.  After  all,  we  get  very  few  cuts  of 
the  whip,  considering  what  bad  cattle  we 
are ;  and  when  we  do  smart  a  little,  it  is 
soon  over.  Pain  past  is  pleasure,  and  ex- 
perience comes  by  it.  We  ought  not  to  be 
afraid  of  going  down  into  Egypt  when  we 
know  we  shall  come  out  of  it  with  jewels 
of  silver  and  gold. 

Impatient   people   water    their    miseries 


52  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

and  hoe  up  their  comforts  ;  sorrows  are 
visitors  that  come  without  invitation,  but 
complaining  minds  send  a  waggon  to  bring 
their  troubles  home  in.  Many  people  are 
born  crying,  live  complaining,  and  die  dis- 
appointed ;  they  chew  the  bitter  pill  which 
they  would  not  even  know  to  be  bitter  if 
they  had  the  sense  to  swallow  it  whole  in  a 
cup  of  patience  and  water.  They  think 
every  other  man's  burden  to  be  light,  and 
their  own  feathers  to  be  heavy  as  lead  ;  they 
are  hardly  done  by  in  their  own  opinion  ; 
no  one's  toes  are  so  often  trodden  on  by 
the  black  ox  as  theirs ;  the  snow  falls  thick- 
est round  their  door,  and  the  hail  rattles 
hardest  on  their  windows ;  and  yet,  if  the 
truth  were  known,  it  is  their  fancy  rather 
than  their  fate  which  makes  things  go  so 
hard  with  them.  Many  would  be  well 
off  if  they  could  but  think  so.  A  little 
sprig  of  the  herb  called  content  put  into 
the  poorest  soup  will  make  it  taste  as  rich 
as  the  Lord  Mayor's  turtle.  John  Plough- 
man grows  the  plant  in  his  garden,  but  the 
late  hard  winter  nipped  it  terribly,  so  that 
he  cannot  afford  to  give  his  neighbors  a 
slip  of  it ;  they  had  better  follow  Matthew 


ON  PA  TIENCE.  53 

xxv.  9,  and  go  to  those  who  sell,  and  buy 
for  themselves.  Grace  is  a  good  soil  to 
grow  it  in,  but  it  wants  watering  from  the 
fountain  of  mercy. 

To  be  poor  is  not  always  pleasant,  but 
worse  things  than  that  happen  at  sea. 
Small  shoes  are  apt  to  pinch,  but  not  if  you 
have  a  small  foot ;  if  we  have  little  means 
it  will  be  well  to  have  little  desires.  Pov- 
erty is  no  shame,  but  being  discontented 
with  it  is.  In  some  things  the  poor  are 
better  off  than  the  rich;  for  if  a  poor  man 
has  to  seek  meat  for  his  stomach,  he  is 
more  likely  to  get  what  he  is  after  than 
the  rich  man  who  seeks  a  stomach  for  his 
meat.  A  poor  man's  table  is  soon  spread, 
and  his  labor  spares  his  buying  sauce. 
The  best  doctors  are  Dr.  Diet,  Dr.  Quiet, 
and  Dr.  Merry  man,  and  many  a  godly 
ploughman  has  all  these  gentlemen  to  wait 
upon  him.  Plenty  makes  dainty,  but  hun- 
ger finds  no  fault  with  the  cook.  Hard 
work  brings  health,  and  an  ounce  of  health 
is  worth  a  sack  of  diamonds.  It  is  not  how 
much  we  have,  but  how  much  we  enjoy, 
that  makes  happiness.  There  is  more 
sweet    in  a  spoonful    of    sugar   than  in  a 


54  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

cask  of  vinegar.  It  is  not  the  quantity  of 
our  goods,  but  the  blessing  of  God  on  what 
we  have  that  makes  us  truly  rich.  The  par- 
ings of  a  pippin  are  better  than  a  whole 
crab ;  a  dinner  of  herbs,  with  peace,  is  bet- 
ter than  a  stalled  ox  and  contention  there- 
with. "  Better  is  little  with  the  fear  of  the 
Lord  than  great  treasure  and  trouble  there- 
with." A  little  wood  will  heat  my  little 
oven  ;  why,  then,  should  I  murmur  because 
all  the  woods  are  not  mine  ? 

When  troubles  come,  it  is  of  no  use  to 
fly  in  the  face  of  God  by  hard  thoughts  of 
providence;  that  is  kicking  against  the 
pricks  and  hurting  your  feet.  The  trees 
bow  in  the  wind,  and  so  must  we.  Every 
time  the  sheep  bleats  it  loses  a  mouthful, 
and  every  time  we  complain  we  miss  a 
blessing.  Grumbling  is  a  bad  trade,  and 
yields  no  profit,  but  patience  has  a  golden 
hand.  Our  evils  will  soon  be  over.  After 
rain  comes  clear  shining ;  black  crows  have 
wings  ;  every  winter  turns  to  spring ;  every 
night  breaks  into  morning. 


Blow  the  wind  never  so  fast, 
It  will  lower  at  last. 


ON  PATIENCE.  55 

If  one  door  should  be  shut,  God  will  open 
another ;  if  the  peas  do  not  yield  well,  the 
beans  may :  if  one  hen  leaves  her  eggs, 
another  will  bring  out  all  her  brood  :  there's 
a  bright  side  to  all  things,  and  a  good  God 
everywhere.  Somewhere  or  other  in  the 
worst  flood  of  trouble  there  always  is  a  dry 
spot  for  contentment  to  get  its  foot  on,  and 
if  there  were  not  it  would  learn  to  swim. 

Friends,  let  us  take  to  patience  and  water 
gruel,  as  the  old  folks  used  to  tell  us,  rather 
than  catch  the  miserables,  and  give  others 
the  disease^  by  wickedly  finding  fault  with 
God.  The  best  remedy  for  affliction  is  sub- 
mitting to  providence.  What  can't  be 
cured  must  be  endured.  If  we  cannot  get 
bacon,  let  us  bless  God  that  there  are  still 
some  cabbages  in  the  garden.  Must  is  a 
hard  nut  to  crack,  but  it  has  a  sweet  kernel. 
"  All  things  work  together  for  good  to  them 
that  love  God."  Whatever  falls  from  the 
skies  is,  sooner  or  later,  good  for  the  land  : 
whatever  comes  to  us  from  God  is  worth 
having,  even  though  it  be  a  rod.  We  can- 
not by  nature  like  trouble  any  more  than  a 
mouse  can  fall  in  love  with  a  cat,  and  yet 
Paul  by  grace  came  to  glory  in  tribulations 


56  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

also.  Losses  and  crosses  are  heavy  to  bear, 
but  when  our  hearts  are  right  with  God  it 
is  wonderful  how  easy  the  yoke  becomes. 
We  must  needs  go  to  glory  by  the  way  of 
Weeping  Cross ;  and  as  we  were  never 
promised  that  we  should  ride  to  heaven  in 
a  feather  bed,  we  must  not  be  disappointed 
when  we  see  the  road  to  be  rough,  as  our 
fathers  found  it  before  us.  All's  well  that 
ends  well ;  and,  therefore,  let  us  plough  the 
heaviest  soil  with  our  eye  on  the  sheaves 
of  harvest,  and  learn  to  sing  at  our  labor 
while  others  murmur. 


ON   GOSSIPS. 


"  Don't  be  the  devil's  bellows, to  blow  up  the  fire  of  strife." — Page  61. 

IN  Walton  church,  in  our  county,  there 
is  a  brank,  or  scold's  bridle,  which  was 
used  in  years  gone  by  to  keep  women's 
tongues  from  troubling  their  husbands  and 

(57) 


58  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

their  neighbors.  They  did  queer  things 
in  those  good  old  times.  Was  this  bridle 
a  proof  of  what  our  parson  calls  the  wis- 
dom of  our  ancestors,  or  was  it  a  bit  of 
needless  cruelty  ? 

"  It  is  nothing — only  a  woman  drowning," 
is  a  wicked  and  spiteful  old  saying,  which, 
like  the  bridle,  came  out  of  the  common 
notion  that  women  do  a  world  of  mischief 
with  their  tongues.  Is  it  so  or  not?  John 
Ploughman  will  leave  somebody  else  to 
answer,  for  he  owns  that  he  cannot  keep  a 
secret  himself,  and  likes  a  dish  of  chat  as 
well  as  anybody ;  only  John  does  not  care 
for  cracking  people's  characters,  and  hates 
the  slander  which  is  so  sweet  to  some  peo- 
ple's teeth.  John  puts  the  question  to 
wiser  men  than  himself:  Are  women  much 
worse  than  men  in  this  business?  They 
say  that  silence  is  a  fine  jewel  for  a  woman, 
but  it  is  very  little  worn.  Is  it  so  ?  Is  it 
true  that  a  woman  only  conceals  what  she 
does  not  know  ?  Are  women's  tongues 
like  lambs'  tails,  always  wagging  ?  They 
say  foxes  are  all  tail,  and  women  all  tongue. 
Is  this  false  or  not  ?  Was  that  old  prayer 
a    needful    one — "  From     big    guns     and 


ON  GOSSIPS.  59 

women's  tongues  deliver  us  ?  "  John  has 
a  right  good  and  quiet  wife  of  his  own, 
whose  voice  is  so  sweet  that  he  cannot 
hear  it  too  often,  and  therefore  he  is  not  a 
fair  judge;  but  he  is  half  afraid  that  some 
other  women  would  sooner  preach  than  pray, 
and  would  not  require  strong  tea  to  set 
their  clappers  going;  but  still  what  is  sauce 
for  the  goose  is  sauce  for  the  gander,  and 
some  men  are  quite  as  bad  blabs  as  the 
women. 

What  a  pity  that  there  is  not  a  tax 
upon  words:  what  an  income  the  Queen 
would  get  from  it ;  but,  alas  !  talking  pays 
no  toll.  And  if  lies  paid  double,  the  gov- 
ernment might  pay  off  the  National  Debt ; 
but  who  could  collect  the  money  ?  Common 
fame  is  a  common  liar.  Hearsay  is  half 
lies.  A  tale  never  loses  in  the  telling.  As 
a  snowball  grows  by  rolling,  so  does  a  story. 
They  who  talk  much  lie  much.  If  men 
only  said  what  was  true,  what  a  peaceable 
world  we  should  see  !  Silence  seldom  makes 
mischief;  but  talking  is  a  plague  to  the 
parish.  Silence  is  wisdom ;  and,  by  this 
rule,  wise  men  and  wise  women  are  scarce. 
Still  waters  are  the  deepest ;  but  the  shal- 


60  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

lowest  brooks  brawl  the  most ;  this  shows 
how  plentiful  fools  must  be.  An  open 
mouth  shows  an  empty  head.  If  the  chest 
had  gold  or  silver  in  it,  it  would  not  al- 
ways stand  wide  open.  Talking  comes  by 
nature,  but  it  needs  a  good  deal  of  train- 
ing to  learn  to  be  quiet ;  yet  regard  for 
truth  should  put  a  bit  into  every  honest 
man's  mouth,  and  a  bridle  upon  every 
good  woman's  tongue. 

If  we  must  talk,  at  least  let  us  be  free 
from  slander,  but  let  us  not  blister  our 
tongues  with  backbiting.  Slander  may  be 
sport  to  talebearers,  but  it  is  death  to  those 
whom  they  abuse.  We  can  commit  mur- 
der with  the  tongue  as  well  as  with  the  hand. 
The  worst  evil  you  can  do  a  man  is  to  in- 
jure his  character;  as  the  Quaker  said  to 
his  dog,  "  I'll  not  beat  thee,  nor  abuse  thee, 
but  I'll  give  thee  an  ill  name."  All  are 
not  thieves  that  dogs  bark  at,  but  they  are 
generally  treated  as  if  they  were ;  for  the 
world  for  the  most  part  believes  that  where 
there  is  smoke  there  is  fire,  and  what  every- 
body says  must  be  true.  Let  us  then  be 
careful  that  we  do  not  hurt  our  neighbor 
in  so  tender  a  point  as  his   character,  for 


ON  GOSSIPS.  61 

it  is  hard  to  get  dirt  off  if  it  is  once  thrown 
on ;  and  when  a  man  is  once  in  people's 
bad  books,  he  is  hardly  ever  quite  out  of 
them.  If  we  would  be  sure  not  to  speak 
amiss,  it  might  be  as  well  to  speak  as  lit- 
tle as  possible ;  for  if  all  men's  sins  were 
divided  into  two  bundles,  half  of  them 
would  be  sins  of  the  tongue.  "  If  any  man 
offend  not  in  word,  the  same  is  a  perfect 
man,  and  able  also  to  bridle  the  whole 
body." 

Gossips  of  both  genders,  give  up  the 
shameful  trade  of  talebearing;  don't  be  the 
devil's  bellows  any  longer  to  blow  up  the 
fire  of  strife.  Leave  off  setting  people  by 
the  ears.  If  you  do  not  cut  a  bit  off  your 
tongues,  at  least  season  them  with  the  salt 
of  grace.  Praise  God  more  and  blame 
neighbors  less.  Any  goose  can  cackle,  any 
fly  can  find  out  a  sore  place,  any  empty  bar- 
rel can  give  forth  sound,  any  brier  can  tear 
a  man's  flesh.  No  flies  will  go  down  your 
throat  if  you  keep  your  mouth  shut,  and 
no  evil  speaking  will  come  up.  Think 
much,  but  say  little  :  be  quick  at  work  and 
slow  at  talk ;  and  above  all,  ask  the  great 
Lord  to  set  a  watch  over  your  lips. 


ON    SEIZING   OPPORTUNITIES. 


"  Dear  me,  is   the  train   gone  ?   My  watch   must   have   stopped  in 
the  night." 

SOME   men   are  never   awake  when  the 
train  starts,  but  crawl  into  the  station 
just  in    time  to  see  that    everybody  is  off, 
and   then    sleepily   say,  "  Dear   me,  is   the 
(62) 


ON  SEIZING    OPPORTUNITIES.  63 

train  gone?  My  watch  must  have  stopped 
in  the  night."  They  always  come  into 
town  a  day  after  the  fair,  and  open  their 
wares  an  hour  after  the  market  is  over. 
They  make  their  hay  when  the  sun  has  left 
off  shining,  and  cut  their  corn  as  soon  as 
the  fine  weather  is  ended ;  they  cry,  "  Hold 
hard  !  "  after  the  shot  has  left  the  gun,  and 
lock  the  stable  door  when  the  steed  is 
stolen.  They  are  like  a  cow's  tail,  always 
behind  ;  they  take  time  by  the  heels,  and  not 
by  the  forelock,  if  indeed  they  ever  take 
him  at  all.  They  are  no  more  worth  than 
an  old  almanack;  their  time  has  gone  for 
being  of  use;  but,  unfortunately,  you  can- 
not throw  them  away  as  you  would  the  al- 
manack, for  they  are  like  the  cross  old  lady 
who  had  an  annuity  left  her,  and  meant  to 
take  out  the  full  value  of  it;  they  won't  die, 
though  they  are  of  no  use  alive.  Take-it 
easy  and  Live-long  are  first  cousins,  they 
say,  and  the  more's  the  pity.  "If  they  are 
immortal  till  their  work  is  done,  they  will 
not  die  in  a  hurry,  for  they  have  not  even 
begun  to  work  yet.  Shiftless  people  gener- 
ally excuse  their  laziness  by  saying  "  they 
are  only  a  little  behind  ;  "  but  a  little  too  late 


64  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK. 

is  much  too  late,  and  a  miss  is  as  good  as  a 
mile.  My  neighbor  Sykes  covered  up  his 
well  after  his  child  was  drowned  in  it;  and 
was  very  busy  down  at  the  Old  Farm  bring- 
ing up  buckets  of  water  after  every  stick  of 
the  house  had  been  burnt ;  one  of  these  days 
he'll  be  for  making  his  will  when  he  can't 
hold  a  pen,  and  he'll  be  trying  to  repent  of 
his  sins  when  his  senses  are  going. 

These  slow  coaches  think  that  to-morrow 
is  better  than  to-day,  and  take  for  their  rule 
an  old  proverb  turned  topsy-turvy — "  Never 
do  to-day  what  you  can  put  off  till  to-mor- 
row." They  are  forever  waiting  until  their 
ship  comes  home,  and  always  dreaming 
about  things  looking  up  by-and-by ;  while 
grass  grows  in  their  furrows,  and  the  cows 
get  through  the  gaps  in  their  hedges.  If 
the  birds  would  but  wait  to  have  salt  put  on 
their  tails,  what  a  breakfast  they  would  take 
home  to  their  families  !  but  while  things 
move  as  fast  as  they  do,  the  youngsters  at 
home  will  have  to  fill  their  mouths  with 
empty  spoons.  "  Never  mind,"  say  they, 
"  there  are  better  times  coming  ;  wait  a  lit- 
tle longer."  Their  birds  are  all  in  the  bush, 
and  rare  fat  ones  they  are,  according  to  their 


ON  SEIZING    OPPORTUNITIES,  65 

account ;  and  so  they  had  need  to  be,  for 
they  have  had  none  in  the  hand  yet,  and 
wife  and  children  are  half  starved.  Some- 
thing will  turn  up,  they  say ;  why  don't  the 
stupids  go  and  turn  it  up  themselves  ?  Time 
and  tide  wait  for  no  man,  and  yet  these  fel- 
lows loiter  about  as  if  they  had  a  freehold 
of  time,  a  lease  of  their  lives,  and  a  rabbit 
warren  of  opportunities.  They  will  find 
out  their  mistake  when  want  finds  them  out, 
and  that  will  not  be  long  with  some  in  our 
village,  for  they  are  already  a  long  way  on 
the  road  to  Needham.  They  who  would 
not  plough  must  not  expect  to  eat ;  they 
who  waste  the  spring  will  have  a  lean  au- 
tumn. They  would  not  strike  when  the  iron 
was  hot,  and  they  will  soon  find  the  cold 
iron  very  hard. 

"  He  that  will  not  when  he  may, 
When  he  will  he  shall  have  nay." 

Time  is  not  tied  to  a  post,  like  a  horse  to  a 
manger  ;  it  passes  like  the  wind,  and  he  who 
would  grind  his  corn  by  it  must  set  the  mill- 
sails.  He  that  gapes  till  he  be  fed,  will  gape 
till  he  be  dead.  Nothing  is  to  be  got  with- 
out pains  except  poverty  and  dirt.  In  the 


66  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

old  days  they  said,  "  Jack  gets  on  by  his  stu- 
pidity :  "  Jack  would  find  it  very  different 
nowadays,  I  think ;  but  never  in  old  times, 
or  any  other  times,  would  Jack  get  on  by 
foolishly  letting  present  chances  slip  by  him ; 
for  hares  never  run  into  the  mouths  of  sleep- 
ing dogs.  He  that  hath  time,  and  looks 
for  better  time,  time  comes  that  he  repents 
himself  of  time.  There's  no  good  in  lying 
down  and  crying,  "  God  help  us  !  "  God 
helps  those  who  help  hemselves.  When  I 
see  a  man  who  declares  that  the  times  are 
bad,  and  that  he  is  always  unlucky,  I  gen- 
erally say  to  myself,  that  old  goose  did  not 
sit  on  the  eggs  till  they  were  all  addled,  and 
now  providence  is  to  be  blamed  because 
they  won't  hatch.  I  never  had  any  faith  in 
luck  at  all,  except  that  I  believe  good  luck 
will  carry  a  man  over  a  ditch  if  he  jumps 
well,  and  will  put  a  bit  of  bacon  into  his 
pot  if  he  looks  after  his  garden  and  keeps 
a  pig.  Luck  generally  comes  to  those  who 
look  after  it,  and  my  notion  is  that  it  taps  at 
least  once  in  a  lifetime  at  everybody's  door, 
but  if  industry  does  not  open  it,  away  it 
goes.  Those  who  have  lost  the  last  coach, 
and  let  every  opportunity  slip  by  them,  turn 


ON  SEIZING    OPPORTUNITIES.  67 

to  abusing  providence  for  setting  everything 
against  them:  "If  I  were  a  hatter,"  says 
one,  "  men  would  be  born  without  heads." 
"  If  I  went  to  the  sea  for  water, "  quoth  an- 
other, "  I  should  find  it  dried  up."  Every 
wind  is  foul  for  a  crazy  ship.  Neither  the 
wise  nor  the  wealthy  can  help  him  who  has 
long  refused  to  help  himself. 

John  Ploughman  in  the  most  genteel  man- 
ner sends  his  compliments  to  his  friends,  and 
now  that  harvest  is  over,  and  the  hops  all 
picked,  according  to  promise,  he  intends 
giving  them  a  bit  of  poetry,  just  to  show  that 
he  is  trying  the  polishing  brushes.  John 
asked  the  minister  to  lend  him  one  of  the 
poets,  and  he  gave  him  the  works  of  George 
Herbert, — very  good,  no  doubt,  but  rather 
tangled,  like  Harkaway  Wood  ;  still,  there's 
a  good  deal  in  the  queer  old  verses,  and 
every  now  and  then  one  comes  upon  clus- 
ters of  the  sweetest  nuts,  but  some  of  them 
are  rather  hard  to  crack.  The  following 
verse  is  somewhat  near  the  subject  now  in 
hand,  and  is  plain  enough  in  reason,  though, 
begging  the  poet's  pardon,  John  can't  see  a 
rhyme  in  it;  however,  as  it  is  by  the  great 
Herbertr  it  must  be  good,  and  will   do  well 


68  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

enough  to  ornament  John's  talk,  like  a 
flower  stuck  in  a  button-hole  of  his  Sun- 
day coat. 

"  Let  thy  mind  still  be  bent,  still  plotting  where, 
And  when,  and  how  thy  business  may  be  done. 
Slackness  breeds  worms ;  but  the  sure  traveller, 
Though  he  alight  sometimes,  still  goeth  on. 
Acting  and  stirring  spirits  live  alone  : 
Write  on  the  others,  Here  lies  such  a  one" 


ON   KEEPING    ONE'S    EYES    OPEN. 


"  There  are  many  baits  for  fishes." 

TO  get  through  this  world  a  man  must 
look  about  him,  and  even  sleep  with 
one  eye  open ;  for  there  are  many  baits  for 

(69) 


70  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

fishes,  many  nets  for  birds,  and  many  traps 
for  men.  While  foxes  are  so  common  we 
must  not  be  geese.  There  is  a  very  great 
difference  in  this  matter  among  people  of 
my  acquaintance:  many  see  more  with  one 
eye  than  others  with  two,  and  many  have 
fine  eyes  and  cannot  see  a  jot.  All  heads 
are  not  sense-boxes.  Some  are  so  cunning 
that  they  suspect  everybody,  and  so  live 
all  their  lives  in  miserable  fear  of  their 
neighbors ;  others  are  so  simple  that  every 
knave  takes  them  in,  and  makes  his  penny 
of  them.  One  man  tries  to  see  through  a 
brick  wall,  and  hurts  his  eyes ;  while 
another  finds  out  a  hole  in  it,  and  sees  as 
far  as  he  pleases.  Some  work  at  the  mouth 
of  a  furnace,  and  are  never  scorched ;  and 
others  burn  their  hands  at  the  fire  when 
they  only  mean  to  warm  them.  Now,  it  is 
true  that  no  one  can  give  another  experi- 
ence, and  we  must  all  pick  up  wit  for  our- 
selves;  yet  I  shall  venture  to  give  some 
of  the  homely  cautions  which  have  served 
my  turn,  and  perhaps  they  may  be  of  use  to 
others  as  they  have  been  to  me. 

Nobody  is  more  like  an  honest  man  than 
a  thorough  rogue.       When  you  see  a  man 


ON  KEEPING    ONE'S  EYES   OPEN.     71 

with  a  great  deal  .of  religion  displayed  in 
his  shop  window,  you  may  depend  upon  it 
he  keeps  a  very  small  stock  of  it  within. 
Do  not  choose  your  friend  by  his  looks : 
handsome  shoes  often  pinch  the  feet.  Don't 
be  fond  of  compliments  :  remember,  "  Thank 
you,  pussy,  and  thank  you,  pussy,"  killed 
the  cat.  Don't  believe  in  the  man  who  talks 
most;  for  mewing  cats  are  very  seldom 
good  mousers.  By  no  means  put  yourself 
in  another  person's  power:  if  you  put  pour 
thumb  between  two  grinders,  they  are  very 
apt  to  bite.  Drink  nothing  without  seeing 
it;  sign  nothing  without  reading  it,  and 
make  sure  that  it  means  no  more  than  it 
says.  Don't  go  to  law  unless  you  have 
nothing  to  lose :  lawyer's  houses  are  built 
on  fools'  heads.  In  any  business,  never 
wade  into  water  where  you  cannot  see  the 
bottom.  Put  no  dependence  upon  the 
label  of  a  bag ;  and  count  money  after  your 
own  kin.  See  the  sack  opened  before  you 
buy  what  is  in  it ;  for  he  who  trades  in  the 
dark  asks  to  be  cheated.  Keep  clear  of  the 
man  who  does  not  value  his  own  character. 
Beware  of  everyone  who  swears :  he  who 
would  blaspheme  his   Maker  would  make 


72  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

no  bones  of  lying  or  stealing.  Beware  of 
no  man  more  than  of  yourself:  we  carry 
our  worst  enemies  within  us.  When  a  new 
opinion  or  doctrine  comes  before  you,  do 
not  bite  till  you  know  whether  it  is  bread 
or  a  stone ;  and  do  not  be  sure  that  the 
gingerbread  is  good  because  of  the  gilt 
on  it.  Never  shout  holloa !  till  you  are 
quite  out  of  the  wood;  and  don't  cry  fried 
fish  till  they  are  caught  in  the  net.  There's 
always  time  enough  to  boast — wait  a  little 
longer.  Don't  throw  away  dirty  water  till 
you  have  got  clean  ;  keep  on  at  scraping  the 
roads  till  you  can  get  better  work;  for  the 
poorest  pay  is  better  than  none,  and  the 
humblest  office  is  better  than  being  out  of 
employment.  Always  give  up  the  road  to 
bulls  and  madmen ;  and  never  fight  with 
a  coalheaver  or  contend  with  a  base  char- 
acter; for  they  will  be  sure  to  blacken 
you. 

"  Neither  trust  nor  contend, 
Nor  lay  wagers,  nor  lend, 
And  you  may  depend 
You'll  have  peace  to  your  end." 

I  cannot  say  quite  so  much  as  that  old 
rhyme   does,   for    there's    more   than  that 


ON  KEEPING    ONE 'S  E  YES    OPEN.     73 

wanted  to  give  peace,  but  certainly  it  will 
help  to  it.  Never  ride  a  broken-kneed 
horse :  the  trader  who  has  once  been  a 
fraudulent  bankrupt  is  not  the  man  for  you 
to  deal  with.  A  rickety  chair  is  a  danger- 
ous seat.  Be  shy  of  people  who  are  over 
polite,  and  don't  be  too  fast  with  those  who 
are  forward  and  rough.  When  you  sus- 
pect a  design  in  anything,  be  on  your  guard ; 
set  the  trap  as  soon  as  you  smell  a  rat,  but 
mind  you  don't  catch  your  own  fingers  in 
it.  Have  very  little  to  do  with  a  boaster, 
for  his  beer  is  all  froth,  and  though  he 
brags  that  all  his  goods,  and  even  his  cop- 
per kettles,  are  gold  and  silver,  you  will  soon 
find  out  that  a  boaster  and  a  liar  are  first 
cousins.  Commit  all  your  secrets  to  no 
man  ;  trust  in  God  with  all  your  heart,  but 
let  your  confidence  in  friends  be  weighed  in 
the  balances  of  prudence,  seeing  that  men 
are  but  men,  and  all  men  are  frail.  Trust 
not  great  weights  to  slender  threads.  Yet 
be  not  evermore  suspicious,  for  suspicion 
is  a  cowardly  virtue  at  best.  Men  are  not 
angels,  remember  that ;  but  they  are  not 
devils,  and  it  is  too  bad  to  think  them  so. 
One  thing  be  sure  of,  never  believe  in  any 


74  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK. 

priest  of  any  religion,  for  before  a  man 
could  be  bad  enough  to  pretend  to  be  a 
priest,  he  must  have  hardened  his  heart  and 
blinded  his  conscience  to  the  most  horrible 
degree.  Our  governors  imprison  gipsies  for 
telling  fortunes,  and  yet  they  give  fat  liv- 
ings to  those  vagabonds  who  deceive  the 
people  in  much  weightier  things.  "  Bad 
company,"  said  the  thief,  as  he  went  to  the 
gallows  between  the  hangman  and  a  priest ; 
a  very  honest  speech,  and  a  very  true  word, 
though  spoken  in  jest.  It  is  the  ignorance 
of  fools  which  keeps  the  pot  boiling  for 
priests.  May  God  clean  this  land  from  the 
plague  of  their  presence,  and  make  men  wise 
enough  to  see  through  their  crafty  devices. 
Lastly,  my  advice  to  all  is — remember  that 
good  wisdom  is  that  which  will  turn  out  to 
be  wise  in  the  end  ;  seek  it,  friends,  and  seek 
it  at  the  hands  of  the  wisest  of  all  teachers, 
the  Lord  Jesus.  Trust  him,  and  he  will 
never  fail  you ;  be  guided  by  his  word,  and 
it  will  never  mislead  you  ;  pray  in  his  name, 
and  your  requests  shall  be  granted.  Re- 
member, he  that  leans  on  man  will  find  him 
a  broken  reed,  but  he  who  builds  on  Christ 
has  a  firm  foundation.      You   may  follow 


ON  KEEPING    ONE'S  EYES   OPEN     75 

Jesus  with  your  eyes  shut  if  you  please, 
but  when  others  would  guide  you  keep  all 
your  eyes  open  even  if  you  have  a  dozen, 
and  all  of  them  as  powerful  as  telescopes. 


THOUGHTS  ABOUT  THOUGHT. 


"  Two  heads  are  better  than  one." — Page  77. 

THIS  paper  is  very  little  of  it  to  be  set 
down  to  the  account  of  John  Plough- 
man, for  our  minister,  as   I   may  say,  found 
the  horses  and  held  the  plough  handles,  and 
(76) 


THOUGHTS  ABOUT   THOUGHT         77 

the  ploughman  only  put  in  a  smack  of  the 
whip  every  now  and  then,  just  to  keep  folks 
awake.  "  Two  heads  are  better  than  one," 
said  the  woman  when  she  took  her  dog 
with  her  to  market :  begging  his  pardon, 
our  minister  is  the  woman,  and  the  only 
sensible  head  in  the  whole  affair.  He  is  a 
man  who  is  used  to  giving  his  people  many 
things  of  a  very  different  sort  from  any- 
thing which  a  ploughman  is  likely  to  turn 
out  of  his  wallet ;  but  I  have,  at  his  request, 
dropped  in  a  few  homely  proverbs  into  his 
thoughts,  as  he  says,  "  by  way  of  salt ; " 
which  is  his  very  kind  way  of  putting  it. 
I  only  hope  I  have  not  spoiled  his  writing 
with  my  rough  expressions.  If  he  thinks 
well  of  it,  I  should  like  a  few  more  of  his 
pieces  to  tack  my  sayings  to ;  and  the  pub- 
lic shall  always  be  honestly  told  whether 
the  remarks  are  to  be  considered  as  alto- 
gether "  John  Ploughman's  Talk,"  or  as  the 
writings  of  two  characters  rolled  into  one. 
There  are  not  so  many  hours  in  a  year 
as  there  may  be  thoughts  in  an  hour. 
Thoughts  fly  in  flocks,  like  starlings,  and 
swarm  like  bees.  Like  the  sere  leaves  in 
autumn,  there   is    no  counting   them ;  and 


78  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

like  links  in  a  chain,  one  draws  on  another. 
What  a  restless  being  man  is  !  His  thoughts 
dance  up  and  down  like  midges  in  a  sum- 
mer's evening.  Like  a  clock  full  of  wheels, 
with  the  pendulum  in  full  swing,  his  mind 
moves  as  fast  as  time  flies.  This  makes 
thinking  such  an  important  business.  Many 
littles  make  a  mickle  ;  and  so  many  light 
thoughts  make  a  great  weight  of  sin.  A 
grain  of  sand  is  light  enough,  but  Solomon 
tells  us  that  a  heap  of  sand  is  heavy. 
Where  there  are  so  many  children  the  mother 
had  need  look  well  after  them.  We  ought 
to  mind  our  thoughts,  for  if  they  turn  to  be 
our  enemies,  they  will  be  too  many  for  us, 
and  will  drag  us  down  to  ruin.  Thoughts 
from  heaven,  like  birds  in  spring,  will  fill 
our  souls  with  music  ;  but  thoughts  of  evil 
will  sting  us  like  vipers. 

There  is  a  notion  abroad  that  thought 
is  free;  but  I  remember  reading,  that  al- 
though thoughts  are  toll-free,  they  are  not 
hell-free  ;  and  that  saying  quite  agrees  with 
the  good  old  Book.  We  cannot  be  sum- 
moned before  an  earthly  court  for  thinking  ; 
but  depend  upon  it  we  shall  have  to  be 
tried  for  it  at  the  Last  Assizes.    Evil  thoughts 


THOUGHTS  ABOUT   THOUGHT.  79 

are  the  marrow  of  sin ;  the  malt  that  sin  is 
brewed  from ;  the  tinder  which  catches  the 
sparks  of  the  devil's  temptations  !  the  churn 
in  which  the  milk  of  imagination  is  churned 
into  purpose  and  plan ;  the  nest  in  which 
all  evil  birds  lay  their  eggs.  Be  certain, 
then,  that,  as  sure  as  fire  burns  brushwood 
as  well  as  logs,  God  will  punish  thoughts 
of  sin  as  well  as  deeds  of  sin. 

Let  no  one  suppose  that  thoughts  are 
not  known  to  the  Lord ;  for  he  has  a  win- 
dow into  the  closest  closet  of  the  soul ;  a 
window  to  which  there  are  no  shutters.  As 
we  watch  bees  in  a  glass  hive,  so  does  the 
eye  of  the  Lord  see  us.  The  Bible  says, 
"  Hell  and  destruction  are  before  the  Lord : 
how  much  more  then  the  hearts  of  the  chil- 
dren of  men?"  Man  is  all  outside  to  God. 
With  heaven  there  are  no  secrets.  That 
which  is  done  in  the  private  chamber  of 
the  heart  is  as  public  as  the  streets  before 
the  all-seeing  eye. 

But  some  will  say  that  they  cannot  help 
having  bad  thoughts;  that  may  be,  but 
the  question  is,  do  they  hate  them  or  not  ? 
We  cannot  keep  thieves  from  looking  in 
at  our  windows,  but  if  we  open  our  doors  to 


80  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK, 

them,  and  receive  them  joyfully,  we  are  as 
bad  as  they.  We  cannot  help  the  birds  fly- 
ing over  our  heads  ;  but  we  may  keep  them 
from  building  their  nests  in  our  hair.  Vain 
thoughts  will  knock  at  the  door,  but  we 
must  not  open  to  them.  Though  sinful 
thoughts  rise,  they  must  not  reign.  He  who 
turns  a  morsel  over  and  over  in  his  mouth, 
does  so  because  he  likes  the  flavor ;  and  he 
who  meditates  upon  evil,  loves  it,  and  is 
ripe  to  commit  it.  Think  of  the  devil,  and 
he  will  appear ;  turn  your  thoughts  towards 
sin,  and  your  hands  will  soon  follow.  Snails 
leave  their  slime  behind  them,  and  so  do 
vain  thoughts.  An  arrow  may  fly  through 
the  air,  and  leave  no  trace  ;  but  an  ill  thought 
always  leaves  a  trail  like  a  serpent.  Where 
there  is  much  traffic  of  bad  thinking,  there 
will  be  much  mire  and  dirt ;  every  wave  of 
wicked  thought  adds  something  to  the  cor- 
ruption which  rots  upon  the  shore  of  life. 
It  is  dreadful  to  think,  that  a  vile  imagina- 
tion, once  indulged,  gets  the  key  of  our 
minds,  and  can  get  in  again  very  easily, 
whether  we  will  or  no,  and  can  so  return  as 
to  bring  seven  other  spirits  with  it  more 
wicked  than  itself;  and  what  may  follow,  no 


THOUGHTS  ABOUT  THOUGHT.  Si 

one  knows.  Nurse  sin  on  the  knees  of 
thought,  and  it  will  grow  into  a  giant.  Dip 
tow  in  naphtha,  and  how  it  will  blaze  when 
fire  gets  to  it !  lay  a  man  asoak  in  depraved 
thought,  and  he  is  ready  to  flame  up  into 
open  sin  as  soon  as  ever  opportunity  occurs. 
This  shows  us  the  wisdom  of  watching, 
every  day,  the  thoughts  and  imaginations  of 
our  hearts.  Good  thoughts  are  blessed 
guests,  and  should  be  heartily  welcomed, 
well  fed,  and  much  sought  after.  Like  rose 
leaves,  they  give  out  a  sweet  smell  if  laid 
up  in  the  jar  of  memory.  They  cannot  be 
too  much  cultivated  ;  they  are  a  crop  which 
enriches  the  soil.  As  the  hen  broods  her 
chickens  under  her  wings,  so  should  we 
cherish  all  holy  thoughts.  As  the  poor 
man's  ewe  lamb  ate  of  his  own  bread  and 
lay  in  his  bosom,  even  so  should  godly  med- 
itation be  very  dear  to  us.  Holy  thoughts 
breed  holy  words  and  holy  actions,  and  are 
hopeful  evidences  of  a  renewed  heart.  Who 
would  not  have  them  ?  To  keep  chaff  out 
of  a  bushel,  one  sure  plan  is  to  fill  it  full 
of  wheat ;  and  to  keep  out  vain  thoughts, 
it  is  wise  and  prudent  to  have  the  mind 
stored  with  choice  subjects  for  meditation : 


82  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK. 

these  are  easy  to  find,  and  we  should  never 
be  without  them.  May  we  all  be  able  to 
say  with  David,  "  In  the  multitude  of  my 
thoughts  within  me,  thy  comforts  delight 
my  soul." 


FAULTS. 


"  What's  rotten  will  rend." — Page  85. 

HE  who  boasts  of  being  perfect  is  per- 
fect in  folly.  I  have  been  a  good 
deal  up  and  down  in  the  world,  and  I  never 
did  see  either  a  perfect  horse  or  a  perfect 
man,  and  I  never  shall  till  two    Sundays 

(83) 


84  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

come  together.  You  cannot  get  white  flour 
out  of  a  coal  sack,  nor  perfection  out  of 
human  nature ;  he  who  looks  for  it  had  bet- 
ter look  for  sugar  in  the  sea.  The  old  say- 
ing is,  "  Lifeless,  faultless  :  "  of  dead  men 
we  should  say  nothing  but  good,  but  as  for 
the  living,  they  are  all  tarred  more  or  less 
with  the  black  brush,  and  half  an  eye  can 
see  it.  Every  head  has  a  soft  place  in  it,  and 
every  heart  has  its  black  drop.  Every  rose 
has  its  prickles,  and  every  day  its  night. 
Even  the  sun  shows  spots,  and  the  skies  are 
darkened  with  clouds.  Nobody  is  so  wise 
but  he  has  folly  enough  to  stock  a  stall  at 
Vanity  Fair.  Where  I  could  not  see  the 
fool's-cap,  I  have  nevertheless  heard  the 
bells  jingle.  As  there  is  no  sunshine  with- 
out some  shadows,  so  is  all  human  good 
mixed  up  with  more  or  less  of  evil ;  even 
poor  law  guardians  have  their  little  failings, 
and  parish  beadles  are  not  wholly  of 
heavenly  nature.  The  best  wine  has  its 
lees.  All  men's  faults  are  not  written  on 
their  foreheads,  and  it's  quite  as  well  they 
are  not,  or  hats  would  need  very  wide  brims, 
yet,  as  sure  as  eggs  are  eggs,  faults  of  some 
sort  nestle  in    every   bosom.      There's  no 


FAULTS.  85 

telling  when  a  man's  sins  may  show  them- 
selves, for  hares  pop  out  of  the  ditch  just 
when  you  are  not  looking  for  them.  A 
horse  that  is  weak  in  the  legs  may  not 
stumble  for  a  mile  or  two,  but  it  is  in  him, 
and  the  rider  had  better  hold  him  up  well. 
The  tabby  cat  is  not  lapping  milk  just  now, 
but  leave  the  dairy  door  open,  and  we  will 
see  if  she  is  not  as  bad  a  thief  as  the  kitten. 
There's  fire  in  the  flint,  cool  as  it  looks : 
wait  till  the  steel  gets  a  knock  at  it,  and  you 
will  see.  Everybody  can  read  that  riddle, 
but  it  is  not  everybody  that  will  remember 
to  keep  his  gunpowder  out  of  the  way  of 
the  candle. 

If  we  would  always  recollect  that  we  live 
among  men  who  are  imperfect,  we  should 
not  be  in  such  a  fever  when  we  find  out  our 
friends'  failings ;  what's  rotten  will  rend, 
and  cracked  pots  will  leak.  Blessed  is  he 
who  expects  nothing  of  poor  flesh  and 
blood,  for  he  shall  never  be  disappointed. 
The  best  of  men  are  men  at  the  best,  and 
the  best  wax  will  melt. 

It  is  a  good  horse  that  never  stumbles, 
And  a  good  wife  that  never  grumbles. 

But  surely  such  horses  and  wives  are  only 


86  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK. 

found  in  the  fool's  paradise,  where  dump- 
lings grow  on  trees.  In  this  wicked  world 
the  straightest  timber  has  knots  in  it,  and 
the  cleanest  field  of  wheat  has  its  share  of 
weeds.  The  most  careful  driver  one  day 
upsets  the  cart,  the  cleverest  cook  spills  a 
little  broth,  and  as  I  know  to  my  sorrow  a 
very  decent  ploughman  will  now  and  then 
break  the  plough,  and  often  make  a  crooked 
furrow.  It  is  foolish  to  turn  off  a  tried 
friend  because  of  a  failing  or  two,  for  you 
may  get  rid  of  a  one-eyed  nag  and  buy  a 
blind  one.  Being  all  of  us  full  of  faults,  we 
ought  to  keep  two  bears,  and  learn  to  bear 
and  forbear  with  one  another ;  since  we  all 
live  in  glass  houses,  we  should  none  of  us 
throw  stones.  Everybody  laughs  when  the 
saucepan  says  to  the  kettle,  "  How  black 
you  are  !  "  Other  men's  imperfections  show 
us  our  imperfections,  for  one  sheep  is  much 
like  another ;  and  if  there's  an  apple  in  my 
neighbor's  eye,  there  is  no  doubt  one  in 
mine.  We  ought  to  use  our  neighbors  as 
looking  glasses  to  see  our  own  faults  in,  and 
mend  in  ourselves  what  we  see  in  them. 

I  have  no  patience  with  those  who  poke 
their  noses  into  every  man's  house  to  smell 


FAULTS.  87 

out  his  faults,  and  put  on  magnifying 
glasses  to  discover  their  neighbors'  flaws  ; 
such  folks  had  better  look  at  home,  they 
might  see  the  devil  where  they  little  ex- 
pected. What  we  wish  to  see  we  shall 
see,  or  think  we  see.  Faults  are  always 
thick  where  love  is  thin.  A  white  cow  is 
all  black  if  your  eye  chooses  to  make  it  so. 
If  we  sniff  long  enough  at  rose  water,  we 
shall  find  out  that  it  has  a  bad  smell.  It 
would  be  a  far  more  pleasant  business,  at 
least  for  other  people,  if  fault  hunters  would 
turn  their  dogs  to  hunt  out  the  good  points 
in  other  folks  ;  the  game  would  pay  better, 
and  nobody  would  stand  with  a  pitchfork 
to  keep  the  huntsmen  off  his  farm.  As  for 
our  own  faults,  it  would  take  a  large  slate 
to  hold  the  account  of  them,  but,  thank  God, 
we  know  where  to  take  them,  and  how  to 
get  the  better  of  them.  With  all  our  faults, 
God  loves  us  still  if  we  are  trusting  in  his 
Son,  therefore  let  us  not  be  downhearted, 
but  hope  to  live  and  learn,  and  do  some 
good  service  before  we  die.  Though  the 
cart  creaks  it  will  get  home  with  its  load, 
and  the  old  horse,  broken  kneed  as  he  is, 
will  do  a  sight  of  work  yet.    There's  no  use 


88  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK. 

in  lying  down  and  doing  nothing,  because 
we  cannot  do  everything  as  we  should  like. 
Faults  or  no  faults,  ploughing  must  be  done, 
and  imperfect  people  must  do  it  too,  or 
there  will  be  no  harvest  next  year;  bad 
ploughman  as  John  may  be,  the  angels 
won't  do  his  work  for  him,  and  so  he  is  off 
to  do  it  himself.  Go  along,  Violet !  Gee 
woa!  Depper! 


THINGS  NOT  WORTH  TRYING. 


"  I  have  often  been  told  to  be  bold,  and  take  the  bull  by  the 
horns." — Page  93. 

THAT  is  a  wise  old  saying,  "  Spend  not 
all  you  have ;  believe  not  all  you 
hear ;  tell  not  all  you  know,  and  do  not  all 
you  can."  There  is  so  much  work  to  be 
done  that  needs  our  hands  that  it  is  a  pity 

(89) 


90  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

to  waste  a  grain  of  our  strength.  When 
the  game  is  not  worth  the  candle,  drop  it  at 
once.  It  is  wasting  time  to  look  for  milk 
in  a  gate-post,  or  blood  in  a  turnip,  or  sense 
in  a  fool.  Never  ask  a  covetous  man  for 
money  till  you  have  boiled  a  flint  soft. 
Don't  sue  a  debtor  who  has  not  a  penny  to 
bless  himself  with — you  will  only  be  throw- 
ing good  money  after  bad,  which  is  like 
losing  your  ferret  without  getting  a  rabbit. 
Never  offer  a  looking-glass  to  a  blind  man : 
if  a  man  is  so  proud  that  he  will  not  see 
his  faults,  he  will  only  quarrel  with  you  for 
pointing  them  out  to  him.  It  is  of  no  use  to 
hold  a  lantern  to  a  mole,  or  to  talk  of  heaven 
to  a  man  who  cares  for  nothing  but  his  dirty 
money.  There's  a  time  for  everything,  and 
it  is  a  silly  thing  to  preach  to  drunken  men, 
it  is  casting  pearls  before  swine ;  get  them 
sober,  and.  then  talk  to  them  soberly;  if  you 
lecture  them  while  they  are  drunk,  you  act 
as  if  you  were  drunk  yourself. 

Do  not  put  a  cat  on  a  coach  box,  or  men 
in  places  for  which  they  are  not  fitted. 
There's  no  making  apples  of  plums :  little 
minds  will  still  be  little,  even  if  you  make 
them  beadles  or  churchwardens.     It's  a  pity 


THINGS  NOT   WORTH  TRYING.        91 

to  turn  a  monkey  into  a  minister,  or  a  maid- 
servant into  a  mistress.  Many  preachers 
are  good  tailors  spoiled,  and  capital  shoe- 
makers turned  out  of  their  proper  calling. 
When  God  means  a  creature  to  fly,  he  gives 
it  wings,  and  when  he  intends  men  to  preach 
he  gives  them  abilities.  It  is  a  pity  to  push 
a  man  into  the  war  if  he  cannot  fight.  Bet- 
ter discourage  a  man's  climbing  than  help 
him  to  break  his  neck.  Silk  purses  are  not 
to  be  made  out  of  sows'  ears,  and  pigs  will 
never  play  well  on  the  flute,  teach  them  as 
long  as  you  like. 

It  is  not  wise  to  aim  at  impossibilities — 
it  is  a  waste  of  powder  to  fire  at  the  man  in 
the  moon.  Making  deal  boards  out  of  saw- 
dust is  a  very  sensible  scheme  compared 
with  what  some  of  my  London  friends  have 
been  aiming  at,  for  they  have  been  trying  to 
get  money  by  buying  shares  in  companies  : 
they  might  quite  as  soon  catch  the  wind  in 
a  net,  or  carry  water  in  a  sieve.  Bubbles 
are  fine  fun  for  boys,  but  bubble  com- 
panies are  edged  tools  that  none  should 
play  with.  If  my  friend  has  money  which 
he  can  afford  to  lose,  there  is  still  no  reason 
why  he  should  hand  it  over  to  a  set  of  knaves : 


92  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

if  I  wanted  to  get  rid  of  my  leg,  I  should 
not  get  a  shark  to  snap  it  off  for  me.  Give 
your  money  to  fools  sooner  than  let  rogues 
wheedle  you  out  of  it. 

It  is  never  worth  while  to  do  unnecessary 
things.  Never  grease  a  fat  sow,  or  praise  a 
proud  man.  Don't  make  clothes  for  fishes, 
or  coverings  for  altars.  Don't  paint  lilies 
or  garnish  the  gospel.  Never  bind  up  a 
man's  head  before  it  is  broken,  or  comfort  a 
conscience  that  makes  no  confession.  Never 
hold  up  a  candle  to  show  the  sun,  or  try  to 
prove  a  thing  which  nobody  doubts.  I 
would  advise  no  one  to  attempt  a  thing 
which  will  cost  more  than  it  is  worth.  You 
may  sweeten  a  dunghill  with  lavender  water, 
and  a  bad  living  man  may  keep  up  a  good 
character  by  an  outward  showT  of  religion, 
but  it  will  turn  out  a  losing  business  in  the 
long  run.  If  our  nation  were  sensible,  it 
would  sweep  out  a  good  many  expensive 
but  useless  people,  who  eat  the  malt  which 
lies  in  the  house  that  Jack  built ;  they  live 
on  the  national  estate,  but  do  it  little  service. 
To  pay  a  man  a  pound  for  earning  a  penny 
is  a  good  deal  wiser  than  keeping  bishops 
who  meet  together  by  the  score  and  consult 


THINGS  NOT   WORTH  TRYING,        93 

about  the  best  way  of  doing  nothing.  If 
my  master's  old  dog  was  as  sleepy  as  the 
bishops  are,  he  would  get  shot  or  drowned, 
for  he  wouldn't  be  worth  the  amount  of  the 
dog-tax.  However,  their  time  of  reckoning 
is  on  the  road,  as  sure  as  Christmas  is  com- 
ing. 

Long  ago  my  experience  taught  me  not  to 
dispute  with  anybody  about  tastes  and  whims; 
one  might  as  well  argue  about  what  you 
can  see  in  the  fire.  It  is  of  no  use  plough- 
ing the  air,  or  trying  to  convince  a  man 
against  his  will  in  matters  of  no  consequence. 
It  is  useless  to  try  to  end  a  quarrel  by  get- 
ting angry  over  it ;  it  is  much  the  same  as 
pouring  oil  on  a  fire  to  quench  it,  and  blow- 
ing coals  with  the  bellows  to  put  them  out. 
Some  people  like  rows — I  don't  envy  their 
choice;  I'd  rather  walk  ten  miles  to  get  out 
of  a  dispute  than  half-a-mile  to  get  into  one. 
I  have  often  been  told  to  be  bold,  and  take 
the  bull  by  the  horns,  but,  as  I  rather  think 
that  the  amusement  is  more  pleasant  than 
profitable,  I  shall  leave  it  to  those  who  are 
so  cracked  already  that  an  ugly  poke  with 
a  horn  would  not  damage  their  skulls.  Sol- 
omon says,  "  Leave  off  strife  before   it   be 


94  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

meddled  with,"  which  is  much  the  same  as 
if  he  had  said,  "  Leave  off  before  you  be- 
gin. "  When  you  see  a  mad  dog,  don't  ar- 
gue with  him  unless  you  are  sure  of  your 
logic  ;  better  get  out  of  his  way,  and  if  any- 
body calls  you  a  coward,  you  need  not  call 
him  a  fool — everybody  knows  that.  Med- 
dling in  quarrels  never  answers  ;  let  hornets' 
nests  alone,  and  don't  pull  down  old  houses 
over  your  own  head.  Meddlers  are  sure  to 
hurt  their  own  characters;  if  you  scrub 
other  people's  pigs,  you  will  soon  need 
scrubbing  yourself.  It  is  the  height  of  folly 
to  interfere  between  a  man  and  his  wife,  for 
they  will  be  sure  to  leave  off  fighting  each 
other  and  turn  their  whole  strength  upon 
you — and  serve  you  right  too  ;  if  you  will 
put  your  spoon  into  other  people's  broth, 
and  it  scalds  you,  who  is  to  blame  but  your- 
self? 

One  thing  more,  don't  attempt  to  make 
a  strong-headed  woman  give  way,  but  re- 
member— 

"  If  she  will,  she  will,  you  may  depend  on't : 
If  she  won't,  she  won't,  and  there's  an  end  on't. 

The  other  day  I  cut  out  of  a  newspaper 


THINGS  NOT   WORTH  TRYING.        95 

a  scrap  from  America,  which  shall  be  my 
tail-piece  : — "  Dip  the  Mississippi  dry  with  a 
tea-spoon ;  twist  your  heel  into  the  toe  of 
your  boot ;  send  up  fishing-hooks  with  bal- 
loons and  fish  for  stars  ;  get  astride  a  gossa- 
mer and  chase  a  comet ;  when  a  rain  storm 
is  coming  down  like  the  cataract  of  Niagara, 
remember  where  you  left  your  umbrella ; 
choke  a  flea  with  a  brickbat !  in  short,  prove 
everything  hitherto  considered  impossible 
to  be  possible — but  never  attempt  to  coax 
a  woman  to  say  she  will  when  she  has  made 
up  her  mind  to  say  she  won't." 


DEBT. 


"  The  poor  debtor  was  set  free,  like  a  bird  let  out  of  a  cage." — 
Page  98. 

WHEN  I  was  a  very  small  boy,  in  pina- 
fores, and  went  to  a  woman's  school, 
it  so  happened  that  I  wanted  a  stick  of  slate 
pencil,  and  had  no  money  to  buy  it  with. 
(96) 


DEBT,  97 

I  was  afraid  of  being  scolded  for  losing  my 
pencils  so  often,  for  I  was  a  real  careless 
little  fellow,  and  so  did  not  dare  to  ask  at 
home  ;  what  then  was  John  to  do  ?  There 
was  a  little  shop  in  the  place,  where  nuts, 
and  tops,  and  cakes,  and  balls  were  sold  by- 
old  Mrs.  Dearson,  and  sometimes  I  had  seen 
boys  and  girls  get  trusted  by  the  old  lady.  I 
argued  with  myself  that  Christmas  was  com- 
ing, and  that  somebody  or  other  would  be  sure 
to  give  me  a  penny  then,  and  perhaps  even  a 
whole  silver  sixpence.  I  would,  therefore, 
go  into  debt  for  a  stick  of  slate  pencil,  and  be 
sure  to  pay  at  Christmas.  I  did  not  feel 
easy  about  it,  but  still  I  screwed  my  courage 
up  and  went  into  the  shop.  One  farthing 
was  the  amount,  and  as  I  had  never  owed 
anything  before,  and  my  credit  was  good, 
the  pencil  was  handed  over  by  the  kind 
dame,  and  /  was  in  debt.  It  did  not  please 
me  much,  and  I  felt  as  if  I  had  done  wrong, 
but  I  little  knew  how  soon  I  should  smart 
for  it.  How  my  father  came  to  hear  of  this 
little  stroke  of  business  I  never  knew,  but 
some  little  bird  or  other  whistled  it  to  him, 
and  he  was  very  soon  down  upon  me  in 
right  earnest.     God  bless  him  for  it ;  he  was 



98  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

a  sensible  man,  and  none  of  your  children 
spoilers ;  he  did  not  intend  to  bring  up  his 
children  to  speculate,  and  play  at  what  big 
rogues  call  financing,  and  therefore  he 
knocked  my  getting  into  debt  on  the  head 
at  once,  and  no  mistake.  He  gave  me  a 
very  powerful  lecture  upon  getting  into  debt, 
and  how  like  it  was  to  stealing,  and  upon 
the  way  in  which  people  were  ruined  by  it ; 
and  how  a  boy  who  would  owe  a  farthing, 
might  one  day  owe  a  hundred  pounds,  and 
get  into  prison,  and  bring  his  family  into 
disgrace.  It  was  a  lecture,  indeed ;  I  think 
I  can  hear  it  now,  and  can  feel  my  ears  ting- 
ling at  the  recollection  of  it.  Then  I  was 
marched  off  to  the  shop  like  a  deserter 
marched  into  barracks,  crying  bitterly  all 
down  the  street,  and  feeling  dreadfully 
ashamed,  because  I  thought  everybody  knew 
I  was  in  debt.  The  farthing  was  paid  amid 
many  solemn  warnings,  and  the  poor  debtor 
was  set  free,  like  a  bird  let  out  of  a  cage. 
How  sweet  it  felt  to  be  out  of  debt !  How 
did  my  little  heart  vow  and  declare  that 
nothing  should  ever  tempt  me  into  debt 
again !  It  was  a  fine  lesson,  and  I  have 
never  forgotten  it.     If  all  boys  were  inocu- 


DEBT.  99 

lated  with  the  same  doctrine  when  they  were 
young,  it  would  be  as  good  as  a  fortune  to 
them,  and  save  them  waggon-loads  of 
trouble  in  after  life.  God  bless  my  father, 
say  I,  and  send  a  breed  of  such  fathers  into 
old  England  to  save  her  from  being  eaten 
up  with  villainy,  for  what  with  companies 
and  schemes  and  paper-money,  the  nation 
is  getting  to  be  as  rotten  as  touchwood. 

Ever  since  that  early  sickening  I  have 
hated  debt  as  Luther  hated  the  Pope,  and 
if  I  say  some  fierce  things  about  it,  you 
must  not  wonder.  To  keep  debt,  dirt,  and 
the  devil  out  of  my  cottage  has  been  my 
greatest  wish  ever  since  I  set  up  housekeep- 
ing ;  and  although  the  last  of  the  three  has 
sometimes  got  in  by  the  door  or  the  window, 
for  the  old  serpent  will  wriggle  through  the 
smallest  crack,  yet,  thanks  to  a  good  wife, 
hard  work,  honesty,  and  scrubbing  brushes, 
the  two  others  have  not  crossed  the  thresh- 
old. Debt  is  so  degrading,  that  if  I  owed  a 
man  a  penny  I  would  walk  twenty  miles,  in 
the  depth  of  winter,  to  pay  him,  sooner  than 
feel  that  I  was  under  an  obligation.  I  should 
be  as  comfortable  with  peas  in  my  shoes,  or 
a  hedgehog  in  my  bed,  or  a  snake  up  my 


ioo  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

back,  as  with  bills  hanging  over  my  head  at 
the  grocer's,  and  the  baker's,  and  the  tailor's. 
Poverty  is  hard,  but  debt  is  horrible  ;  a  man 
might  as  well  have  a  smoky  house  and  a 
scolding  wife,  which  are  said  to  be  the  two 
worst  evils  of  our  life.  We  may  be  poor, 
and  yet  respectable,  which  John  Ploughman 
and  wife  hope  they  are  and  will  be ;  but  a 
man  in  debt  cannot  even  respect  himself, 
and  he  is  sure  to  be  talked  about  by  the 
neighbors,  and  that  talk  will  not  be  much  to 
his  credit.  Some  persons  appear  to  like  to 
be  owing  money ;  but  I  would  as  soon  be  a 
cat  up  a  chimney  with  the  fire  alight,  or  a 
fox  with  the  hounds  at  my  heels,  or  a  hedge- 
hog on  a  pitchfork,  or  a  mouse  under  an 
owl's  claw.  An  honest  man  thinks  a  purse 
full  of  other  people's  money  to  be  worse 
than  an  empty  one ;  he  cannot  bear  to  eat 
other  people's  cheese,  wear  other  people's 
shirts,  and  walk  about  in  other  people's 
shoes,  neither  will  he  be  easy  while  his  wife 
is  decked  out  in  the  milliner's  bonnets,  and 
wears  the  draper's  flannels.  The  jackdaw  in 
the  peacock's  feathers  was  soon  plucked,  and 
borrowers  will  surely  come  to  poverty — a 


DEBT.  101 

poverty  of  the  bitterest  sort,  because  there 
is  shame  in  it. 

Living  beyond  their  incomes  is  the 
ruin  of  many  of  my  neighbors ;  they  can 
hardly  *  afford  to  keep  a  rabbit,  and  must 
needs  drive  a  pony  and  chaise.  I  am  afraid 
extravagance  is  the  common  disease  of  the 
times,  and  many  professing  Christians  have 
caught  it,  to  their  shame  and  sorrow.  Good 
cotton  or  stuff  gowns  are  not  good  enough 
nowadays ;  girls  must  have  silks  and  satins, 
and  then  there's  a  bill  at  the  dressmaker's 
as  long  as  a  winter's  night,  and  quite  as 
dismal.  Show,  and  style,  and  smartness 
run  away  with  a  man's  means,  keep  the 
family  poor,  and  the  father's  nose  down  on 
the  grindstone.  Frogs  try  to  look  as  big  as 
bulls,  and  burst  themselves.  A  pound 
a-week  apes  five  hundred  a-year,  and  comes 
to  the  county  court.  Men  burn  the  candle 
at  both  ends,  and  then  say  they  are  very 
unfortunate — why  don't  they  put  the  saddle 
on  the  right  horse,  and  say  they  are  ex- 
travagant ?  Economy  is  half  the  battle  in 
life  ;  it  is  not  so  hard  to  earn  money  as  to 
spend  it  well.  Hundreds  would  never  have 
known  want  if  they  had  not   first  known 


102         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK. 

waste.  If  all  poor  men's  wives  knew  how 
to  cook,  how  far  a  little  might  go  !  Our 
minister  says  the  French  and  the  Germans 
beat  us  hollow  in  nice  cheap  cookery,  I 
wish  they  would  send  missionaries  over  to 
convert  our  gossiping  women  into  good 
managers  ;  this  is  a  French  fashion  which 
would  be  a  deal  more  useful  than  those  fine 
pictures  in  Mrs.  Frippery's  window,  with 
ladies  rigged  out  in  a  new  style  every  month. 
Dear  me!  some  people  are  much  too  fine 
nowadays  to  eat  what  their  fathers  were 
thankful  to  see  on  the  table,  and  so  they 
please  their  palates  with  costly  feeding,  come 
to  the  workhouse,  and  expect  everybody  to 
pity  them.  They  turned  up  their  noses  at 
bread  and  butter,  and  came  to  eat  raw  turnips 
stolen  out  of  the  fields.  They  who  live  like 
fighting  cocks  at  other  men's  costs,  will  get 
their  combs  cut,  or  perhaps  get  roasted  for 
it  one  of  these  days.  If  you  have  a  great 
store  of  peas,  you  may  put  the  more  in  the 
soup;  but  everybody  should  fare  according 
to  his  earnings.  He  is  both  a  fool  and  a 
knave  who  has  a  shilling  coming  in,  and  on 
the  strength  of  it  spends  a  pound  which 
does  not  belong  to  him.     Cut   your  coat 


DEBT.  103 

according  to  your  cloth  is  sound  advice; 
but  cutting  other  peopled  cloth  by  running 
into  debt  is  as  like  thieving  as  fourpence  is 
like  a  groat.  If  I  meant  to  be  a  rogue  I 
would  deal  in  marine  stores,  or  be  a  pettifog- 
ging lawyer,  or  a  priest,  or  open  a  loan  office, 
or  go  out  picking  pockets,  but  I  would  scorn 
the  dirty  art  of  getting  into  debt  without  a 
prospect  of  being  able  to  pay. 

Debtors  can  hardly  help  being  liars,  for 
they  promise  to  pay  when  they  know  they 
cannot,  and  when  they  have  made  up  a  lot 
of  false  excuses  they  promise  again,  and  so 
they  lie  as  fast  as  a  horse  can  trot. 

"  You  have  debts,  and  make  debts  still, 
If  you've  not  lied,  lie  you  will. " 

Now,  if  owing  leads  to  lying,  who  shall 
say  that  it  is  not  a  most  evil  thing  ?  Of 
course,  there  are  exceptions,  and  I  do  not 
want  to  bear  hard  upon  an  honest  man  who 
is  brought  down  by  sickness  or  heavy  losses, 
but  take  the  rule  as  a  rule,  and  you  will  find 
debt  to  be  a  great  dismal  swamp,  a  huge  mud- 
hole,  a  dirty  ditch :  happy  is  the  man  who 
gets  out  of  it  after  once  tumbling  in,  but 


104         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK, 

happiest  of  all  is  he  who  has  been  by  God's 
goodness  kept  out  of  the  mire  altogether. 
If  you  once  ask  the  devil  to  dinner  it  will  be 
hard  to  get  him  out  of  the  house  again  : 
better  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  him. 
Where  a  hen  has  laid  one  egg  she  is  very 
likely  to  lay  another;  when  a  man  is  once 
in  debt,  he  is  likely  to  get  into  it  again ; 
better  keep  clear  of  it  from  the  first.  He 
who  gets  in  for  a  penny  will  soon  be  in  for 
a  pound,  and  when  a  man  is  over  shoes,  he 
is  very  liable  to  be  over  boots.  Never  owe 
a  farthing,  and  you  will  never  owe  a  guinea. 
If  you  want  to  sleep  soundly,  buy  a  bed 
of  a  man  who  is  in  debt;  surely  it  must  be 
a  very  soft  one,  or  he  never  could  have 
rested  so  easy  on  it.  I  suppose  people  get 
hardened  to  it,  as  Smith's  donkey  did  when 
its  master  broke  so  many  sticks  across  its 
back.  It  seems  to  me  that  a  real  honest 
man  would  sooner  get  as  lean  as  a  grey- 
hound than  feast  on  borrowed  money,  and 
would  choke  up  his  throat  with  March  dust 
before  he  would  let  the  landlord  make  chalks 
against  him  behind  the  door  for  a  beer  score. 
What  pins  and  needles  tradesmen's  bills 
must  stick  in  a  fellow's  soul !      A  pig  on 


DEBT.  105 

credit  always  grunts.  Without  debt,  with- 
out care ;  out  of  debt,  out  of  danger ;  but 
owing  and  borrowing  are  bramble  bushes 
full  of  thorns.  If  ever  I  borrow  a  spade  of 
my  next  door  neighbor  I  never  feel  safe 
with  it  for  fear  I  should  break  it ;  I  never 
can  dig  in  peace  as  I  do  with  my  own ;  but 
if  I  had  a  spade  at  the  shop  and  knew  I 
could  not  pay  for  it,  I  think  I  should  set  to 
and  dig  my  own  grave  out  of  shame.  Script- 
ure says,  "  Owe  no  man  anything,"  which 
does  not  mean  pay  your  debts,  but  never 
have  any  to  pay ;  and  my  opinion  is,  that 
those  who  wilfully  break  this  law  ought  to  be 
turned  out  of  the  Christian  church,  neck  and 
crop,  as  we  say.  Our  laws  are  shamefully 
full  of  encouragement  to  credit :  nobody 
need  be  a  thief  now ;  he  has  only  to  open  a 
shop  and  make  a  fail  of  it,  and  it  will  pay/ 
him  much  better ;  as  the  proverb  is,  "  He 
who  never  fails  will  never  grow  rich.  "  Why, 
I  know  tradesmen  who  have  failed  five  or 
six  times,  and  yet  think  they  are  on  the 
road  to  heaven ;  the  scoundrels,  what  would 
they  do  if  they  got  there  ?  They  are  a 
deal  more  likely  to  go  where  they  shall 
never  come  out  till  they  have  paid  the  utter- 


106  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

most  farthing.  But  people  say,  "  How  liberal 
they  are  !  "  Yes,  with  other  people's  money. 
I  hate  to  see  a  man  steal  a  goose  and  then 
give  religion  the  giblets.  Piety  by  all  means, 
but  pay  your  way  as  part  of  it.  Honesty 
first,  then  generosity.  But  how  often  re- 
ligion is  a  cloak  for  deceiving!  There's 
Mrs.  Scamp  as  fine  as  a  peacock,  all  the 
girls  out  at  boarding-school,  learning  French 
and  the  piano,  the  boys  swelling  about  in 
kid  gloves,  and  G.  B.  Scamp,  Esq.,  driving 
a  fast-trotting  mare,  and  taking  the  chair  at 
public  meetings,  while  his  poor  creditors 
cannot  get  more  than  enough  to  live  from 
hand  to  mouth.  It  is  shameful  and  beyond 
endurance  to  see  how  genteel  swindling  is 
winked  at  by  many  in  this  country.  I'd  off 
with  their  white  waistcoats,  and  kid  gloves, 
and  patent  leather  boots,  if  I  had  my  way, 
and  give  them  the  county  crop,  and  the 
prison  livery  for  six  months  ;  gentlemen  or 
not,  I'd  let  them  see  that  big  rogues  could 
dance  on  the  treadmill  to  the  same  tune  as 
little  ones.  I'd  make  the  land  too  hot  to 
hold  such  scamping  gentry  if  I  were  a  mem- 
ber of  Parliament,  or  a  prime  minister :  as  I've 
no  such  power,  I  can  at  least  write  against 


DEBT.  107 

the  fellows,  and  let  off  the  steam  of  my 
wrath  in  that  way. 

My  motto  is,  pay  as  you  go,  and  keep 
from  small  scores.  Short  reckonings  are 
soon  cleared.  Pay  what  you  owe,  and  what 
you're  worth  you'll  know.  Let  the  clock 
tick,  but  no  "  tick  "  for  me.  Better  go  to 
bed  without  your  supper  than  get  up  in  debt. 
Sins  and  debts  are  always  more  than  we 
think  them  to  be.  Little  by  little  a  man 
gets  over  head  and  ears.  It  is  the  petty  ex- 
penses that  empty  the  purse.  Money  is 
round,  and  rolls  away  easily.  Tom  Thrift- 
less buys  what  he  does  not  want  because  it 
is  a  great  bargain,  and  so  is  soon  brought 
to  sell  what  he  does  want,  and  find  it  a  very 
little  bargain  ;  he  cannot  say  "  No  "  to  his 
friend  who  wants  him  to  be  security ;  he 
gives  grand  dinners,  makes  many  holidays, 
keeps  a  fat  table,  lets  his  wife  dress  fine, 
never  looks  after  his  servants,  and  by-and- 
by  he  is  quite  surprised  to  find  that  quarter- 
days  come  round  so  very  fast,  and  that 
creditors  bark  so  loud.  He  has  sowed  his 
money  in  the  fields  of  thoughtlessness,  and 
now  he  wonders  that  he  has  to  reap  the 
harvest   of  poverty.      Still   he    hopes   for 


108         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

something  to  turn  up  to  help  him  out  of 
difficulty,  and  so  muddles  himself  into  more 
troubles,  forgetting  that  hope  and  expecta- 
tion are  a  fool's  income.  Being  hard  up,  he 
goes  to  market  with  empty  pockets,  and 
buys  at  whatever  prices  tradesmen  like  to 
charge  him,  and  so  he  pays  more  than 
double  and  gets  deeper  and  deeper  into  the 
mire.  This  leads  him  to  scheming,  and  try- 
ing little  tricks  and  mean  dodges,  for  it  is 
hard  for  an  empty  sack  to  stand  upright. 
This  is  sure  not  to  answer,  for  schemes  are 
like  spiders'  webs,  which  never  catch  any- 
thing better  than  flies,  and  are  soon  swept 
away.  As  well  attempt  to  mend  your  shoes 
with  brown  paper,  or  stop  a  broken  window 
with  a  sheet  of  ice,  as  try  to  patch  up  a 
falling  business  with  manceuvering  and 
scheming.  When  the  schemer  is  found  out, 
he  is  like  a  dog  in  church,  whom  everybody 
kicks  at,  and  like  a  barrel  of  powder,  which 
nobody  wants  for  a  neighbor. 

They  say  poverty  is  a  sixth  sense,  and  it 
had  need  be,  for  many  debtors  seem  to  have 
lost  the  other  five,  or  were  born  without 
common  sense,  for  they  appear  to  fancy 
that  you  not  only  make  debts,  but  pay  them 


DEBT.  109 

by  borrowing.  A  man  pays  Peter  with 
what  he  has  borrowed  of  Paul,  and  thinks 
he  is  getting  out  of  his  difficulties,  when 
he  is  only  putting  one  foot  into  the  mud  to 
pull  his  other  foot  out.  It  is  hard  to  shave 
an  egg,  or  pull  hairs  out  of  a  bald  pate,  but 
they  are  both  easier  than  paying  debts  out 
of  an  empty  pocket.  Samson  was  a  strong 
man,  but  he  could  not  pay  debts  without 
money,  and  he  is  a  fool  who  thinks  he  can 
do  it  by  scheming.  As  to  borrowing  money 
of  loan  societies,  it's  like  a  drowning  man 
catching  at  razors  ;  both  Jews  and  Gentiles, 
when  they  lend  money,  generally  pluck  the 
geese  as  long  as  they  have  any  feathers.  A 
man  must  cut  down  his  outgoings  and  save 
his  incomings  if  he  wants  to  clear  himself; 
you  can't  spend  your  penny  and  pay  debts 
with  it  too.  Stint  the  kitchen  if  the  purse 
is  bare.  Don't  believe  in  any  way  of  wiping 
out  debts  except  by  paying  hard  cash. 
Promises  make  debts,  and  debts  make 
promises,  but  promises  never  pay  debts  ; 
promising  is  one  thing,  and  performing  is 
quite  another.  A  good  man's  word  should 
be  as  binding  as  an  oath,  and  he  should 
never  promise  to  pay  unless  he  has  a  clear 


no         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK. 

prospect  of  doing  so  in  due  time  ;  those  who 
stave  off  payment  by  false  promises,  deserve 
no  mercy.  It  is  all  very  well  to  say  "  I'm 
very  sorry,  "  but — 

"  A  hundred  years  of  regret 
Pay  not  a  farthing  of  debt." 

Now  I'm  afraid  all  this  sound  advice 
might  as  well  have  been  given  to  my  master's 
cocks  and  hens  as  to  those  who  have  got 
into  the  way  of  spending  what  is  not  their 
own,  for  advice  to  such  people  goes  in  at 
one  ear  and  out  at  the  other ;  well,  those 
who  won't  listen  will  have  to  feel,  and  those 
who  refuse  cheap  advice  will  have  to  buy 
dear  repentance;  but  to  young  people 
beginning  life,  a  word  may  be  worth  a  world, 
and  this  shall  be  John  Ploughman's  short 
sermon,  with  three  heads  to  it — always  live 
a  little  below  your  means,  never  get  into 
debt,  and  remember — 

"  He  who  goes  a  borrowing 
Goes  a  sorrowing." 


HOME. 


Merry  times  in  Ploughman's  Cottage.— Page  114. 

THAT  word  home  always   sounds  like 
poetry  to  me.     It  rings  like  a  peal 
of  bells  at  a  wedding,  only  more  soft  and 

(in) 


112  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

sweet,  and  it  chimes  deeper  into  the  ears  of 
my  heart.  It  does  not  matter  whether  it 
means  thatched  cottage  or  manor  house, 
home  is  home,  be  it  ever  so  homely,  and 
there's  no  place  on  earth  like  it.  Green 
grow  the  houseleek  on  the  roof  for  ever,  and 
let  the  moss  flourish  on  the  thatch.  Sweetly 
the  sparrows  chirrup  and  the  swallows  twit- 
ter around  the  chosen  spot  which  is  my  joy 
and  rest.  Every  bird  loves  its  own  nest ; 
the  owl  thinks  the  old  ruins  the  fairest  spot 
under  the  moon,  and  the  fox  is  of  opinion 
that  his  hole  in  the  hill  is  remarkably  cosy. 
When  my  master's  nag  knows  that  his  head 
is  towards  home  he  wants  no  whip,  but 
thinks  it  best  to  put  on  all  steam ;  and  I  am 
always  of  the  same  mind,  for  the  way  home 
to  me,  is  the  best  bit  of  road  in  the  country. 
I  like  to  see  the  smoke  out  of  my  own  chim- 
ney better  than  the  fire  on  another  man's 
hearth  ;  there's  something  so  beautiful  in 
the  way  in  which  it  curls  up  among  the 
trees.  Cold  potatoes  on  my  own  table 
taste  better  than  roast  meat  at  my  neigh- 
bor's, and  the  honeysuckle  at  my  own  door 
is  the  sweetest  I  ever  smell.  When  you  are 
out,  friends  do  their  best,  but  still  it  is  not 


HOME.  113 

home.  "  Make  yourself  at  home,"  they  say, 
because  everybody  knows  that  to  feel  at 
home  is  to  feel  at  ease. 

"  East  and  west, 
Home  is  best." 

Why,  at  home  you  are  at  home,  and  what 
more  do  you  want  ?  Nobody  grudges  you, 
whatever  your  appetite  may  be ;  and  you 
don't  get  put  into  a  damp  bed.  Safe  is  his  own 
castle,  like  a  king  in  his  palace,  a  man  feels 
himself  somebody,  and  is  not  afraid  of  being 
thought  proud  for  thinking  so.  Every  cock 
may  crow  on  his  own  dunghill ;  and  a  dog 
is  a  lion  when  he  is  at  home.  A  sweep  is 
master  inside  his  own  door.  No  need  to 
guard  every  word  because  some  enemy  is 
on  the  watch,  no  keeping  the  heart  under 
lock  and  key ;  but  as  soon  as  the  door  is 
shut  it  is  liberty  hall,  and  none  to  peep  and 
pry.  There  is  a  glorious  view  from  the  top 
of  Leith  Hill,  in  our  dear  old  Surrey,  and 
Hindhead  and  Martha's  Chapel,  and  Box- 
hill,  are  not  to  be  sneezed  at,  but  I  could 
show  you  something  which  to  my  mind 
beats  them  all  to  nothing  for  real  beauty : 
I  mean  John  Ploughman's  cottage,  with  the 


114         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK. 

kettle  boiling  on  the  hob,  singing  like  an 
unfallen  black  angel,  while  the  cat  is  lying 
asleep  in  front  of  the  fire,  and  the  wife  in  her 
chair  mending  stockings,  and  the  children 
cutting  about  the  room,  as  full  of  fun  as 
young  lambs.  It  is  a  singular  fact,  and 
perhaps  some  of  you  will  doubt  it,  but 
that  is  your  unbelieving  nature,  our  little 
ones  are  real  beauties,  always  a  pound  or 
two  plumper  than  others  of  their  age,  and 
yet  it  don't  tire  you  half  so  much  to  nurse 
them  as  it  does  other  people's  babies.  Why, 
bless  you,  my  wife  would  knock  up  in  half 
the  time,  if  her  neighbor  had  asked  her  to 
see  to  a  strange  youngster,  but  her  own 
children  don't  seem  to  tire  her  at  all ;  now 
my  belief  is  that  it  all  comes  of  their  having 
been  born  at  home.  Just  so  is  it  with 
everything  else;  our  lane  is  the  most 
beautiful  for  twenty  miles  round,  because 
our  home  is  in  it ;  and  my  garden  is  a  per- 
fect paradise,  for  no  other  particular  reason 
than  this  very  good  one,  that  it  belongs  to 
the  old  house  at  home. 

I  cannot  make  out  why  so  many  work- 
ing men  spend  their  evenings  at  the  public 
house,  when  their  own  fireside  would  be  so 


HOME.  115 

much  better  and  cheaper  too.  There  they 
sit,  hour  after  hour,  boozing  and  talking 
nonsense,  and  forgetting  the  dear  good  souls 
at  home  who  are  half  starved  and  weary 
with  waiting  for  them.  Their  money  goes 
into  the  publican's  till  when  it  ought  to 
make  their  wives  and  children  comfortable ; 
as  for  the  beer  they  get,  it  is  just  so  much 
fools'  milk  to  drown  their  wits  in.  Such 
fellows  ought  to  be  horse-whipped,  and  those 
who  encourage  them  and  live  on  their 
spendings  deserve  to  feel  the  butt  end  of 
the  whip.  Those  beershops  are  the  curse 
of  this  country — no  good  ever  can  come 
of  them,  and  the  evil  they  do  no  tongue 
can  tell ;  the  publics  were  bad  enough, 
but  the  beershops  are  a  pest ;  I  wish  the 
man  who  made  the  law  to  open  them  had 
to  keep  all  the  families  that  they  have 
brought  to  ruin.  Beershops  are  the  ene- 
mies of  home,  and  therefore  the  sooner 
their  licenses  are  taken  away  the  better; 
poor  men  don't  need  such  places,  nor  rich 
men  either,  they  are  all  worse  and  no  bet- 
ter, like  Tom  Norton's  wife.  Anything  that 
hurts  the  home  is  a  curse,  and  ought  to  be 


n6         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

hunted  down  as  gamekeepers  do  the  vermin 
in  the  copses. 

Husbands  should  try  to  make  home  happy 
and  holy.  It  is  an  ill  bird  that  fouls  its  own 
nest,  a  bad  man  who  makes  his  home 
wretched.  Our  house  ought  to  be  a  little 
church,  with  holiness  to  the  Lord  over  the 
door,  but  it  ought  never  to  be  a  prison  where 
there  is  plenty  of  rule  and  order,  but  little 
love  and  no  pleasure.  Married  life  is  not  all 
sugar,  but  grace  in  the  heart  will  keep  away 
most  of  the  sours.  Godliness  and  love  can 
make  a  man,  like  a  bird  in  a  hedge,  sing 
among  thorns  and  briers,  and  set  others  a 
singing  too.  It  should  be  the  husband's 
pleasure  to  please  his  wife,  and  the  wife's 
care  to  care  for  her  husband.  He  is  kind 
to  himself  who  is  kind  to  his  wife.  I  am 
afraid  some  men  live  by  the  rule  of  self,  and 
when  that  is  the  case  home  happiness  is  a 
mere  sham.  When  husbands  and  wives  are 
well  yoked,  how  light  their  load  becomes ! 
It  is  not  every  couple  that  is  a  pair,  and  the 
more's  the  pity.  In  a  true  home  all  the 
strife  is  which  can  do  the  most  to  make  the 
family  happy.  A  home  should  be  a  Bethel, 
not  a  Babel.     The  husband  should  be  the 


HOME.  117 

houseband,  binding  all  together  like  a  corner 
stone,  but  not  crushing  everything  like  a 
mill-stone.  Unkind  and  domineering  hus- 
bands ought  not  to  pretend  to  be  Christians, 
for  they  act  clean  contrary  to  Christ's 
commands.  Yet  a  home  must  be  well  or- 
dered, or  it  will  become  a  Bedlam,  and  be  a 
scandal  to  the  parish.  If  the  father  drops 
the  reins,  the  family-coach  will  soon  be  in 
the  ditch.  A  wise  mixture  of  love  and 
firmness  will  do  it ;  but  neither  harshness  nor 
softness  alone  will  keep  home  in  happy  order. 
Home  is  no  home  where  the  children  are 
not  in  obedience,  it  is  rather  a  pain  than 
a  pleasure  to  be  in  it.  Happy  is  he  who 
is  happy  in  his  children,  and  happy  are 
the  children  who  are  happy  in  their  father. 
All  fathers  are  not  wise.  Some  are  like 
Eli,  and  spoil  their  children.  Not  to  cross 
our  children  is  the  way  to  make  a  cross 
of  them.  Those  who  never  give  their 
children  the  rod  must  not  wonder  if  their 
children  become  a  rod  to  them.  Solomon 
says,  "  Correct  thy  son,  and  he  shall  give 
thee  rest ;  yea,  he  shall  give  delight  to  thy 
soul."  I  am  not  clear  that  anybody  wiser 
than  Solomon  lives  in    our    time,  though 


Ii8         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

some  think  they  are.  Young  colts  must 
be  broken  in  or  they  will  make  wild 
horses.  Some  fathers  are  all  fire  and 
fury,  filled  with  passion  at  the  smallest 
fault ;  this  is  worse  than  the  other,  and 
makes  home  a  little  hell  instead  of  a  heaven. 
No  wind  makes  the  miller  idle,  but  too 
much  upsets  the  mill  altogether.  Men 
who  strike  in  their  anger  generally  miss 
their  mark.  When  God  helps  us  to  hold 
the  reins  firmly,  but  not  to  hurt  the  horses' 
mouths,  all  goes  well.  When  home  is 
ruled  according  to  God's  word,  angels 
might  be  asked  to  stay  a  night  with  us,  and 
they  would  not  find  themselves  out  of  their 
element. 

Wives  should  feel  that  home  is  their 
place  and  their  kingdom,  the  happiness  of 
which  depends  mostly  upon  them.  She 
is  a  wicked  wife  who  drives  her  husband 
away  by  her  long  tongue.  A  man  said  to 
his  wife  the  other  day,  "  Double  up  your 
whip ;  "  he  meant,  keep  you  tongue  quiet : 
it  is  wretched  living  with  such  a  whip  al- 
ways lashing  you.  When  God  gave  to 
men  ten  measures  of  speech,  they  say  the 
women  ran  away  with  nine,  and  in   some 


HOME.  119 

cases  I  am  afraid  the  saying  is  true.  A 
dirty,  slatternly,  gossiping  wife  is  enough 
to  drive  her  husband  mad ;  and  if  he  goes 
to  the  public  house  of  an  evening,  she  is 
the  cause  of  it.  It  is  doleful  living  where 
the  wife,  instead  of  reverencing  her  hus- 
band, is  always  wrangling  and  railing  at 
him.  It  must  be  a  good  thing  when  such 
women  are  hoarse,  and  it  is  a  pity  that 
they  have  not  as  many  blisters  on  their 
tongues  as  they  have  teeth  in  their  jaws. 
God  save  us  all  from  wives  who  are  an- 
gels in  the  streets,  saints  in  the  church,  and 
devils  at  home.  I  have  never  tasted  of  such 
bitter  herbs,  but  I  pity  from  my  very 
heart  those  who  have  this  diet  every  day  of 
their  lives. 

Show  me  a  loving  husband,  a  worthy 
wife,  and  good  children,  and  no  pair  of 
horses  that  ever  flew  along  the  road  could 
take  me  in  a  year  where  I  could  see  a  more 
pleasing  sight.  Home  is  the  grandest  of 
all  institutions.  Talk  about  parliament, 
give  me  a  quiet  little  parlor.  Boast  about 
voting  and  the  Reform  Bill  if  you  like, 
but  I  go  in  for  weeding  the  little  garden, 
and    teaching    the    children   their    hymns. 


iio         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

Franchise  may  be  a  very  fine  thing,  but  I 
should  a  good  deal  sooner  get  the  free- 
hold of  my  cottage,  if  I  could  find  the 
money  to  buy  it.  Magna  Charta  I  don't 
know  much  about,  but  if  it  means  a  quiet 
home  for  everybody,  three  cheers  for  it. 

I  wish  our  governors  would  not  break 
up  so  many  poor  men's  homes  by  that 
abominably  heartless  poor  law.  It  is  far 
more  fit  for  a  set  of  Red  Indians  than 
Englishmen.  A  Hampshire  carter  told 
me  the  other  day  that  his  wife  and  chil- 
dren were  all  in  the  union,  and  his  home 
broken  up,  because  of  the  cruel  working 
of  the  poor  law.  He  had  eight  little  ones 
and  his  wife  to  keep  on  nine  shillings  a 
week,  with  rent  to  pay  out  of  it ;  on  this 
he  could  not  keep  body  and  soul  together; 
now,  if  the  parish  had  allowed  him  a  mere 
trifle,  a  loaf  or  two  and  a  couple  of  shil- 
lings a  week,  he  would  have  jogged  on, 
but  no,  not  a  penny  out  of  the  house ; 
they  might  all  die  of  starvation  unless  they 
would  all  go  into  the  workhouse.  So,  with 
many  bitter  tears  and  heartaches,  the  poor 
soul  had  to  sell  his  few  little  bits  of  furni- 
ture, and  he  is   now  a  houseless  man,  and 


HOME.  121 

yet  he  is  a  good  hard-working  fellow,  and 
served  one  master  for  nearly  twenty  years. 
Such  things  are  very  common,  but  they 
ought  not  to  be.  Why  cannot  the  really 
deserving  poor  have  a  little  help  given 
them  ?  Why  must  they  be  forced  into  the 
union  house  ?  Home  is  the  pillar  of  the 
British  Empire,  and  ought  not  to  be  knocked 
to  pieces  by  these  unchristian  laws.  I  wish 
I  was  an  orator  and  could  talk  politics,  I 
would  not  care  a  rush  for  Whigs  or  Tories, 
but  I  would  stand  up  like  a  lion  for  the 
poor  man's  home,  which,  let  me  tell  the 
Lords  and  Commons,  is  as  dear  to  him  as 
their  great  palaces  are  to  them,  and  some- 
times dearer. 

If  I  had  no  home  the  world  would  be  a 
big  prison  to  me.  England  for  me  for  a 
country,  Surrey  for  a  county,  and  for  a  vil- 
lage give  me —  no,  I    shan't  tell  you, 

or  you  will  be  hunting  John  Ploughman 
up.  Many  of  my  friends  have  emigrated, 
and  are  breaking  up  fresh  soil  in  Australia 
and  America.  Though  their  stone  has  rolled, 
I  hope  they  may  gather  moss,  for  when 
they  were  at  home  they  were  like  the  set- 
ting hen,   which    gets    no   barley.     Really 


122  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

these  hard  times  make  a  man  think  of  his 
wings,  but  I  am  tied  by  the  leg  to  my  own 
home,  and,  please  God,  I  hope  to  live  and 
die  among  my  own  people.  They  may  do 
things  better  in  France  and  Germany,  but 
old  England  for  me,  after  all. 


MEN  WHO  ARE  DOWN. 


'  Where  the  carcass  is,  thither  will  the  eagles  be  gathered  together." 
Page  124. 

NO  man's  lot  is  fully  known  till  he  is 
dead  :  change  of  fortune  is  the  lot 
of  life.  He  who  rides  in  the  carriage  may 
yet   have   to    clean   it.      Sawyers    change 

(123) 


124  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

places,  and  he  who  is  up  aloft  may  have  to 
take  his  turn  in  the  pit.  In  less  than  a 
thousand  years  we  shall  all  be  bald  and 
poor  too,  and  who  knows  what  he  may 
come  to  before  that  ?  The  thought  that  we 
may  ourselves  be  one  day  under  the  win- 
dow should  make  us  careful  when  we  are 
throwing  out  our  dirty  water.  With  what 
measure  we  mete  it  shall  be  measured  to  us 
again,  and  therefore  let  us  look  well  to  our 
dealings  with  the  unfortunate. 

Nothing  makes  me  more  sick  of  human 
nature  than  to  see  the  way  in  which  men 
treat  others  when  they  fall  down  the  ladder 
of  fortune.  "  Down  with  him,"  they  cry, 
"  he  always  was  good  for  nothing." 

"  Down  among  the  dead  men,  down,  down,  down, 
Down  among  the  dead  men,  there  let  him  lie." 

Dog  won't  eat  dog,  but  men  will  eat  each 
other  up  like  cannibals,  and  boast  of  it  too. 
There  are  thousands  in  this  world  who  fly 
like  vultures  to  feed  on  a  tradesman  or  a 
merchant  as  soon  as  ever  he  gets  into  trou- 
ble. Where  the  carcass  is,  thither  will  the 
eagles  be  gathered  together.  Instead  of  a 
little   help,   they  give  the  sinking  man  a 


MEN   WHO  ARE  DOWN,  125 

great  deal  of  cruelty,  and  cry,  "  Serves  him 
right.  "  All  the  world  will  beat  the  man 
whom  fortune  buffets.  If  providence  smites 
him,  all  men's  whips  begin  to  crack.  The 
dog  is  drowning,  and  therefore  all  his 
friends  empty  their  buckets  over  him.  The 
tree  has  fallen,  and  everybody  runs  for  his 
hatchet.  The  house  is  on  fire,  and  all  the 
neighbors  warm  themselves.  The  man  has 
ill  luck,  therefore  his  friends  give  him  ill 
usage;  he  has  tumbled  into  the  road,  and 
they  drive  their  carts  over  him  :  he  is  down, 
and  selfishness  cries,  "  Let  him  be  kept 
down,  then  there  will  be  the  more  room  for 
those  who  are  up." 

How  aggravating  it  is  when  those  who 
knocked  you  down  kick  you  for  not  stand- 
ing up !  It  is  not  very  pleasant  to  hear 
that  you  have  been  a  great  fool,  and  there 
were  fifty  ways  at  least  of  keeping  out  of 
your  difficulty,  only  you  had  not  the  sense 
to  see  them.  You  ought  not  to  have  lost 
the  game ;  even  Tom  Fool  can  see  where 
you  made  a  bad  move.  "  He  ought  to  have 
locked  the  stable  door ;  "  everybody  can  see 
that,  but  nobody  offers  to  buy  the  loser  a 
new  nag.     "  What  a  pity  he  went  so  far  on 


126  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK. 

the  ice  !  "  That's  very  true,  but  that  won't 
save  the  poor  fellow  from  drowning.  When 
a  man's  coat  is  threadbare,  it  is  an  easy- 
thing  to  pick  a  hole  in  it.  Good  advice  is 
poor  food  for  a  hungry  family. 

"  A  man  of  words  and  not  of  deeds, 
Is  like  a  garden  full  of  weeds." 

Lend  me  a  bit  of  string  to  tie  up  the  traces, 
and  find  fault  with  my  old  harness  when  I 
get  home.  Help  my  old  horse  to  a  few 
oats,  and  then  tell  him  to  mend  his  pace. 
Feel  for  me  and  I  shall  be  much  obliged 
to  you,  but  mind  you  feel  in  your  pocket, 
or  else  a  fig  for  your  feelings. 

Most  men  who  go  down  hill  meet  with 
Judas  before  they  get  to  the  bottom. 
Those  whom  they  helped  in  their  better 
days  generally  forget  the  debt,  or  repay  it 
with  unkindness.  The  young  sucker  runs 
away  with  the  sap  from  the  old  tree.  The 
foal  drains  his  mother,  and  then  kicks  her. 
The  old  saying  is,  "  I  taught  you  to  swim, 
and  now  you  would  drown  me,"  and  many 
a  time  it  comes  true.  The  dog  wags  his 
tail  till  he  gets  the  bone,  and  then  he  snaps 
and  bites  at  the  man  who  fed  him.     Eaten 


MEN   WHO  ARE  DOWN.  127 

bread  is  forgotten,  and  the  hand  that  gave 
it  is  despised.  The  candle  lights  others 
and  is  burnt  away  itself.  For  the  most  part, 
nothing  is  more  easily  blotted  out  than  a 
good  turn.  Everyone  for  himself  is  the 
world's  golden  rule,  and  we  all  know  who 
takes  the  hindmost.  The  fox  looks  after 
his  own  skin,  and  has  no  idea  of  losing  his 
brush  out  of  gratitude  to  a  friend. 

A  noble  spirit  always  takes  the  side  of 
the  weak,  but  noble  spirits  do  not  often 
ride  along  our  roads  ;  they  are  as  scarce 
as  eagles  :  you  can  get  magpies,  and  hawks, 
and  kites  by  the  score,  but  the  nobler  breed 
you  don't  see  once  in  a  lifetime.  Did  you 
ever  hear  the  crows  read  the  burial  service 
over  a  dead  sheep  before  they  eat  it? 
Well,  that's  wonderfully  like  the  neigh- 
bors crying,  "  What  a  pity  !  How  did 
it  happen  ?  Oh,  dear  !  Oh,  dear  !  "  and 
then  falling  to  work  to  get  each  of  them  a 
share  of  the  plunder.  Most  people  will 
help  those  who  do  not  need  it ;  every  trav- 
eller throws  a  stone  where  there  is  a 
heap  already ;  all  the  cooks  baste  the  fat 
pig,  and  the  lean  one  gets  burned. 


128         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

u  In  times  of  prosperity  friends  will  be  plenty : 
In  times  of  adversity  not  one  in  twenty." 

When  the  wind  serves,  all  aid.  While  the 
pot  boils,  friendship  blooms.  But  flatterers 
haunt  not  cottages,  and  the  faded  rose  no 
suitor  knows.  All  the  neighbors  are  cous- 
ins to  the  rich  man,  but  the  poor  man's 
brother  does  not  know  him.  When  we 
have  a  ewe  and  a  lamb,  everyone  cries, 
"Welcome,  Peter!"  The  squire  can  be 
heard  for  half-a-mile,  if  he  only  whispers, 
but  Widow  Needy  is  not  heard  across 
the  park  railings,  let  her  call  as  she  may. 
Men  willingly  pour  water  into  a  full  tub, 
and  give  feasts  to  those  who  are  not  hun- 
gry, because  they  look  to  have  as  good  or 
better  in  return.  Have  a  goose  and  get  a 
goose.  Have  a  horse  of  your  own,  and 
then  you  can  borrow  one.  It  is  safe  to  lend 
barley  where  the  barn  is  full  of  wheat,  but 
who  lends  or  gives  where  there's  none? 
Who,  indeed,  unless  it  be  some  antiquated 
old  soul  who  believes  in  his  Bible,  and  loves 
his  Lord,  and  therefore  gives,  "  hoping  for 
nothing  again  "? 

I  have  noticed  certain  gentry  who  pre- 
tend to  be  great  friends  to  a  falling  man 


MEN   WHO   ARE   DOWN.  129 

because  there  are  some  few  pickings  yet  to 
to  be  got  off  his  bones.  The  lawyer  and 
the  money-lender  will  cover  the  poor  fellow 
with  their  wings,  and  then  peck  at  him  with 
their  bills  till  there's  nothing  left.  When 
these  folks  are  very  polite  and  considerate, 
poor  men  had  need  beware.  It  was  not  a 
good  sign  when  the  fox  walked  into  the 
hen-roost  and  said,  "  Good  morning  to  you 
all,  my  very  dear  friends.  " 

Dov/n  men,  however,  must  not  despair, 
for  God  is  yet  alive,  and  he  is  the  friend  of 
the  friendless.  If  there  be  no  one  else 
found  to  hold  out  a  hand  to  him  who  has 
fallen,  the  Lord's  hand  shall  not  fail  to 
bring  deliverance  to  those  who  trust  him. 
A  good  man  may  be  put  in  the  fire,  but  he 
cannot  be  burned.  His  hope  may  be 
drenched  but  not  drowned.  He  plucks  up 
courage  and  sets  a  stout  heart  to  a  stiff  hill, 
and  gets  over  rough  ground  where  others 
lie  down  and  die.  While  there's  life  there's 
hope.  Therefore,  my  friend,  if  you've  tum- 
bled off  the  back  of  prosperity,  John  Plough- 
man bids  you  not  lie  in  the  ditch,  but  up 
with  you  and  try  again.  Jonah  went  to  the 


130         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

bottom  of  the  sea,  but  he  got  to  shore  again 
all  the  better  for  his  watery  journey. 

**  Though  the  bird's  in  the  net, 
It  may  get  away  yet ; 
Though  I'm  down  in  the  dust, 
In  my  God  I  will  trust, 
I  will  hope  in  him  still, 
And  leave  all  to  his  will ; 
For  he'll  surely  appear, 
And  will  banish  my  fear." 

Let  it  never  be  forgotten  that  when  a 
man  is  down  he  has  a  grand  opportunity 
for  trusting  in  God.  A  false  faith  can  only 
float  in  smooth  water,  but  true  faith,  like  a 
life-boat,  is  at  home  in  storms.  If  our  re- 
ligion does  not  bear  us  up  in  time  of  trial 
what  is  the  use  of  it?  If  we  cannot  be- 
lieve God  when  our  circumstances  appear 
to  be  against  us  we  do  not  believe  him 
at  all.  We  trust  a  thief  as  far  as  we  can 
see  him,  shall  we  dare  to  treat  our  God  in 
that  fashion  ?  No,  no.  The  Lord  is  good, 
and  he  will  yet  appear  for  his  servants,  and 
we  shall  praise  his  name. 

"  Down  among  the  dead  men  "  !     No,  sir,  not  I. 

"  Down  among  the  dead  men  "  !  I  will  not  lie. 
Up  among  the  hopeful  I  will  ascend, 
Up  among  the  joyful  sing  without  end. 


HOPE. 

EGGS  are  eggs,  but  some  are  rotten ; 
and  so  hopes  are  hopes,  but  many  of 
them  are  delusions.  Hopes  are  like  women, 
there  is  a  touch  of  angel  about  them  all,  but 
there  are  two  sorts.  My  boy  Tom  has 
been  blowing  a  lot  of  birds'-eggs,  and 
threading  them  on  a  string;  I  have  been 
doing  the  same  thing  with  hopes,  and  here's 
a  few  of  them,  good,  bad,  and  indifferent. 

The  sanguine  man's  hope  pops  up  in  a 
moment  like  jack-in-the-box  ;  it  works  with 
a  spring,  and  does  not  go  by  reason.  When- 
ever this  man  looks  out  of  the  window  he 
sees  better  times  coming,  and  although  it 
is  nearly  all  in  his  own  eye,  and  nowhere 
else,  yet  to  see  plum  puddings  in  the  moon 
is  a  far  more  cheerful  habit  than  croaking 
at  everything  like  a  two-legged  frog.  This 
is  the  kind  of  brother  to  be  on  the  road 
with  on  a  pitch-dark  night,  when  it  pours 
with  rain,  for  he  carries  candles  in  his  eyes 
and  a  fireside  in  his  heart.  Beware  of  being 
misled  by  him,  and  then  you  may  safely 
keep  his  company.  His  fault  is  that  he 
counts  his  chickens  before  they  are  hatched, 
and  sells  his  herrings  before  they  are  in  the 

'    (131) 


132  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

net.  All  his  sparrow's-eggs  are  bound  to 
turn  into  thrushes,  at  the  least,  if  not  par- 
tridges and  pheasants.  Summer  has  fully 
come,  for  he  has  seen  one  swallow.  He  is 
sure  to  make  his  fortune  at  his  new  shop, 
for  he  had  not  opened  the  door  five  min- 
utes before  two  of  the  neighbors  crowded 
in,  one  of  them  wanted  a  loaf  of  bread  on 
trust,  and  the  other  asked  change  for  a  shil- 
ling. He  is  certain  that  the  squire  means 
to  give  him  his  custom,  for  he  saw  him 
reading  the  name  over  the  shop  door  as  he 
rode  past.  He  does  not  believe  in  slips  be- 
tween cups  and  lips,  but  makes  certainties 
out  of  perhapses.  Well,  good  soul,  though 
he  is  a  little  soft  at  times,  there  is  much  in 
him  to  praise,  and  I  like  to  think  of  one  of 
his  odd  sayings,  "  Never  say  die  till  you  are 
dead,  and  then  it's  no  use,  so  let  it  alone.,, 
There  are  other  odd  people  in  the  world, 
you  see,  besides  John  Ploughman. 

My  neighbor  Shiftless  is  waiting  for  his 
aunt  to  die,  but  the  old  lady  has  as  many 
lives  as  nine  cats,  and  my  notion  is  that 
when  she  does  die  she  will  leave  her  little 
money  to  the  Hospital  for  Diseased  Cats  or 
Stray  Dogs,  sooner  than  her  nephew  Jack 


(133) 


134  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK, 

shall  have  it.  Poor  creature,  he  is  dread- 
fully down  at  the  heel,  and  lays  it  all  on  the 
dear  old  lady's  provoking  constitution.  How- 
ever, he  hopes  on,  and  gets  worse  and 
worse,  for  while  the  grass  grows  the  horse 
starves.  He  pulls  at  a  long  rope  who  waits 
for  another's  death;  he  who  hunts  after 
legacies  had  need  have  iron  shoes.  He  that 
waits  for  dead  men's  shoes  may  long  go 
barefoot ;  he  who  waits  for  his  uncle's  cow 
need  not  be  in  a  hurry  to  spread  the  but- 
ter. He  who  lives  on  hope  has  a  slim  diet. 
If  Jack  Shiftless  had  never  had  an  aunt  he 
might  have  tucked  up  his  shirt  sleeves  and 
worked  for  himself,  but  they  told  him  that 
he  was  born  with  a  silver  spoon  in  his 
mouth,  and  that  made  a  spoon  of  him,  so 
that  he  is  no  more  use  at  work  than  a  cow 
at  catching  hares.  If  anybody  likes  to  leave 
John  Ploughman  a  legacy,  he  will  be  very 
much  obliged  to  them,  but  they  had  better 
not  tell  him  of  it  for  fear  he  should  not 
plough  so  straight  a  furrow ;  they  had  bet- 
ter make  it  twice  as  much,  and  take  him  by 
surprise.  On  the  whole,  it  would  be  better 
to  leave  it  to  the  Pastors*  College  or  the 
Stockwell   Orphanage,   for   it   will  be  well 


HOPE.  135 

used  in  either  case.  Did  you  notice  the 
drawings  of  these  two  places  a  page  or  two 
back?  Fix  them  well  in  your  mind's  eye. 
But  now  we  must  get  back  to  our  subject. 
I  wish  people  would  think  less  about  wind- 
falls, and  plant  more  apple  trees.  Hopes 
that  grow  out  of  graves  are  grave  mistakes  ; 
and  when  they  cripple  a  man's  own  ener- 
gies, they  are  a  sort  of  hangman's  rope, 
dangling  round  a  man's  neck. 

Some  people  were  born  on  the  first  of 
April,  and  are  always  hoping  without  sense 
or  reason.  Their  ship  is  to  come  home,  they 
are  to  dig  up  a  pot  of  gold,  or  to  hear  of 
something  to  their  advantage.  Poor  sillies, 
they  have  wind  on  the  brain,  and  dream 
while  they  are  awake.  They  may  hold 
their  mouths  open  a  long  while  before  fried 
ham  and  eggs  will  come  flying  into  them, 
and  yet  they  really  seem  to  believe  that 
some  stroke  of  luck,  some  windfall  of  golden 
apples,  will  one  day  set  them  up  and  make 
gentlemen  of  them.  They  hope  to  ride  in 
their  coaches,  and  by-and-by  find  them- 
selves shut  up  in  a  place  where  the  coaches 
won't  run  over  them.  You  may  whistle  a 
long  while  before  goldfinches  will   hop  on 


136         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK, 

to  your  thumb.  Once  in  a  while  one  man 
in  a  million  may  stumble  against  a  fortune, 
but  thousands  ruin  themselves  by  idle  ex- 
pectations. Expect  to  get  half  of  what  you 
earn,  a  quarter  of  what  is  your  due,  and 
none  of  what  you  have  lent,  and  you  will 
be  near  the  mark ;  but  to  look  for  a  fortune 
to  fall  from  the  moon  is  to  play  the  fool 
with  a  vengeance.  A  man  ought  to  hope 
within  the  bounds  of  reason  and  the  prom- 
ises of  the  good  old  Book.  Hope  leans  on 
an  anchor,  but  an  anchor  must  have  some- 
thing to  hold  by  and  to  hold  to.  A  hope 
without  grounds  is  a  tub  without  a  bottom, 
a  horse  without  a  head,  a  goose  without  a 
body,  a  shoe  without  a  sole,  a  knife  without 
a  blade.  Who  but  Simple  Simon  would  be- 
gin to  build  a  house  at  the  top  ?  there  must 
be  a  foundation.  Hope  is  no  hope,  but 
sheer  folly,  when  a  man  hopes  for  impossi- 
bilities, or  looks  for  crops  without  sowing 
seed,  and  for  happiness  without  doing  good. 
Such  hopes  lead  to  great  boast  and  small 
roast ;  they  act  like  a  jack-o'-lantern,  and 
lead  men  into  the  ditch.  There's  poor  Will 
at  the  workhouse,  who  always  declares  that 
he  owns  a  great  estate,  only  the  right  owner 


HOPE.  137 

keeps  him  out  of  it ;  his  name  is  Jenyns,  or 
Jennings,  and  somebody  of  that  name  he 
says  has  left  enough  money  to  buy  the 
Bank  of  England,  and  one  day  he  is  to  have 
a  share  of  it ;  but  meanwhile  poor  Will 
finds  the  parish  broth  poor  stuff  for  such  a 
great  gentleman's  stomach  ;  he  has  prom- 
ised me  an  odd  thousand  or  two  when  he 
gets  his  fortune,  and  I  am  going  to  build  a 
castle  in  the  air  with  it,  and  ride  to  it  on  a 
broomstick.  Poor  soul,  like  a  good  many 
others,  he  has  windmills  in  his  head,  and 
may  make  his  will  on  his  thumbnail  for 
anything  that  he  has  to  give.  Depend  upon 
it,  ploughing  the  air  is  not  half  so  profitable 
as  it  is  easy  :  he  who  hopes  in  this  world 
for  more  than  he  can  get  by  his  own  earn- 
ings hopes  to  find  apricots  on  a  crab-tree. 
He  who  marries  a  slovenly,  dressy  girl,  and 
hopes  to  make  her  a  good  wife,  might  as 
well  buy  a  goose  and  expect  it  to  turn  out 
a  milch  cow.  He  who  takes  his  boys  to  the 
beershop,  and  trusts  that  they  will  grow  up 
sober,  puts  his  coffee-pot  on  the  fire  and  ex- 
pects to  see  it  look  bright  as  new  tin.  Men 
cannot  be  in  their  senses  when  they  brew 
with  bad   malt  and   look   for  good  beer,  or 


138        JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK. 

set  a  wicked  example  and  reckon  upon 
raising  a  respectable  family.  You  may  hope 
and  hope  till  your  heart  grows  sick  ;  but 
when  you  send  your  boy  up  the  chimney, 
he'll  come  down  black  for  all  your  hoping. 
Teach  a  child  to  lie,  and  then  hope  that  he 
will  grow  up  honest ;  better  put  a  wasp  in 
a  tar  barrel  and  wait  till  he  makes  you 
honey.  When  will  people  act  sensibly  with 
their  boys  and  girls  ?  Not  till  they  are 
sensible  themselves. 

As  to  the  next  world,  it  is  a  great  pity 
that  men  do  not  take  a  little  more  care 
when  they  talk  of  it.  If  a  man  dies  drunk, 
somebody  or  other  is  sure  to  say,  "  I  hope 
he  is  gone  to  heaven."  It  is  all  very  well 
to  wish  it,  but  to  hope  it  is  another  thing. 
Men  turn  their  faces  to  hell  and  hope  to 
get  to  heaven ;  why  don't  they  walk  into 
the  horsepond,  and  hope  to  be  dry  ?  Hopes 
of  heaven  are  solemn  things,  and  should  be 
tried  by  the  word  of  God.  A  man  might 
as  well  hope,  as  our  Lord  says,  to  gather 
grapes  of  thorns  or  figs  of  thistles  as  look  for 
a  happy  hereafter  at  the  end  of  a  bad  life. 
There  is  only  one  rock  to  build  good  hopes 
on,  and  that  is  not  Peter,  as  the  pope  says, 


HOPE.  139 

neither  is  it  sacraments,  as  the  old  Roman 
beast's  cubs  tell  us,  but  the  merits  of  the 
Lord  Jesus.  All  the  hope  of  man  is  in 
"  the  man  Christ  Jesus."  If  we  believe  in 
him  we  are  saved,  for  it  is  written  u  he  that 
believeth  in  him  hath  everlasting  life."  Mind 
he  has  it  now,  and  it  is  everlasting,  so  that 
there  is  no  fear  of  his  losing  it.  There  John 
Ploughman  rests,  and  he  is  not  afraid  of 
being  confounded,  for  this  is  a  firm  footing, 
and  gives  him  a  hope  sure  and  steadfast, 
which  neither  life  nor  death  can  shake ; 
but  John  must  not  turn  preacher,  or  he  may- 
take  the  bread  out  of  the  parson's  mouth, 
so  please  remember  that  presumption  is  a 
ladder  which  will  break  the  mounter's  neck, 
and  don't  try  it,  as  you  love  your  soul. 


SPENDING. 


"  What  their  fathers  got  with  the  rake  they  throw  away  with  the 
shovel/' — Page  141. 

TO  earn  money  is  easy  compared  with 
spending  it  well  ;  anybody  may  dig  up 
potatoes,  but  it  is  not  one  woman  in  ten  that 
(140) 


SPENDING.  141 

can  cook  them.  Men  do  not  become  rich 
by  what  they  get,  but  by  what  they  save. 
Many  men  who  have  money  are  as  short  of 
wit  as  a  hog  is  of  wool ;  they  are  under  the 
years  of  discretion  though  they  have  turned 
forty,  and  make  ducks  and  drakes  of  hun- 
dreds as  boys  do  of  stones.  What  their 
fathers  got  with  the  rake  they  throw  away 
with  the  shovel.  After  the  miser  comes  the 
prodigal.  Often  men  say  of  the  spendthrift, 
his  old  father  was  no  man's  friend  but  his 
own,  and  now  the  son  is  no  man's  enemy 
but  his  own  :  the  fact  is,  the  old  gentleman 
went  to  hell  by  the  lean  road,  and  his  son 
has  made  up  his  mind  to  go  there  by  the 
fat.  As  soon  as  the  spendthrift  gets  his 
estate  it  goes  like  a  lump  of  butter  in  a 
greyhound's  mouth.  All  his  days  are  the 
first  of  April ;  he  would  buy  an  elephant  at 
a  bargain,  or  thatch  his  house  with  pancakes, 
nothing  is  too  foolish  to  tickle  his  fancy ; 
his  money  burns  holes  in  his  pocket,  and 
he  must  squander  it,  always  boasting  that 
his  motto  is,  u  Spend,  and  God  will  send." 
He  will  not  stay  till  he  has  his  sheep  before 
he  shears  them ;  he  forestalls  his  income, 
draws   upon  his  capital,  and   so    kills   the 


142  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

goose  which  lays  the  golden  eggs,  and  cries 
out,  "  Who  would  have  thought  it  ?  "  He 
never  spares  at  the  brim,  but  he  means,  he 
says,  to  save  at  the  bottom.  He  borrows 
at  high  interest  of  Rob'em,  Cheat'em,  and 
Sell'em-up,  and  when  he  gets  cleaned  out, 
he  lays  it  all  either  upon  the  lawyers  or 
else  on  the  bad  times.  Times  never  were 
good  for  lazy  prodigals,  and  if  they  were 
good  to  them  they  would  be  bad  for  all  the 
world  besides.  Why  men  should  be  in  such 
a  hurry  to  make  themselves  beggars  is  a 
mystery,  but  nowadays,  what  with  betting 
at  horse-races,  laziness,  and  speculating, 
there  seems  to  be  a  regular  four-horse  coach 
running  to  Needham  every  day.  Ready- 
money  must  be  quite  a  curiosity  to  some 
men,  and  yet  they  spend  like  lords.  They 
are  gentlemen  without  means,  which  is 
much  the  same  as  plum-puddings  without 
plums. 

Spending  your  money  with  many  a  guest, 
Empties  the  larder,  the  cellar,  and  chest. 

If  a  little  gambling  is  thrown  in  with  the 
fast  living,  money  melts  like  a  snowball  in 


SPENDING.  143 

an  oven.     A  young  gambler  is  sure  to  be 
an  old  beggar  if  he  lives  long  enough. 


The  devil  leads  him  by  the  nose, 
Who  the  dice  so  often  throws. 


There  are  more  asses  than  those  with  four 
legs.  I  am  sorry  to  say  they  are  found 
among  working  men  as  well  as  fine  gentle- 
men. Fellows  who  have  no  estate  but  their 
labor,  and  no  family  arms  except  those 
they  work  with,  will  yet  spend  their  little 
hard  earnings  at  the  beershop  or  in  waste. 
No  sooner  are  their  wages  paid  than  away 
they  go  to  the  "  Spotted  Dog,"  or  the 
"  Marquis  of  Granby,"  to  contribute  their 
share  of  fools'  pence  towards  keeping  up  the 
landlord's  red  face  and  round  corporation. 
Drinking  water  neither  makes  a  man  sick 
nor  in  debt,  nor  his  wife  a  widow,  and  yet 
some  men  hardly  know  the  flavor  of  it; 
but  beer  guzzled  down  as  it  is  by  many  a 
working  man,  is  nothing  better  than  brown 
ruin.  Dull  droning  blockheads  sit  on  the 
ale  bench  and  wash  out  what  little  sense 
they  ever  had.  However,  I  believe  that 
farming  people  are  a  deal  better  managers 


144  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK. 

with  their  money  than  Londoners  are,  for 
though  their  money  is  very  little,  their 
families  look  nice  and  tidy  on  Sundays. 
True,  the  rent  isn't  so  bad  in  a  village  as  in 
the  town,  and  there's  a  bit  of  garden ;  still, 
those  Londoners  earn  a  deal  of  money,  and 
they  have  many  chances  of  buying  in  a 
cheap  market  which  the  poor  countryman 
has  not ;  and,  on  the  whole,  I  think  'tis 
very  good  management  which  keeps  a 
family  going  on  ten  shillings  a  week  in  the 
country,  and  bad  management  that  can't 
pay  its  way  on  five-and-twenty  in  London. 
Why,  some  families  are  as  merry  as  mice  in 
malt  on  very  small  wages,  and  others  are 
as  wretched  as  rats  in  a  trap  on  double  the 
amount.  Those  who  wear  the  shoe  know 
best  where  it  pinches,  but  economy  is  a 
fine  thing,  and  makes  ninepence  go  further 
than  a  shilling.  Some  make  soup  out  of  a 
flint,  and  others  can't  get  nourishment  out 
of  beef  gravy.  Some  go  to  shop  with  as 
much  wit  as  Samson  had  in  both  his  shoul- 
ders, but  no  more  ;  they  do  not  buy  well  ; 
they  have  not  sense  to  lay  out  their  money 
to  advantage.  Buyers  ought  to  have  a 
hundred  eyes,  but  these  have  not  even  half 


SPENDING.  145 

a  one,  and  they  do  not  open  that ;  well  was 
it  said  that  if  fools  did  not  go  to  market 
bad  wares  would  never  be  sold.  They  never 
get  a  pennyworth  for  their  penny,  and  this 
often  because  they  are  on  the  hunt  for  cheap 
things,  and  forget  that  generally  the  cheap- 
est is  the  dearest,  and  one  cannot  buy  a  good 
shilling's  worth  of  a  bad  article.  When 
there's  five  eggs  a  penny,  four  of  them  are 
rotten.  Poor  men  often  buy  in  very  small 
quantities,  and  so  pay  through  the  nose  ; 
for  a  man  who  buys  by  the  pennyworth 
keeps  his  own  house  and  another  man's. 
Why  not  get  two  or  three  weeks'  supply  at 
once,  and  so  get  it  cheaper  ?  Store  is  no 
sore.  People  are  often  saving  at  the  wrong 
place,  and  spoil  the  ship  for  a  ha'p'orth  of 
tar  ;  others  look  after  small  savings  and  for- 
get greater  things  ;  they  are  penny  wise 
and  pound  foolish  ;  they  spare  at  the  spigot, 
and  let  all  run  away  at  the  bunghole. 
Some  buy  things  they  don't  want,  because 
they  are  great  bargains  ;  let  me  tell  them 
that  what  they  do  not  want  is  dear  at  a 
farthing.  Fine  dressing  makes  a  great  hole 
in  poor  people's  means.  Whatever  does 
John  Ploughman,  and  such  as  work   hard 


146         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK. 

for  their  daily  bread,  want  with  silks  and 
satins  ?  It's  like  a  blacksmith's  wearing 
a  white  silk  apron.  I  hate  to  see  a  ser- 
vant girl  or  a  laborer's  daughter  tricked 
out  as  if  she  thought  people  would  take 
her  for  a  lady.  Why,  everybody  knows  a 
tadpole  from  a  fish,  nobody  mistakes  a  poppy 
for  a  rose.  Give  me  a  woman  in  a  nice 
neat  dress,  clean  and  suitable,  and  for  beauty 
she  will  beat  the  flashy  young  hussies  all  to 
pieces.  If  a  girl  has  got  a  few  shillings  to 
spare,  let  her  buy  a  good  bit  of  flannel  for 
the  winter,  before  she  is  tempted  with  bright 
looking  but  useless  finery.  Buy  what  suits 
yourself  to  wear,  and  if  it  does  not  suit  other 
people  to  look  at,  let  them  shut  their  eyes. 
All  women  are  good — either  for  something 
or.  for  nothing,  and  their  dress  will  generally 
tell  you  which. 

I  suppose  we  all  find  the  money  goes 
quite  fast  enough,  but  after  all  it  was  made 
to  circulate,  and  there's  no  use  in  hoarding 
it.  It  is  bad  to  see  our  money  become  a  run- 
away servant,  and  leave  us,  but  it  would  be 
worse  to  have  it  stop  with  us  and  become 
our  master.  We  should  try,  as  our  minister 
says,  "  to  find  the  golden  mean,"  and  neither 


SPENDING.  147 

De  lavish  nor  stingy.  He  has  his  money 
best  spent  who  has  the  best  wife.  The  hus- 
band may  earn  money,  but  only  the  wife 
can  save  it.  "A  wise  woman  buildeth 
her  house,  but  the  foolish  plucketh  it  down 
with  her  hands. "  The  wife  it  seems,  accord- 
ing to  Solomon,  is  the  builder  or  the  real 
puller  down.  A  man  cannot  prosper  till  he 
gets  his  wife's  leave.  A  thrifty  housewife 
is  better  than  a  great  income.  A  good  wife 
and  health  are  a  man's  best  wealth.  Bless 
their  hearts,  what  should  we  do  without 
them  ?  It  is  said  they  like  to  have  their 
own  way,  but  then  the  proverb  says,  a  wife 
ought  to  have  her  will  during  life,  because 
she  cannot  make  one  when  she  dies.  The 
weather  is  so  melting  that  I  cannot  keep  up 
this  talk  any  longer,  and  therefore  I  shall 
close  with  an  oldfashioned  rhyme — 

"  Heaven  bless  the  wives,  they  fill  our  hives 
With  little  bees  and  honey  ! 
They  soothe  life's  shocks,  they  mend  our  socks — 
But  don't  they  spend  the  money !  " 


A  GOOD  WORD  FOR  WIVES. 


The  sign  of  the  "  Good  Woman." 

WE  pulled  up  the  horses  in    the    last 
chapter   at  the  sign  of  the  "  Good 
Woman;"  and  as  there  is  good  entertain- 
ment for  man,  if  not  for  beast,  under  that 
sign,  we  will  make  a  stay  of  it,  and  dip  our 
(148)' 


A    GOOD    WORD   FOR    WIVES.  149 

pen  into  some  of  that  superfine  ink  which 
has  no  galls  in  it.  When  he  writes  on  so 
fair  a  subject,  John  Ploughman  must  be  on 
his  best  behavior. 

It  is  astonishing  how  many  old  sayings 
there  are  against  wives,  you  may  find  nine- 
teen to  the  dozen  of  them.  The  men  years 
ago  showed  the  rough  side  of  their  tongues 
whenever  they  spoke  of  their  spouses. 
Some  of  these  sayings  are  downright  shock- 
ing; as,  for  instance,  that  very  wicked  one, 
"  Every  man  has  two  good  days  with  his 
wife — the  day  he  marries  her,  and  the  day 
he  buries  her;  "  and  that  other,  "  He  that 
loseth  his  wife  and  a  farthing,  has  a  great 
loss  of  the  farthing." 

I  recollect  an  old  ballad  that  Gaffer  Brooks 
used  to  sing  about  a  man's  being  better 
hung  than  married,  it  shows  how  common 
it  was  to  abuse  the  married  life.  It  is  al- 
most too  bad  to  print  it,  but  here  it  is,  as 
near  as  I  remember  it : — 


"  There  was  a  victim  in  a  cart, 
One  day  for  to  be  hang'd, 
And  his  reprieve  was  granted, 
And  the  cart  made  for  to  stand. 


150         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

*  Come  marry  a  wife,  and  save  your  life,' 

The  judge  aloud  did  cry ; 

*  Oh,  why  should  I  corrupt  my  life  ? ' 

The  victim  did  reply. 

*  For  here's  a  crowd  of  every  sort, 

And  why  should  I  prevent  their  sport  ? 
The  bargain's  bad  in  every  part, 

The  wife's  the  worst — drive  on  the  cart.'" 

Now  this  rubbish  does  not  prove  that  the 
women  are  bad,  but  that  their  husbands  are 
good  for  nothing,  or  else  they  would  not 
make  up  such  abominable  slanders  about 
their  partners.  The  rottenest  bough  cracks 
first,  and  it  looks  as  if  the  male  side  of  the 
house  was  the  worse  of  the  two,  for  it  cer- 
tainly has  made  up  the  most  grumbling 
proverbs.  There  have,  no  doubt,  been 
some  shockingly  bad  wives  in  the  world, 
who  have  been  provoking  enough  to  make 
a  man  say, 

"  If  a  woman  were  as  little  as  she  is  good, 
A  peashell  would  make  her  a  gown  and  a  hood." 

But  how  many  thousands  have  there  been 
of  true  helpmeets,  worth  far  more  than 
their  weight  in  gold !     There  is  only  one 


A    GOOD    WORD   FOR    WIVES.  151 

Job's  wife  mentioned  in  the  Bible  and  one 
Jezebel,  but  there  are  no  end  of  Sarahs  and 
Rebekahs.  I  am  of  Solomon's  mind,  that, 
as  a  rule,  he  that  findeth  a  wife  findeth  a 
good  thing.  If  there's  one  bad  shilling 
taken  at  the  grocer's  all  the  neighbors  hear 
of  it,  but  of  the  hundreds  of  good  ones  re- 
port says  nothing.  A  good  woman  makes 
no  noise,  and  no  noise  is  made  about  her, 
but  a  shrew  is  noted  all  over  the  parish. 
Taking  them  for  all  in  all,  they  are  most 
angelical  creatures,  and  a  great  deal  too 
good  for  half  the  husbands. 

It  is  much  to  the  woman's  credit  that 
there  are  very  few  old  sayings  against  hus- 
bands, although,  in  this  case,  sauce  for  the 
goose  would  make  capital  sauce  for  the 
gander ;  and  the  mare  has  as  good  reasons 
for  kicking  as  the  horse  has.  They  must 
be  very  forbearing,  or  they  would  have 
given  the  men  a  Roland  for  every  Oliver. 
Pretty  dears,  they  may  be  rather  quick  in 
their  talk,  but  is  it  not  the  nature  of  bells 
and  belles  to  have  tongues  that  swing  easy  ? 
They  cannot  be  so  very  bad  after  all,  or 
they  would  have  had  their  revenge  for  the 
many  cruel  things  which  are    said    against 


152  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK, 

them ;  and  if  they  are  a  bit  masterful,  their 
husbands  cannot  be  such  very  great  victims, 
or  they  would  surely  have  sense  enough  to 
hold  their  tongues  about  it.  Men  don't 
care  to  have  it  known  when  they  are 
thoroughly  well  henpecked,  and  I  feel 
pretty  certain  that  the  old  sayings  are  noth- 
ing but  chaff,  for  if  they  were  true,  men 
would  never  dare  to  own  it. 

A  true  wife  is  her  husband's  better  half, 
his  lump  of  delight,  his  flower  of  beauty, 
his  guardian  angel,  and  his  heart's  treasure. 
He  says  to  her,  "  I  shall  in  thee  most 
happy  be.  In  thee,  my  choice,  I  do  rejoice. 
In  thee  I  find  content  of  mind.  God's  ap- 
pointment is  my  contentment."  In  her 
company  he  finds  his  earthly  heaven  ;  she 
is  the  light  of  his  home ;  the  comfort  of 
his  soul,  and  (for  this  world)  the  soul  of  his 
comfort.  Whatever  fortune  God  may  send 
him,  he  is  rich  so  long  as  she  lives.  His 
rib  is  the  best  bone  in  his  body. 

The  man  who  weds  a  loving  wife, 
Whate'er  betideth  him  in  life, 

Shall  bear  up  under  all ; 
But  he  that  finds  an  evil  mate, 
No  good  can  come  within  his  gate, 

His  cup  is  filFd  with  gall. 


A    GOOD    WORD   FOR   WIVES.  153 

A  good  husband  makes  a  good  wife.  Some 
men  can  neither  do  without  wives  nor  with 
them ;  they  are  wretched  alone  in  what  is 
called  single  blessedness,  and  they  make 
their  homes  miserable  when  they  get  mar- 
ried ;  they  are  like  Tompkin's  dog,  which 
could  not  bear  to  be  loose,  and  howled 
when  it  was  tied  up.  Happy  bachelors  are 
likely  to  be  happy  husbands,  and  a  happy 
husband  is  the  happiest  of  men.  A  well- 
matched  couple  carry  a  joyful  life  between 
them,  as  the  two  spies  carried  the  cluster 
of  Eshcol.  They  are  a  brace  of  birds  of 
Paradise.  They  multiply  their  joys  by 
sharing  them,  and  lessen  their  troubles  by 
dividing  them  ;  this  is  fine  arithmetic.  The 
wagon  of  care  rolls  lightly  along  as  they 
pull  together,  and  when  it  drags  a  little 
heavily,  or  there's  a  hitch  anywhere,  they 
love  each  other  all  the  more,  and  so  lighten 
the  labor. 

When  a  couple  fall  out  there  are  always 
faults  on  both  sides,  and  generally  there  is 
a  pound  on  one  and  sixteen  ounces  on  the 
other.  When  a  home  is  miserable  it  is 
as  often  the  husband's  fault  as  the  wife's. 
Darby  is  as   much  to  blame  as  Joan,  and 


154         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

sometimes  more.  If  the  husband  won't 
keep  sugar  in  the  cupboard,  no  wonder  his 
wife  gets  sour.  Want  of  bread  makes  want 
of  love  ;  lean  dogs  fight.  Poverty  generally 
rides  home  on  the  husband's  back,  for  it  is 
not  often  the  woman's  place  to  go  out  work- 
ing for  wages.  A  man  down  our  parts 
gave  his  wife  a  ring  with  this  on  it,  4<  If  thee 
don't  work,  thee  shan't  eat."  He  was  a 
brute.  It  is  no  business  of  hers  to  bring 
in  the  grist — she  is  to  see  it  is  well  used 
and  not  wasted ;  therefore,  I  say,  short 
commons  are  not  her  fault.  She  is  not  the 
bread-winner,  but  the  bread-maker.  She 
earns  more  at  home  than  any  wages  she 
can  get  abroad. 

It  is  not  the  wife  who  smokes  and  drinks 
away  the  wages  at  the  "  Brown  Bear,"  or 
the  u  Jolly  Topers.  "  One  sees  a  drunken 
woman  now  and  then,  and  it's  an  awful 
sight,  but  in  ninety-nine  cases  out  of  a 
hundred  it  is  the  man  who  comes  home 
tipsy,  and  abuses  the  children — the  woman 
seldom  does  that.  The  poor  drudge  of  a 
wife  is  a  teetotaler,  whether  she  likes  it  or 
not,  and  gets  plenty  of  hot  water  as  well  as 
cold.      Women   are   found    fault   with    for 


A    GOOD    WORD  FOR    WIVES.  155 

often  looking  into  the  glass,  but  that  is  not 
so  bad  a  glass  as  men  drown  their  senses 
in.  The  wives  do  not  sit  boozing  over  the 
tap-room  fire ;  they,  poor  souls,  are  shiver- 
ing at  home  with  the  baby,  watching  the 
clock  (if  there  is  one),  wondering  when 
their  lords  and  masters  will  come  home, 
and  crying  while  they  wait.  I  wonder  they 
don't  strike.  Some  of  them  are  about  as 
wretched  as  a  cockchafer  on  a  pin,  or  a 
mouse  in  a  cat's  mouth.  They  have  to 
nurse  the  sick  girl,  and  wash  the  dirty  boy, 
and  bear  with  the  crying  and  noise  of  the 
children,  while  his  lordship  puts  on  his  hat, 
lights  his  pipe,  and  goes  off  about  his  own 
pleasure,  or  comes  in  at  his  own  time  to 
find  fault  with  his  poor  dame  for  not  getting 
him  a  fine  supper.  How  could  he  expect 
to  be  fed  like  a  fighting-cock  when  he 
brought  home  so  little  money  on  Saturday 
night,  and  spent  so  much  in  worshipping  Sir 
John  Barleycorn  ?  I  say  it,  and  I  know  it, 
there's  many  a  house  where  there  would  be 
no  scolding  wife  if  there  was  not  a  skulk- 
ing, guzzling  husband.  Fellows  not  fit  to 
be  cut  up  for  mops  drink  and  drink  till  all 
is  blue,  and  then  turn  on  their  poor  hacks 


156  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

for  not  having  more  to  give  them.  Don't 
tell  me,  I  say  it,  and  will  maintain  it,  a 
woman  can't  help  being  vexed  when,  with 
all  her  mending  and  striving,  she  can't  keep 
house  because  her  husband  won't  let  her. 
It  would  provoke  any  of  us  if  we  had  to 
make  bricks  without  straw,  keep  the  pot 
boiling  without  fire,  and  pay  the  piper  out 
of  an  empty  purse.  What  can  she  get  out 
of  the  oven  when  she  has  neither  meal  nor 
dough  ?  You  bad  husbands,  you  are 
thoroughbred  sneaks,  and  ought  to  be  hung 
up  by  your  heels  till  you  know  better. 

They  say  a  man  of  straw  is  worth  a 
woman  of  gold,  but  I  cannot  swallow  it; 
a  man  of  straw  is  worth  no  more  than  a 
woman  of  straw ;  let  old  sayings  lie  as  they 
like;  Jack  is  no  better  than  Jill,  as  a  rule. 
When  there  is  wisdom  in  the  husband 
there's  generally  gentleness  in  the  wife,  and 
between  them  the  old  wedding  wish  is 
worked  out :  "  One  year  of  joy,  another  of 
comfort,  and  all  the  rest  of  content."  Where 
hearts  agree,  there  joy  will  be.  United 
hearts  death  only  parts.  They  say  mar- 
riage is  not  often  merry-age,  but  very  com- 
monly mar-age ;  well,  if  so,  the  coat  and 


! 


A   GOOD    WORD   FOR    WIVES.  157 

waistcoat  have  as  much  to  do  with  it  as  the 
gown  and  petticoat.  The  honeymoon  need 
not  come  to  an  end ;  and  when  it  does  it  is 
often  the  man's  fault  for  eating  all  the 
honey,  and  leaving  nothing  but  moonshine  : 
when  they  both  agree  that  whatever  be- 
comes of  the  moon  they  will  each  keep  up 
their  share  of  honey,  there's  merry  living. 
When  a  man  dwells  under  the  sign  of  the 
cat's  foot,  where  faces  get  scratched,  either 
his  wife  did  not  marry  a  man  or  he  did  not 
marry  a  woman.  If  a  man  cannot  take 
care  of  himself,  his  wit  must  be  as  scant  as 
the  wool  of  a  blue  dog.  I  don't  pity  most 
of  the  men  martyrs  ;  I  save  my  pity  for  the 
women.  When  the  Dunmow  flitch  is  lost, 
neither  of  the  pair  will  eat  the  bacon  ;  but 
the  wife  is  the  most  likely  to  fast  for  the 
want  of  it.  Every  herring  must  hang  by 
its  own  gill,  and  every  person  must  account 
for  his  own  share  in  home  quarrels,  but 
John  Ploughman  can't  bear  to  see  all  the 
blame  laid  on  the  women.  Whenever  a 
dish  is  broke,  the  cat  did  it,  and  whenever 
there  is  mischief,  there's  a  woman  at  the 
bottom  of  it :  here  are  two  as  pretty  lies  as 
you  will  meet  with  in  a  month's  march. 


158         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK. 

There's  a  why  for  every  wherefore,  but  the 
why  for  family  jars  does  not  always  lie  with 
the  housekeeper.  I  know  some  women 
have  long  tongues,  then  the  more's  the 
pity  that  the  husbands  should  set  them 
going;  but  for  the  matter  of  talk,  just  look 
into  a  bar-parlor  when  the  men's  jaws  are 
well  oiled  with  liquor,  and  if  any  woman 
living  can  talk  faster  or  be  more  stupid 
than  the  men,  my  name  is  not  John  Plough- 
man. 

When  I  had  got  about  as  far  as  this,  in 
stepped  our  minister,  and  he  said,  "John, 
you've  got  a  tough  subject,  a  cut  above 
you  ;  I'll  lend  you  a  rare  old  book  to  help 
you  over  the  stile."  "  Well,  sir/'  said  I, 
"  a  little  help  is  worth  a  great  deal  of  fault- 
finding, and  I  shall  be  uncommonly  obliged 
to  you."  He  sent  me  down  old  William 
Seeker's  "  Wedding  Ring,"  and  a  real  wise 
fellow  that  Seeker  was.  I  could  not  do 
any  other  than  pick  out  some  of  his  pithy 
bits  ;  they  are  very  flavory,  and  such  as 
are  likely  to  glue  themselves  to  the  mem- 
ory. He  says,  "  Hast  thou  a  soft  heart  ? 
It  is  of  God's  breaking.  Hast  thou  a  sweet 
wife  ?     She  is  of  God's  making.     The   He- 


I 


A    GOOD    WORD  FOR    WIVES.  159 

brews  have  a  saying,  '  He  is  not  a  man  that 
hath  not  a  woman/  Though  man  alone 
may  be  good,  yet  it  is  not  good  that  man 
should  be  alone.  '  Every  good  gift  and 
every  perfect  gift  is  from  above/  A  wife, 
though  she  be  not  a  perfect  gift,  is  a  good 
gift,  a  beam  darted  from  the  Sun  of  mercy. 
How  happy  are  those  marriages  where 
Christ  is  at  the  wedding !  Let  none  but 
those  who  have  found  favor  in  God's  eyes 
find  favor  in  yours.  Husbands  should 
spread  a  mantle  of  charity  over  their  wives' 
infirmities.  Do  not  put  out  the  candle 
because  of  the  snuff.  Husbands  and  wives 
should  provoke  one  another  to  love,  and 
they  should  love  one  another  notwithstand- 
ing provocations.  The  tree  of  love  should 
grow  up  in  the  midst  of  the  family  as  the 
tree  of  life  grew  in  the  garden  of  Eden. 
Good  servants  are  a  great  blessing ;  good 
children  a  greater  blessing;  but  a  good 
wife  is  the  greatest  blessing;  and  such  a 
help  let  him  seek  for  her  that  wants  one ; 
let  him  sigh  for  her  that  hath  lost  one ;  let 
him  delight  in  her  that  enjoys  one." 

To  come  down  from  the   old   Puritan's 
roast  beef  to  my  own  pot-herbs,  or,  as  they 


160         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK, 

say,  to  put  Jack  after  gentleman,  I  will  tell 
my  own  experience,  and  have  done. 

My  experience  of  my  first  wife,  who  will 
I  hope  live  to  be  my  last,  is  much  as  fol- 
lows :  matrimony  came  from  Paradise  and 
leads  to  it.  I  never  was  half  so  happy 
before  I  was  a  married  man  as  I  am  now. 
When  you  are  married  your  bliss  begins. 
I  have  no  doubt  that  where  there  is  much 
love  there  will  be  much  to  love,  and  where 
love  is  scant  faults  will  be  plentiful.  If 
there  is  only  one  good  wife  in  England,  I 
am  the  man  who  put  the  ring  on  her  finger, 
and  long  may  she  wear  it.  God  bless  the 
dear  soul  if  she  can  put  up  with  me,  she 
shall  never  be  put  down  by  me. 

If  I  were  not  married  to-day,  and  saw  a 
suitable  partner,  I  would  be  married  to- 
morrow morning  before  breakfast.  What 
think  you  of  that  ?  "  Why,"  says  one,  "  I 
think  John  would  get  a  new  wife  if  he  were 
left  a  widower."  Well,  and  what  if  he  did, 
how  could  he  better  show  that  he  was 
happy  with  his  first  ?  I  declare  I  would 
not  say,  as  some  do,  that  they  married  to 
have  some  one  to  look  after  the  children  ;  I 
should  marry  to  have  some  one   to   look 


A    GOOD    WORD  FOR    WIVES.  161 

after  myself.  John  Ploughman  is  a  socia- 
ble soul,  and  could  not  do  in  a  house  by 
himself.  One  man,  when  he  married  his 
fourth  wife,  put  on  the  ring — 

"  If  I  survive,  I'll  make  it  five." 

What  an  old  Bluebeard  ! !  Marriages  are 
made  in  heaven  :  matrimony  in  itself  is  good, 
but  there  are  fools  who  turn  meat  into 
poison,  and  make  a  blessing  into  a  curse. 
"  This  is  a  good  rope,"  said  Pedley,  "  I'll 
hang  myself  with  it."  A  man  who  has 
sought  his  wife  from  God,  and  married  her 
for  her  character,  and  not  merely  for  her 
figure  head,  may  look  for  a  blessing  on  his 
choice.  They  who  join  their  love  in  God 
above,  who  pray  to  love,  and  love  to  pray, 
will  find  that  love  and  joy  will  never  cloy. 

He  who  respects  his  wife  will  find  that 
she  respects  him.  With  what  measure  he 
metes  it  shall  be  measured  to  him  again, 
good  measure,  pressed  down,  and  running 
over.  He  who  consults  his  spouse  will 
have  a  good  counsellor.  I  have  heard  our 
minister  say,  "  Women's  instincts  are  often 
truer  than  man's  reason;"  they  jump  at  a 
ii 


1 62         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK. 

thing  at  once,  and  are  wise  offhand.  Say 
what  you  will  of  your  wife's  advice,  it's  as 
likely  as  not  you  will  be  sorry  you  did  not 
take  it.  He  who  speaks  ill  of  women  should 
remember  the  breast  he  was  nursed  at,  and 
be  ashamed  of  himself.  He  who  ill-treats 
his  wife  ought  to  be  whipped  at  the  cart 
tail,  and  would  not  I  like  a  cut  at  him  !  I 
would  just  brush  a  fly  or  two  off,  trust  me 
for  that.  So  no  more  at  present,  as  the 
thatcher  said  when  he  had  cleared  every 
dish  on  the  table. 


MEN  WITH  TWO  FACES. 


"  Drink  or  drone  will  he,  as  the  case  may  be." 

EVEN  bad  men  praise  consistency. 
Thieves  like  honest  men,  for  they 
are  the  best  to  rob.  When  you  know 
where  to   find   a  man,   he   has    one   good 

(163) 


164         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

point  at  any  rate ;  but  a  fellow  who  howls 
with  the  wolves,  and  bleat  swith  the  sheep, 
gets  nobody's  good  word  unless  it  be  the 
devil's.  To  carry  two  faces  under  one  hat 
is,  however,  very  common.  Many  roost 
with  the  poultry  and  go  shares  with  Rey- 
nard. Many  look  as  if  butter  would  not 
melt  in  their  mouths,  and  yet  can  spit  fire 
when  it  suits  their  purpose.  I  read  the 
other  day  an  advertisement  about  reversible 
coats  ;  the  tailor  who  sells  them  must  be 
making  a  fortune.  Holding  with  the  hare 
and  running  with  the  hounds  is  still  in 
fashion.  Consistency  is  about  as  scarce  in 
the  world  as  musk  in  a  dog-kennel. 

You  may  trust  some  men  as  far  as  you 
can  see  them,  but  no  further,  for  new 
company  makes  them  new  men.  Like 
water,  they  boil  or  freeze  according  to  the 
temperature.  Some  do  this  because  they 
have  no  principles ;  they  are  of  the  weather- 
cock persuasion,  and  turn  with  the  wind. 
You  might  as  well  measure  the  moon  for 
a  suit  of  clothes  as  know  what  they  are. 
They  believe  in  that  which  pays  best. 
They  always  put  up  at  the  Golden  Fleece. 
Their    mill    grinds    any    grist    which    you 


MEN   WITH  TWO   FACES.  165 

bring  to  it  if  the  ready  money  is  forthcoming ; 
and  they  go  with  every  wind,  north,  south, 
east,  west,  north-east,  north-west,  south- 
east, south-west,  nor'-nor'-east,  south-west- 
by-south,  or  any  other  in  all  the  world. 
Like  frogs,  they  can  live  on  land  or 
water,  and  are  not  at  all  particular  which 
it  is.  Like  a  cat,  they  always  fall  on 
their  feet,  and  will  stop  anywhere  if  you 
butter  their  toes.  They  love  their  friends 
dearly,  but  their  love  lies  in  the  cupboard, 
and  if  that  be  bare,  like  a  mouse,  their 
love  runs  off  to  some  other  larder.  They 
say,  "  Leave  you,  dear  girl?  Never,  while 
you  have  a  shilling."  How  they  scuttle 
off  if  you  come  to  the  bad !  Like  rats, 
they  leave  a  sinking  ship. 

When  good  cheer  is  lacking, 
Such  friends  will  be  packing. 

Their  heart  follows  the  pudding.  While 
the  pot  boils  they  sit  by  the  fire ;  when  the 
meal  tub  is  empty  they  play  at  turnabout. 
They  believe  in  the  winning  horse ;  they 
will  wear  anybody's  coat  who  may  choose 
to  give  them  one  ;  they  are  to  be  bought  by 
the  dozen,  like  mackerel,  but  he  who  gives 


166  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK, 

a  penny  for  them  wastes  his  money.  Profit 
is  their  god,  and  whether  they  make  it  out 
of  you  or  your  enemy,  the  money  is  just 
as  sweet  to  them.  Heads  or  tails  are  alike 
to  them  so  long  as  they  win.  High  road 
or  back  lane,  all's  the  same  to  them  so  that 
they  can  get  home  with  the  loaf  in  the 
basket.  They  are  friends  to  the  goose,  but 
they  will  eat  his  giblets.  So  long  as  the 
water  turns  their  wheel,  it  is  none  the 
worse  for  being  muddy ;  they  would  burn 
their  mother's  coffin  if  they  were  short  of 
firing,  and  sell  their  own  father  if  they 
could  turn  a  penny  by  the  old  gentle- 
man's bones.  They  never  lose  a  chance  of 
minding  the  main  chance. 

Others  are  shifty  because  they  are  so 
desperately  fond  of  good  fellowship. 
"  Hail  fellow,  well  met,"  is  their  cry,  be  it 
traveller  or  highwayman.  They  are  so 
good-natured  that  they  must  needs  agree 
with  everybody.  They  are  cousins  of  Mr. 
Anything.  Their  brains  are  in  other 
people's  heads.  If  they  were  at  Rome 
they  would  kiss  the  pope's  toe,  but  when 
they  are  at  home  they  make  themselves 
hoarse     with      shouting,     "  No      Popery." 


MEN   WITH  TWO   FACES.  167 

They  admire  the  Vicar  of  Bray,  whose 
principle  was  to  be  the  Vicar  of  Bray 
whether  the  Church  was  Protestant  or 
Popish.  They  are  mere  time-servers,  in 
hopes  that  the  times  may  serve  them. 
They  belong  to  the  party  which  wears  the 
yellow  colors,  not  in  their  button-holes, 
but  in  the  palms  of  their  hands.  Butter 
them,  and  like  turnips  you  may  eat  them. 
Pull  the  rope,  and  like  the  bells  they  will 
ring  as  you  choose  to  make  them,  funeral 
knell  or  wedding  peal,  come  to  church  or 
go  to  the  devil.  They  have  no  backbones ; 
you  may  bend  them  like  willow  wands, 
backwards  or  forwards,  whichever  way  you 
please.  Like  oysters,  anybody  may  pepper 
them  who  can  open  them.  Sweet  to  you 
and  sweet  to  your  enemy.  They  blow  hot 
and  cold.  They  try  to  be  Jack-o'-both 
sides,  and  deserve  to  be  kicked  like  a  foot- 
ball by  both  parties. 

Some  are  hypocrites  by  nature  ;  slippery 
as  eels,  and  piebald  like  Squire  Smoothey's 
mare.  Like  a  drunken  man,  they  could 
not  walk  straight  if  they  were  to  try. 
Like  corn-dealers,  they  are  rogues  ingrain. 
They  wind  in  and  out  like  a  Surrey  lane. 


1 68         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK, 

They  were  born  of  the  breed  of  St.  Judas. 
The  double  shuffle  is  their  favorite  game, 
and  honesty  their  greatest  hatred.  Honey 
is  on  their  tongue,  but  gall  in  their  hearts. 
They  are  mongrel  bred,  like  the  gipsy's  dog. 
Like  a  cat's  feet  they  show  soft  pads,  but 
carry  sharp  claws.  If  their  teeth  are  not 
rotten  their  tongues  are,  and  their  hearts 
are  like  dead  men's  graves.  If  speaking 
the  truth  and  lying  were  equally  profitable, 
they  would  naturally  prefer  to  lie,  for,  like 
dirt  to  a  pig,  it  would  be  congenial.  They 
fawn,  and  flatter,  and  cringe,  and  scrape, 
for  like  snails  they  make  their  way  by 
their  slime  ;  but  all  the  while  they  hate  you 
in  their  hearts,  and  only  wait  for  a  chance 
to  stab  you.  Beware  of  those  who  come 
from  the  town  of  Deceit.  Mr.  Facing-both- 
ways,  Mr.  Fair-speech,  and  Mr.  Two- 
tongues  are  neighbors  who  are  best  at  a 
distance.  Though  they  look  one  way,  as 
boatmen  do,  they  are  pulling  the  other; 
they  are  false  as  the  devil's  promises,  and  as 
cruel  as  death  and  the  grave. 

Religious  deceivers  are  the  worst  of 
vermin,  and  I  fear  they  are  as  plentiful  as 
rats  in  an  old  wheatstack. 


MEN  WITH  TWO   FACES.  169 

They  are  like  a  silver  pin, 
Fair  without  but  foul  within. 

They  cover  up  their  black  flesh  with  white 
feathers.  Saturday  and  Sunday  make  a 
wonderful  difference  in  them.  They  have  the 
fear  of  the  minister  a  deal  more  before  their 
eyes  than  the  fear  of  God.  Their  religion  lies 
in  imitating  the  religious;  they  have  none 
of  the  root  of  the  matter  in  them.  They 
carry  Dr.  Watts'  hymn-book  in  their 
pocket,  and  sing  a  roaring  song  at  the  same 
time.  Their  Sunday  coats  are  the  best 
part  about  them;  the  nearer  you  get  to 
their  hearts  the  more  filth  you  will  find. 
They  prate  like  parrots,  but  their  talk  and 
their  walk  do  not  agree.  Some  of  them 
are  fishing  for  customers,  and  a  little  pious 
talk  is  a  cheap  advertisement ;  and  if  the 
seat  at  the  church  or  the  meeting  costs 
a  trifle,  they  make  it  up  out  of  short 
weights.  They  don't  worship  God  wrhile 
they  trade,  but  they  trade  on  their  worship. 
Others  of  the  poorer  sort  go  to  church  for 
soup,  and  bread,  and  coal  tickets.  They 
love  the  communion  because  of  the  alms' 
money.  Some  of  the  dear  old  Mrs.  Good- 
bodies  want  a  blessed  almshouse,  and  so 


170         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

they  profess  to  be  so  blessed  under  the 
blessed  ministry  of  their  blessed  Pastor 
every  blessed  Sabbath.  Charity  suits  them 
if  faith  does  not;  they  know  which  side 
their  bread  is  buttered  on. 

Others  make  a  decent  show  in  religion  to 
quiet  their  consciences ;  they  use  it  as  a 
salve  for  their  wounds — and  if  they  could 
satisfy  heaven  as  easily  as  they  quiet  them- 
selves it  would  be  a  fine  thing  for  them. 
It  has  been  my  lot  to  meet  with  some  who 
went  a  long  way  in  profession,  as  far  as  I 
could  see,  for  nothing  but  the  love  of  being 
thought  a  deal  of.  They  got  a  little  knot  of 
friends  to  believe  in  their  fine  talk,  and  take 
all  in  for  gospel  that  they  liked  to  say. 
Their  opinion  was  the  true  measure  of  a 
preacher's  soundness ;  they  could  settle  up 
everything  by  their  own  know,  and  they  had 
gallons  of  XXX  experience  for  those  who 
liked  something  hot  and  strong;  but  dear, 
dear,  if  they  had  but  condescended  to  show 
a  little  Christian  practice  as  well,  how  much 
better  their  lives  would  have  weighed  up ! 
These  people  are  like  owls,  which  look  to 
be  big  birds,  but  they  are  not,  for  they  are 
all    feathers;    and   they    look    wonderfully 


MEN   WITH  TWO  FACES.  171 

knowing  in  the  twilight,  but  when  the  light 
comes  they  are  regular  boobies. 

Hypocrites  of  all  sorts  are  abominable, 
and  he  who  deals  with  them  will  rue  it. 
He  who  tries  to  cheat  the  Lord  will  be 
quite  ready  to  cheat  his  fellow  men.  Great 
cry  generally  means  little  wool.  Many  a 
big  chimney  in  which  you  expect  to  see 
bacon  and  hams,  when  you  look  up  it,  has 
nothing  to  show  you  but  its  empty  hooks 
and  black  t  soot.  Some  men's  windmills 
are  only  nut-crackers — their  elephants  are 
nothing  but  sucking-pigs.  It  is  not  all  who 
go  to  church  or  meeting  that  truly  pray, 
nor  those  who  sing  loudest  that  praise  God 
most,  nor  those  who  pull  the  longest  faces 
who  are  the  most  in  earnest. 

What  mean  animals  hypocrites  must  be  ! 
talk  of  polecats  and  weasels,  they  are 
nothing  to  them.  Better  be  a  dead  dog 
than  a  live  hypocrite.  Surely  when  the 
devil  sees  hypocrites  at  their  little  game,  it 
must  be  as  good  as  a  play  to  him  ;  he  tempts 
genuine  Christians,  but  he  lets  these  alone, 
because  he  is  sure  of  them.  He  need  not 
shoot  at  lame  ducks,  his  dog  can  pick  them 
up  any  day. 


172         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK, 

Depend  upon  it,  friends,  if  a  straight  line 
will  not  pay,  a  crooked  one  won't.  What 
is  got  by  shuffling  is  very  dangerous  gain. 
It  may  give  a  moment's  peace  to  wear  a 
mask,  but  deception  will  come  home  to 
you  and  bring  sorrow  with  it.  Honesty  is 
the  best  policy.  If  the  lion's  skin  does  not 
do,  never  try  the  fox's.  Be  as  true  as  steel. 
Let  your  face  and  hands,  like  the  church 
clock,  always  tell  how  your  inner  works  are 
going.  Better  be  laughed  at  as  Tom  Tell- 
truth  than  be  praised  as  Crafty  Charlie. 
Plain  dealing  may  bring  us  trouble,  but  it  is 
better  than  shuffling.  At  the  last  the  up- 
right will  have  their  reward,  but  for  the 
double-minded  to  get  to  heaven  is  as  im- 
possible as  for  a  man  to  swim  across  the 
Atlantic  with  a  mill-stone  under  each  arm. 


HINTS   AS   TO  THRIVING. 


"  If  the  cat  sits  long  enough  at  the  hole  she  will  catch  the  mouse." 
Page  179. 

HARD  work  is  the  grand  secret  of  suc- 
cess.    Nothing  but  rags  and  poverty 
can  come  of  idleness.     Elbow  grease  is  the 

(i73) 


174  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK. 

only  stuff  to  make  gold  with.  No  sweat  no 
sweet.  He  who  would  have  the  crow's 
eggs  must  climb  the  tree.  Every  man  must 
build  up  his  own  fortune  nowadays.  Shirt 
sleeves  rolled  up  lead  on  to  best  broad- 
cloth ;  and  he  who  is  not  ashamed  of  the 
apron  will  soon  be  able  to  do  without  it. 
"  Diligence  is  the  mother  of  good  luck,"  as 
poor  Richard  says  ;  but  "  Idleness  is  the 
devil's  bolster,"  as  John  Ploughman  says. 

Believe  in  travelling   on    step   by   step ; 
don't  expect  to  be  rich  in  a  jump. 

Great  greediness  to  reap 
Helps  not  the  money  heap. 

Slow  and  sure  is  better  than  fast  and  flimsy. 
Perseverance,  by  its  daily  gains,  enriches  a 
man  far  more  than  fits  and  starts  of  fortunate 
speculation.  Little  fishes  are  sweet.  Every 
little  helps,  as  the  sow  said  when  she 
snapped  at  a  gnat.  Every  day  a  thread 
makes  a  skein  in  a  year.  Brick  by  brick 
houses  are  built.  We  should  creep  before 
we  walk,  walk  before  we  run,  and  run  before 
we  ride.  In  getting  rich  the  more  haste 
the  worse  speed.  Haste  trips  up  its  own 
heels.     Hasty  climbers  have  sudden  falls. 


HINTS  AS    TO    THRIVING.  175 

It  is  bad  beginning  business  without  cap- 
ital. It  is  hard  marketing  with  empty 
pockets.  We  want  a  nest  egg,  for  hens 
will  lay  where  there  are  eggs  already.  It  is 
true  you  must  bake  with  the  flour  you  have, 
but  if  the  sack  is  empty  it  might  be  quite  as 
well  not  to  set  up  for  a  baker.  Making 
bricks  without  straw  is  easy  enough  compared 
with  making  money  when  you  have  none 
to  start  with.  You,  young  gentleman,  stay 
as  a  journeyman  a  little  longer,  till  you  have 
saved  a  few  pounds;  fly  when  your  wings 
have  got  feathers  ;  but  if  you  try  it  too  soon 
you  will  be  like  the  young  rook  that  broke 
its  neck  through  trying  to  fly  before  it  was 
fledged.  Every  minnow  wants  to  be  a 
whale,  but  it  is  prudent  to  be  a  little  fish 
while  you  have  but  little  water ;  when  your 
pond  becomes  the  sea,  then  swell  as  much 
as  you  like.  Trading  without  capital  is 
like  building  a  house  without  bricks,  mak- 
ing a  fire  without  sticks,  burning  candles 
without  wicks ;  it  leads  men  into  tricks,  and 
lands  them  in  a  fix. 

Don't  give  up  a  small  business  till  you 
see  that  a  large  one  will  pay  you  better. 
Even  crumbs  are  bread. 


176  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK. 

Better  a  poor  horse  than  an  empty  stall  ; 
Better  half  a  loaf  than  none  at  all. 

Better  a  little  furniture  than  an  empty  house. 
In  these  hard  times  he  who  can  sit  on  a 
stone  and  feed  himself  had  better  not  move. 
From  bad  to  worse  is  poor  improvement. 
A  crust  is  hard  fare,  but  none  at  all  is  harder. 
Don't  jump  out  of  the  frying  pan  into  the 
fire.  Remember,  many  men  have  done  well 
in  very  small  shops.  A  little  trade  with 
profit  is  better  than  a  great  concern  at  a  loss  ; 
a  small  fire  that  warms  you  is  better  than  a 
large  fire  that  burns  you.  A  great  deal  of 
water  can  be  got  from  a  small  pipe  if  the 
bucket  is  always  there  to  catch  it.  Large 
hares  may  be  caught  in  small  woods.  A 
sheep  may  get  fat  in  a  small  meadow,  and 
starve  in  a  great  desert.  He  who  under- 
takes too  much  succeeds  but  little.  Two 
shops  are  like  two  stools,  a  man  comes  to 
the  ground  between  them.  You  may  burst 
a  bag  by  trying  to  fill  it  too  full,  and  ruin 
yourself  by  grasping  at  too  much. 

In  a  great  river  great  fish  are  found, 
But  take  good  heed  lest  you  be  drown* d. 


HINTS  AS   TO    THRIVING.  177 

Make  as  few  changes  as  you  can ;  trees 
often  transplanted  bear  little  fruit.  If  you 
have  difficulties  in  one  place  you  will  have 
them  in  another;  if  you  move  because  it  is 
damp  in  the  valley,  you  may  find  it  cold  on 
the  hill.  Where  will  the  ass  go  that  he  will 
not  have  to  work  ?  Where  can  a  cow  live 
and  not  get  milked  ?  Where  will  you  find 
land  without  stones,  or  meat  without  bones  ? 
Everywhere  on  earth  men  must  eat  bread 
in  the  sweat  of  their  faces.  To  fly  from 
trouble  men  must  have  eagles'  wings.  Al- 
teration is  not  always  improvement,  as  the 
pigeon  said  when  she  got  out  of  the  net 
and  into  the  pie.  There  is  a  proper  time 
for  changing,  and  then  mind  you  bestir 
yourself,  for  a  sitting  hen  gets  no  barley; 
but  do  not  be  forever  on  the  shift,  for  a  roll- 
ing stone  gathers  no  moss.  Stick-to-it  is 
the  conqueror.  He  who  can  wait  long 
enough  will  win.  This,  that,  and  the  other, 
anything,  and  everything,  all  put  together 
make  nothing  in  the  end ;  but  on  one  horse 
a  man  rides  home  in  due  season.  In  one 
place  the  seed  grows,  in  one  nest  the  bird 
hatches  its  eggs,  in  one  oven  the  bread 
bakes,  in  one  river  the  fish  lives. 


178  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK. 

Do  not  be  above  your  business.  He  who 
turns  up  his  nose  at  his  work  quarrels  with 
his  bread  and  butter.  He  is  a  poor  smith 
who  is  afraid  of  his  own  sparks  ;  there's 
some  discomfort  in  all  trades  except  chim- 
ney-sweeping. If  sailors  gave  up  going  to 
sea  because  of  the  wet ;  if  bakers  left  off 
baking  because  it  is  hot  work  ;  if  ploughmen 
would  not  plough  because  of  the  cold,  and 
tailors  would  not  make  our  clothes  for  fear 
of  pricking  their  fingers,  what  a  pass  we 
should  come  to !  Nonsense,  my  fine  fellow, 
there's  no  shame  about  any  honest  calling ; 
don't  be  afraid  of  soiling  your  hands,  there's 
plenty  of  soap  to  be  had.  All  trades  are 
good  to  good  traders.  A  clever  man  can 
make  money  out  of  dirt.  Lucifer  matches 
pay  well  if  you  sell  enough  of  them. 


Never  mind  the  stink, 
Sweets  smells  the  chink. 


You  cannot  get  honey  if  you  are  fright- 
ened at  bees,  nor  sow  corn  if  you  are  afraid  of 
getting  mud  on  your  boots.  Lackadaisical 
gentlemen  had  better  emigrate  to  Fool's- 
land,  where  men  get  their  living  by  wearing 


HINTS  AS    TO    THRIVING,  179 

shiny  boots  and  lavender  gloves.  When 
bars  of  iron  melt  under  the  south  wind, 
when  you  can  dig  the  fields  with  tooth-picks, 
blow  ships  along  with  fans,  manure  the 
crops  with  lavender  water,  and  grow  plum- 
cake  in  flowerpots,  then  will  be  a  fine  time 
for  dandies  ;  but  until  the  Millennium  comes 
we  shall  all  have  a  deal  to  put  up  with,  and 
had  better  bear  our  present  burdens  than 
run  helter-skelter  where  we  shall  find  matters 
a  deal  worse. 

Plod  is  the  word.  Every  one  must  row 
with  such  oars  as  he  has,  and  as  he  can't 
choose  the  wind,  he  must  sail  by  such  as 
God  sends  him.  Patience  and  attention 
will  get  on  in  the  long  run.  If  the  cat  sits 
long  enough  at  the  hole  she  will  catch  the 
mouse.  Always-at-it  grows  good  cabbage 
and  lettuce  where  others  grow  thistles.  I 
know  as  a  ploughman  that  it  is  up  and  down, 
up  and  down  the  field  that  ploughs  the 
acres;  there's  no  getting  over  the  ground 
by  a  mile  at  a  time.  He  who  plods  on,  the 
clods  on,  rods  on  rods  will  turn  of  the  sods 
while  laziness  nods. 

Keep  your  weather  eye  open.  Sleeping 
poultry  are  carried  off  by  the  fox.     Who 


180         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK. 

watches  not  catches  not.  Fools  ask  what's 
o'clock,  but  wise  men  know  their  time. 
Grind  while  the  wind  blows,  or  if  not  do 
not  blame  providence.  God  sends  every 
bird  its  food,  but  he  does  not  throw  it  into 
the  nest :  he  gives  us  our  daily  bread,  but 
it  is  through  our  own  labor.  Take  time 
by  the  forelock.  Be  up  early  and  catch  the 
worm.  The  morning  hour  carries  gold  in 
its  mouth.  He  who  drives  last  in  the  row 
gets  all  the  dust  in  his  eyes  ;  rise  early,  and 
you  will  have  a  clear  start  for  the  day. 

Never  try  dirty  dodges  to  make  money. 
It  will  never  pay  you  to  lick  honey  off  of 
thorns.  An  honest  man  will  not  make  a 
dog  of  himself  for  the  sake  of  getting  a 
bone.  It  is  hard  to  walk  on  the  devil's  ice  ; 
it  is  fine  skating,  but  it  ends  in  a  heavy  fall, 
and  worse.  He  needs  have  a  long  spoon 
who  would  eat  out  of  the  same  dish  with 
Satan.  Never  ruin  your  soul  for  the  sake 
of  pelf:  it  is  like  drowning  yourself  in  a 
well  to  get  a  drink  of  water.  Take  nothing 
in  hand  that  may  bring  you  repentance. 
Better  walk  barefoot  than  ride  in  a  carriage 
to  hell ;  better  that  the  bird  starve  than  be 
fattened  for  the  spit.     The  mouse  wins  little 


HINTS  AS    TO    THRIVING.  181 

by  nibbling  the  cheese  if  it  gets  caught  in 
the  trap.  Clean  money  or  none,  mark  that ; 
for  gain  badly  got  will  be  an  everlasting 
loss. 

A  good  article,  full  weight,  and  a  fair 
price  bring  customers  to  the  shop,  but  peo- 
ple do  not  recommend  the  shop  where  they 
are  cheated.  Cheats  never  thrive  ;  or  if 
they  do  it  must  be  in  London,  where  they 
catch  chance  customers  enough  to  live  by. 
The  long-bow  man  may  hit  the  mark  some- 
times, but  a  fair  shot  is  the  best.  A  rogue's 
purse  is  full  of  holes.  He  will  have  blisters 
on  his  feet  who  wears  stolen  shoes.  He 
whose  fingers  are  like  lime-twigs  will  find 
other  things  stick  to  them  besides  silver. 
Steal  eels  and  they  will  turn  to  snakes. 
The  more  a  fox  robs  the  sooner  he  will  be 
hunted.  If  a  rogue  wants  to  make  a  good 
trade  he  had  better  turn  honest.  If  all  you 
aim  at  is  profit,  still  deal  uprightly,  for  it  is 
the  most  paying  game. 

Look  most  to  your  spending.  No  matter 
what  comes  in,  if  more  goes  out  you  will 
always  be  poor.  The  art  is  not  in  making 
money,  but  in  keeping  it ;  little  expenses, 
like  mice  in  a  barn,  when  they  are  many, 


182         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

make  great  waste.  Hair  by  hair  heads  get 
bald.  Straw  by  straw  the  thatch  goes  off 
the  cottage,  and  drop  by  drop  the  rain  comes 
into  the  chamber.  A  barrel  is  soon  empty 
if  the  tap  leaks  but  a  drop  a  minute. 
Chickens  will  be  plucked  feather  by  feather 
if  the  maid  keeps  at  it ;  small  mites  eat  the 
cheese  ;  little  birds  destroy  a  great  deal  of 
wheat.  When  you  mean  to  save,  begin 
with  your  mouth ;  there  are  many  thieves 
down  the  red  lane.  The  ale  jug  is  a  great 
waster.  In  all  other  things  keep  within 
compass.  In  clothes  choose  suitable  and 
lasting  stuff,  and  not  tawdry  fineries.  To 
be  warm  is  the  main  thing ;  never  mind  the 
looks.  Never  stretch  your  legs  further 
than  your  blankets  will  reach,  or  you  will 
soon  be  cold.  A  fool  may  make  money,  but 
it  needs  a  wise  man  to  spend  it.  Remember 
it  is  easier  to  build  two  chimneys  than  to 
keep  one  going.  If  you  give  all  to  back 
and  board  there  is  nothing  left  for  the  sav- 
ings bank.  Fare  hard  and  work  hard  while 
you  are  young,  and  you  have  a  chance  of 
rest  when  you  are  old. 

Never   indulge   in    extravagance    unless 
you  want  to  make  a  short  cut  to  the  work- 


HINTS  AS    TO    THRIVING.  183 

house.  Money  has  wings  of  its  own,  and 
if  you  find  it  another  pair  of  wings,  wonder 
not  if  it  flies  fast. 

He  that  hath  it,  and  will  not  keep  it; 
He  that  wants  it,  and  will  not  seek  it ; 
He  that  drinks  and  is  not  dry, 
Shall  want  money  as  well  as  I. 

If  our  poor  people  could  only  see  the 
amount  of  money  which  they  melt  away  in 
drink  their  hair  would  stand  on  end  with 
fright.  Why,  they  swallow  rivers  of  beer, 
and  seas  of  porter,  and  great  big  lakes  of 
spirits  and  other  fire-waters.  We  should 
all  be  clothed  like  gentlemen  and  live  like 
fighting-cocks  if  what  is  wasted  on  fuddle 
could  be  sensibly  used.  We  should  need 
to  get  up  earlier  in  the  morning  to  spend 
all  our  money,  for  we  should  find  ourselves 
suddenly  made  quite  rich,  and  all  that 
through  stopping  the  drip  of  the  tap.  At 
any  rate,  you  young  people  who  want  to 
get  on  in  the  world  must  make  a  point  of 
dropping  your  half-pints,  and  settle  in  your 
spirits  that  no  spirits  shall  ever  settle  you. 
Have  your  luxuries,  if  you  must  have  them, 
after  you  have  made  your  fortunes,  but  just 
now  look  after  your  bread  and  cheese. 


1 84  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

Pray  excuse  me  for  spinning  this  long 
yarn,  for  as  I  pulled  it  came.  My  talk 
seems  like  the  Irishman's  rope  which  he 
could  not  get  into  the  ship  because  some- 
body had  cut  the  end  off.  I  only  want  to 
say,  do  not  be  greedy,  for  covetousness  is 
always  poor:  still  strive  to  get  on,  for  pov- 
erty is  no  virtue,  and  to  rise  in  the  world  is 
to  a  man's  credit  as  well  as  his  comfort. 
Earn  all  you  can,  save  all  you  can,  and  then 
give  all  you  can.  Never  try  to  save  out  of 
God's  cause  ;  such  money  will  canker  the 
rest.  Giving  to  God  is  no  loss ;  it  is  put- 
ting your  substance  into  the  best  bank. 
Giving  is  true  having,  as  the  old  grave-stone 
said  of  the  dead  man,  u  What  I  spent  I  had, 
what  I  saved  I  lost,  what  I  gave  I  have." 
The  pockets  of  the  poor  are  safe  lockers, 
and  it  is  always  a  good  investment  to  lend 
to  the  Lord.  John  Ploughman  wishes  all 
young  beginners  long  life  and  prosperity. 

Sufficient  of  wealth, 

And  abundant  health, 

Long  years  of  content, 

And  when  life  is  spent 

A  mansion  with  God  in  glory. 


TALL  TALK. 


"  Gooseberries   are   to   be   heard   of  weighing    twice  as  much  as 
possible." 

THE  art  of  stretching  is  uncommonly 
general  nowadays.  Gooseberries  are 
to  be  heard  of  weighing  twice  as  much 
as  possible,  and  unseen   showers   of  frogs 

ri.85) 


186         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

fall  regularly  when  newspapers  are  slack. 
If  a  cart  goes  by,  and  rattles  the  lid  of  an 
old  woman's  teapot,  it  is  put  down  as  an 
earthquake.  Fine  imaginations  are  not  at 
all  scarce.  Certain  people  are  always  on 
the  look  out  for  wonders,  and  if  they  don't 
see  them  they  invent  them.  They  see 
comets  every  night,  and  hear  some  rare  tale 
every  day.  All  their  molehills  are  moun- 
tains. All  their  ducks  are  swans.  They 
have  learned  the  multiplication  table,  and 
use  it  freely.  If  they  saw  six  dogs  together 
they  would  swear  they  saw  a  hundred 
hounds;  yes,  and  get  as  red  in  the  face  as 
turkey-cocks  if  anybody  looked  a  little 
doubtful;  and  before  long  they  would  per- 
suade themselves  that  they  saw  ten  thou- 
sand lions  ;  for  everything  grows  with  them 
as  fast  as  mushrooms,  and  as  big  as  Box 
Hill. 

All  things  around  them  are  wonderful, 
but  as  for  themselves,  nobody  is  fit  to  clean 
their  boots.  They  are  the  cream  of  crea- 
tion. They  are  as  strong  as  Samson,  and 
could  pull  against  John  Ploughman's  team, 
only  they  won't  try  it,  for  fear  of  hurting 
the   horses.      Their   wealth   is  enormous; 


TALL    TALK.  187 

they  could  pay  off  the  National  Debt,  only 
they  have  good  reasons  for  not  doing  so 
just  yet.  If  they  keep  shop  they  turn  over 
several  millions  in  the  year,  and  only  stop 
in  business  at  all  for  the  sake  of  their 
neighbors.  They  sell  the  best  goods  at 
the  lowest  prices,  in  fact,  under  cost  price ; 
and  none  in  the  county  are  fit  to  hold  a 
candle  to  them;  their  business  is  cock  of 
the  walk  and  king  of  the  castle.  If  they 
take  a  farm  it  is  only  for  amusement,  and  to 
show  the  poor  ignorant  natives  how  to  do 
it.  All  their  doings  are  wonders  !  Like 
the  wild  beast  show  which  stopped  at  our 
village  the  other  day,  they  are  the  only, 
original,  and  unrivalled!  But  they  are 
quite  as  dead  a  sell  as  that  fine  affair  was ; 
all  the  best  of  it  was  outside  on  the  pictures, 
and  it's  just  the  same  with  them.  But, 
bless  you,  how  they  do  draw  the  long  bow ! 
Hear  them  talk.  It  is  all  in  capital  letters 
and  notes  of  admiration.  "  Did  you  ever 
see  such  A  nag  ?  Why,  sir,  it  would  beat 
the  wind  ! !  That  Cow — let  me  call  your 
attention  to  her,  there  is  not  such  another 
in  the  county;  just  notice  the  swing  of 
her  tail  ! !     Yes,  sir,  that  boy  of  mine  is 


1 88        JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

intelligent,  far  beyond  his  years.  He's  a 
perfect  prodigy!  Like  his  father,  did  you 
say?  Very  kind  remark,  sir,  but  there's  a 
good  deal  of  truth  in  it :  though  I  say  it, 
a  man  must  get  up  early  to  beat  me!  Pm 
one  too  many  for  most  people !  Just  look 
over  the  farm,  sir.  Was  there  ever  such  a 
field  of  turnips?  The  fly  on  the  leaf? 
Not  a  bit,  sir ;  that  arises  from  the  peculiar 
sort ;  it's  A  very  rare  turnip,  with  venti- 
lated leaves  pricked  through  by  nature  to 
let  the  air  in  and  out !  Too  many  moles 
did  you  say?  Ah!  thereby  hangs  a  tale. 
Do  you  know  our  moles  are  a  great  sin- 
gularity? they  throw  up  bigger  hills  than 
any  others  in  England,  and  are  supposed  to 
be  of  a  fine  old  British  stock  now  al- 
most lost.  Did  you  notice  that  tremen- 
dous thistle  ?  Is  it  not  a  rare  specimen  ? 
enough  to  make  a  Scotchman  die  of  joy. 
That  shows  the  extraordinary  richness  of 
the  soil ;  and,  indeed,  sir,  our  last  year's 
crop  of  wheat  was  so  amazingly  heavy,  I 
thought  we  should  never  get  it  home;  it 
nearly  broke  the  wagons ;  we  had  half  the 
county  here  to  see  it  threshed,  and  the  old- 
est men  in  the  parish  said  they  never  heard 


TALL    TALK.  189 

tell  of  the  like.     It  is  a  mercy  that  steam 

IS    INVENTED,    OR     WE     NEVER     COULD     HAVE 
THRESHED  IT  BY  HAND." 

When  a  man  gets  into  this  style  of  talk, 
it  is  no  matter  what  he  is  hammering  at,  he 
speaks  of  it  as  the  finest,  greatest,  and  most 
marvellous  in  the  kingdom,  or  else  the  most 
awful,  horrible,  and  dreadful  in  the  world. 
His  boots  would  not  fit  Goliath,  but  his 
tongue  is  much  too  big  for  the  giant's 
mouth.  He  paints  with  a  broom.  He  sug- 
ars his  dumplings  with  a  spade,  and  lays 
on  his  butter  with  a  trowel.  His  horse,  his 
dog,  his  gun,  his  wife,  his  child,  his  singing, 
his  planning,  are  all  nonsuches,  he  is  the 
forehorse  of  the  parish,  he  lives  at  Number 
One,  and  it  would  be  hard  to  find  a  man  fit 
to  be  number  two  to  him.  The  water  out 
of  his  well  is  stronger  than  wine ;  it  rains 
pea-soup  into  his  water  butt;  his  currant 
bushes  grow  grapes ;  you  might  live  in- 
side one  of  his  pumpkins  ;  and  his  flowers — 
well,  he's  heard  that  the  Queen  herself 
had  the  fellow  plant  to  that  geranium,  only 
his  was  rather  the  better !  The  greatest  won- 
der is  that  men  of  this  kidney  don't  see  that 
everybody  is  laughing  at  them  ;  they  must 


190  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK. 

have  bragged  themselves  blind.  Everybody 
sees  the  bottom  of  their  dish,  and  yet  they 
go  on  calling  in  an  ocean,  as  if  they  had 
none  but  flat  fish  to  deal  with. 

I've  known  men  who  open  their  mouths 
like  barn  doors  in  boasting  what  they 
would  do  if  they  were  in  somebody  else's 
shoes.  If  they  were  in  Parliament  they 
would  abolish  all  taxes,  turn  workhouses 
into  palaces,  make  the  pumps  run  with  beer, 
and  set  the  Thames  on  fire ;  but  all  this  de- 
pends on  an  if,  and  that  if  is  a  sort  of  five- 
barred  gate  which  they  have  never  got 
over.  If  the  sky  falls  we  shall  catch  larks. 
If  Jack  Brag  does  but  get  the  reins  he'll 
make  the  horses  fly  up  to  the  moon.  If  is 
a  fine  word ;  when  a  man  jumps  on  its  back 
it  will  carry  him  into  worlds  which  were 
never  created,  and  make  him  see  miracles 
which  were  never  wrought.  With  an  if 
you  may  put  all  London  into  a  quart 
pot. 

"  If  all  the  seas  were  one  sea, 
What  a  great  sea  that  would  be  ! 
And  if  all  the  trees  were  one  tree, 
What  a  great  tree  that  would  be ! 
And  if  all  the  axes  were  one  axe, 
What  a  great  axe  that  would  be ! 


I 


TALL    TALK.  191 

And  if  all  the  men  were  one  man, 

What  a  great  man  he  would  be ! 

And  if  the  great  man  took  the  great  axe, 

And  cut  down  the  great  tree, 

And  let  it  fall  into  the  great  sea, 

What  a  splish  splash  that  would  be  !  " 


"  What  nonsense  !"  says  some  one  ;  so  John 
Ploughman  thinks,  and  therefore  he  puts  it 
in  as  a  specimen  of  the  stupidity  which  tall 
talkers  are  so  fond  of.  This  is  not  half  so 
silly  as  nine  out  of  ten  of  their  mighty 
nothings. 

What  some  of  these  fellows  have  done ! 
Now,  would  you  believe  it  ?  (I  say,  "  No, 
I  would  not/')  They  made  their  own  for- 
tunes in  no  time,  and  made  other  people's 
too.  Their  advice  has  been  the  means  of 
filling  many  a  bag  with  gold.  What  they 
said  at  a  meeting  fastened  the  people  to 
their  seats  like  cobbler's  wax.  They  were 
in  a  quarrel,  and  when  all  their  party  were 
nearly  beaten,  they  settled  off  the  opposi- 
tion side  at  once  with  first-rate  wit  and  wis- 
dom— King  Solomon  was  a  fool  to  them. 
As  to  religion,  they  were  the  first  to  set  it 
up  in  the  parish,  and  by  their  wonderful 
exertions  everything  was  set  a  going.     They 


192  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

laid  the  golden  egg.  People  are  not  grate- 
ful, or  they  would  almost  worship  them: 
it's  shameful  to  see  how  they  have  been 
neglected,  and  even  turned  off,  of  late  by 
the  very  people  whom  they  have  been  the 
making  of.  While  they  had  a  finger  in  the 
pie  all  went  well  at  the  meeting,  but  now 
they  have  left  they  say  there's  a  screw 
loose,  and  they  who  live  longest  will  see 
most.  When  they  are  in  a  modest  humor 
they  borrow  words  from  David,  and  say, 
"  The  earth  is  dissolved,  I  bear  up  the  pil- 
lars of  it."  It  is  thought  that  their  death 
would  fill  the  world  with  bones.  If  they 
remove  their  custom  people  are  expected  to 
shut  up  their  shops  directly,  and  it  is  only 
their  impudence  that  makes  them  hope  to 
get  a  living  after  such  customers  are  gone. 
When  they  feel  a  little  natural  pride  at  their 
great  doings,  then  it's  fine  to  hear  them  go 
ahead :  talk  of  blowing  your  own  trumpet, 
they  have  a  whole  band  of  music,  big  drum 
and  all,  and  keep  all  the  instruments  going 
first-rate  to  their  own  praise  and  glory. 

I'd  rather  plough  all  day  and  be  on  the 
road  with  the  wagon  all  night  when  it 
freezes   your   eyelashes    off  than  listen  to 


TALL    TALK.  193 

these  great  talkers ;  they  make  me  as  sick  as 
a  cat.  I'd  sooner  go  without  eating  till  I 
was  as  lean  as  a  wash-leather  than  eat  the 
best  turkey  that  ever  came  on  the  table,  and 
be  dinned  all  the  while  with  their  awful 
jaw.  They  talk  on  such  a  mighty  big 
scale,  and  magnify  everything  so  thunder- 
ingly,  that  you  cannot  believe  them  when 
they  accidentally  slip  in  a  word  or  two  of 
truth ;  and  so  you  are  apt  to  think  that 
even  their  cheese  is  chalk.  They  are  great 
liars,  but  they  are  hardly  conscious  of  it; 
they  have  talked  themselves  into  believing 
their  own  bombast.  The  frog  thought  her- 
self equal  to  the  cow,  and  then  began  to 
blow  herself  out  to  make  it  true;  they 
swell  like  her  and  they  will  burst  like  her 
if  they  don't  mind. 

Everybody  who  knows  these  big  talkers 
should  take  warning  from  them : 

"  Said  I  to  myself,  here's  a  lesson  for  me, 
This  man  is  a  picture  of  what  I  might  be." 

We  must  try  to  state  the  truth,  the  whole 
truth,  and  nothing  but  the   truth.     If  we 
begin  calling  eleven  inches  a  foot  we  shall 


194         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

go  on  till  we  call  one  inch  four-and-twenty. 
If  we  call  a  heifer  a  cow,  we  may  one  day 
call  a  dormouse  a  bullock.  Once  go  in  for 
exaggeration,  and  you  may  as  well  be  hung 
for  a  sheep  as  a  lamb ;  you  have  left  the 
road  of  truth,  and  there  is  no  telling  where 
the  crooked  lane  may  lead  you  to.  He 
who  tells  little  lies  will  soon  think  nothing 
of  great  ones,  for  the  principle  is  the  same. 
Where  there  is  a  mouse-hole  there  will  soon 
be  a  rat-hole,  and  if  the  kitten  comes  the 
cat  will  follow.  It  seldom  rains  but  it  pours ; 
a  little  untruth  leads  on  to  a  perfect  shower 
of  lying. 

Self-praise  is  no  recommendation.  A 
man's  praise  smells  sweet  when  it  comes 
out  of  other  men's  mouths,  but  in  his  own 
it  stinks.  Grow  your  own  cherries,  but 
don't  sing  your  own  praises. 

Boasters  are  never  worth  a  button  with 
the  shank  off.  Long  tongue,  short  hand. 
Great  talkers,  little  doers.  Dogs  that  bark 
much  run  away  when  it  is  time  to  bite. 
The  leanest  pig  squeaks  most.  It  is  not 
the  hen  which  cackles  most  that  lays  most 
eggs.  Saying  and  doing  are  two  different 
things.     It  is  the  barren  cow  that  bellows. 


TALL    TALK,  195 

There  may  be  great  noise  of  threshing 
where  there  is  no  wheat.  Great  boast,  little 
roast.  Much  froth,  little  beer.  Drums 
sound  loud  because  there  is  nothing  in 
them.  Good  men  know  themselves  too 
well  to  chant  their  own  praises.  Barges 
without  cargoes  float  high  on  the  canal,  but 
the  fuller  they  are  the  lower  they  sink. 
Good  cheese  sells  itself  without  puffery; 
good  wine  needs  no  bush ;  and  when  men 
are  really  excellent,  people  find  it  out  with- 
out telling.  Bounce  is  the  sign  of  folly. 
Loud  braying  reveals  an  ass.  If  a  man  is 
ignorant  and  holds  his  tongue,  no  one  will 
despise  him ;  but  if  he  rattles  on  with  an 
empty  pate,  and  a  tongue  that  brags  like 
forty,  he  will  write  out  his  own  name  in 
capital  letters,  and  they  will  be  these — 
F,  O,  O,  L. 

As  "by  the  ears  the  ass  is  known " — 
A  truth  as  sure  as  parsons  preach, 

"The  man,"  as  proverbs  long  have  shown, 
"  Is  seen  most  plainly  through  his  speech. " 


"  I  would  not  choose  to  be  gossipped  to  death  by  wild  washerwomen." — Page  199 

(196) 


THINGS  I  WOULD  NOT  CHOOSE. 

IF  it  were  all  the  same  to  other  folks  and 
I  might  have  things  managed  exactly 
as  I  liked,  I  should  not  choose  to  have  my 
homely  book  pulled  to  pieces  by  fellows 
who  have  not  the  honesty  to  read  it,  but 
make  up  their  minds  beforehand,  as  Simple 
Simon  did  when  they  put  him  on  the  jury. 
However,  as  the  rhinoceros  said,  I  have  not 
a  very  thin  skin :  and  if  it  amuses  others 
to  find  fault  with  me,  they  are  as  welcome 
as  they  are  free.  The  anvil  is  not  afraid 
of  the  hammer.  They  tell  me  those  London 
editors  cut  a  page  open,  and  then  smell  the 
knife,  and  fall  to  praising  the  book  up  to 
the  skies,  or  abusing  it  without  mercy, 
according  as  the  maggot  bites  them,  or 
according  to  what  they  have  had  for  din- 
ner. John  Ploughman  hopes  the  publisher 
will  turn  down  this  leaf  when  he  sends  his 
book  to  the  papers,  and  he  hopes  the  fol- 
lowing word  to  the  wise  will  be  enough : 
7"  hope  my  pears  won't  fall  into  pigs'  mouths. 
I  should  not  choose,  if  I  might  have  my 
own  way,  to  see  a  dozen  of  these  pages 
brought  home  wrapped  round  the  butter 
the  next  time  we  send  to  the  shop ;  but  it 

(i97) 


198         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

is  not  at  all  unlikely  to  happen,  so  I  must 
put  up  with  it,  as  Tom  Higgs  did  when  he 
had  only  turkey  and  plum  pudding  for 
dinner. 

I  should  not  choose  to  plough  with  two 
old  horses  spavined  and  broken-winded, 
and  altogether  past  work :  pity  the  poor 
horses  and  pity  the  poor  ploughman,  and 
no  pity  at  all  for  the  farmer  who  keeps 
such  wretched  cattle.  When  I  see  a  man 
whipping  and  slashing  a  poor  brute  of  a 
horse,  I  want  to  kick  him,  but  at  the  same 
time  I  feel  glad  that  Violet  and  Dapper  go 
well  enough  with  the  sound  of  the  whip 
without  needing  to  be  paid  like  lawyers  for 
all  they  do.  A  man  who  knocks  a  horse 
about  ought  to  be  put  in  harness  himself, 
and  be  driven  about  by  a  butcher.  There's 
a  deal  to  be  done  with  animals  with  kind- 
ness, and  nothing  with  cruelty.  He  who  is 
unmerciful  to  his  beast  is  worse  than  a 
beast  himself. 

I  should  not  choose  to  be  a  bob-tailed 
cow  in  summer-time,  nor  a  servant  with  a 
score  of  masters,  nor  a  minister  with  half-a- 
dozen  ignorant  tyrants  for  deacons,  nor  a 
man    who    lives    with    his    mother-in-law. 


THINGS  I   WOULD  NOT  CHOOSE.     199 

Nor  should  I  like  to  try  the  truth  of  the 
old  saying — 

"  Two  cats  and  one  mouse, 
Two  women  in  one  house, 
Two  dogs  to  one  bone, 
Will  not  agree  long." 

I  had  rather  not  be  a  dog  with  a  tin  kettle 
tied  to  his  tail,  nor  a  worm  on  a  fisherman's 
hook,  nor  an  eel  being  skinned  alive,  nor  a 
husband  with  a  vixen  for  his  wife.  I 
would  much  rather  not  fall  into  the  jaws  of 
a  crocodile  or  the  hands  of  a  lawyer;  the 
only  suit  that  lasts  too  long  is  a  lawsuit,  and 
that  would  not  suit  me  at  all.  I  would 
not  choose  to  be  gossipped  to  death  by  wild 
washerwomen,  or  pestered  by  a  travelling 
bookseller  wanting  me  to  take  in  sixpenny 
numbers  of  a  book  that  will  run  on  for  ever 
like  old  Jimmy's  debts. 

I  should  be  very  hard  up  before  I  should 
choose  to  sleep  with  pigs,  or  live  in  some 
people's  dirty  houses.  I  would  not  choose 
to  own  half  the  cottages  poor  laborers 
are  made  to  live  in ;  no  farmer  would  be 
so  mean  as  to  keep  his  horses  in  them; 
and  they  are  not  good  enough  for  dog  ken- 


200         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK. 

nels.  Think  of  father,  and  mother,  and  a 
grown-up  son,  and  two  daughters  sleeping 
in  the  same  room  !  It  is  a  burning  shame, 
and  a  crying  sin  on  the  part  of  those  who 
drive  people  to  such  shifts.  It  won't  bear 
to  be  thought  of,  and  yet  it  is  not  at  all 
uncommon.  Squires  and  landlords,  how 
would  you  like  it  ?  If  any  man  defends 
such  a  system,  half-an-hour's  hanging  would 
be  a  good  thing  for  him. 

To  be  servant  to  a  miser,  to  work  for  a 
wasp,  to  be  catspaw  to  a  monkey,  or  toady 
to  a  lord  without  brains,  I  would  not 
choose ;  nor  to  go  to  the  workhouse,  nor 
apply  for  parish  relief;  I'd  sooner  try 
Grantham  gruel,  nine  grits  and  a  gallon  of 
water.  I  would  not  go  round  with  the 
hat  for  my  own  pocket,  nor  borrow  money, 
nor  be  a  loafer,  nor  live  like  a  toad  under  a 
harrow;  no,  not  for  all  that  ever  thawed 
out  of  the  cold  hand  of  charity. 

Bad  off  as  I  am,  I  would  not  choose  to 
change,  unless  I  could  hope  to  better  my- 
self. Who  would  go  under  the  spout  to 
get  out  of  the  rain  ?  What's  the  use  of 
travelling  to  the  other  end  of  the  world  to 
be  worse  off  than  you  are  ?     Old  England 


THINGS  I   WOULD   NOT  CHOOSE.     201 

for  me,  and  Botany  Bay  for  those  who  like 
to  transport  themselves. 

I  would  not  choose  to  drive  a  pig,  nor  to 
manage  a  jibbing  nag,  nor  try  to  persuade 
a  man  with  a  wooden  head ;  nor  should  I 
like  to  be  a  schoolmaster  with  unruly  boys, 
nor  a  bull  baited  by  dogs,  nor  a  hen  who 
has  hatched  ducks.  Worse  off  still  is  a 
preacher  to  drowsy  hearers  ;  he  hunts  with 
dead  dogs  and  drives  wooden  horses.  As 
well  hold  a  service  for  sleeping  swine  as 
sleeping  men. 

I  would  not  buy  a  horse  of  a  horsedealer 
if  I  could  help  it,  for  the  two  or  three  honest 
ones  nobody  ever  heard  of.  A  very  honest 
horsedealer  will  never  cheat  you  if  you 
don't  let  him ;  an  ordinary  one  will  draw 
your  eye-tooth  while  your  mouth  is  shut. 
Horses  are  almost  as  hard  to  judge  of  as 
men's  hearts ;  the  oldest  hands  are  taken 
in.  What  with  bone-spavin,  ringbone  and 
splints ;  grease,  crown-scab  and  rat -tail, 
wind-galls  and  cankers,  colic  and  jaundice, 
sandcracks  and  founders,  mallenders  and 
sallenders,  there  is  hardly  a  sound  horse  in 
the  world.  It's  a  bad  thing  to  change 
horses  at  all ;  if  you  have  a  good  one  keep 


202  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

it,  for  you  will  not  get  a  better;  if  you 
have  a  bad  one  keep  it,  for  ten  to  one  you 
will  buy  a  worse. 

I  would  not  choose  to  make  myself  a 
door-mat  nor  a  poodle,  nor  a  fellow  who 
will  eat  dirt  in  order  to  curry  favor  with 
great  folks.  Let  who  will  tell  lies  to  please 
others,  I'd  rather  have  truth  on  my  side,  if 
I  go  barefoot.  Independence  and  a  clear 
conscience  are  better  with  cold  cabbage  than 
slavery  and  sin  with  roast  beef. 

I  would  not  like  to  keep  a  toll-gate  at 
the  top  of  a  long  hill,  nor  to  be  a  tax- 
collector,  nor  the  summoning  officer,  nor  a 
general  nuisance,  nor  a  poor  postman  with 
half  enough  to  live  on  and  twice  as  much  to 
do  as  he  ought ;  better  be  a  gipsy's  horse, 
and  live  on  the  common,  with  no  hay  and 
no  oats,  but  plenty  of  oak  cudgel. 

I  would  not  choose  to  be  plucked  like  a 
goose,  nor  to  be  shareholder  in  a  company ; 
nor  to  be  fried  alive,  nor  to  be  at  the  mercy 
of  a  Roman  Catholic  priest. 

I  would  not  stand  as  godfather  to  any- 
body's child,  to  promise  that  the  little  sin- 
ner shall  keep  God's  holy  commandments 
and  walk  in  the  same  all  the  days  of  his  life ; 


THINGS  I   WOULD   NOT  CHOOSE.    203 

of  the  two,  I  would  sooner  promise  to  put 
the  moon  into  my  coat  sleeve  and  bring  it 
out  again  at  the  leg  of  my  trousers,  or  vow 
that  the  little  dear  shall  have  red  hair  and 
a  snub  nose.  Neither  would  I  choose  to 
have  lies  told  over  my  baby  in  the  hope  of 
getting  on  the  parson's  blind  side  when 
the  blankets  were  given  away  at  Christmas. 
I  should  not  choose  to  go  where  I 
should  be  afraid  to  die,  nor  could  I  bear 
to  live  without  a  good  hope  for  hereafter. 
I  would  not  choose  to  sit  on  a  barrel  of 
gunpowder  and  smoke  a  pipe,  but  that  is 
what  those  do  who  are  thoughtless  about 
their  souls  while  life  is  so  uncertain. 
Neither  would  I  choose  my  lot  on  earth, 
but  leave  it  with  God  to  choose  for  me. 
I  might  pick  and  choose  and  take  the 
worst,  but  his  choice  is  always  best. 


TRY. 


"We  shall  get  through  it  now,'  said  Jack  to  Harry,  as  they  fin- 
ished up  the  pudding." — Page  205. 

OF  all  the  pretty  little  songs  I  have  ever 
heard  my  youngsters  sing,  that  is  one 
of  the  best  which  winds  up — 


"  If  at  first  you  don't  succeed, 
Try,  try,  try  again." 


(204) 


TR  K  205 

I. recommend  it  to  grown-up  people  who 
are  down  in  the  mouth,  and  fancy  that  the 
best  thing  they  can  do  is  to  give  up.  No- 
body knows  what  he  can  do  till  he  tries. 
"  We  shall  get  through  it  now,"  said  Jack 
to  Harry  as  they  finished  up  the  pudding. 
Everything  new  is  hard  work,  but  a  little 
"  TRY  "  ointment  rubbed  on  the  hand  and 
worked  into  the  heart  makes  all  things 
easy. 

Can't  do  it  sticks  in  the  mud,  but  Try 
soon  drags  the  wagon  out  of  the  rut.  The 
fox  said  Try,  and  he  got  away  from  the 
hounds  when  they  almost  snapped  at  him. 
The  bees  said  Try,  and  turned  flowers 
into  honey.  The  squirrel  said  Try,  and 
up  he  went  to  the  top  of  the  beech  tree. 
The  snowdrop  said  Try,  and  bloomed  in  the 
cold  snows  of  winter.  The  sun  said  Try, 
and  the  spring  soon  threw  Jack  Frost  out 
of  the  saddle.  The  young  lark  said  Try, 
and  he  found  that  his  new  wings  took  him 
over  hedges  and  ditches,  and  up  where  his 
father  was  singing.  The  ox  said  Try,  and 
ploughed  the  field  from  end  to  end.  No 
hill  too  steep  for  Try  to  climb,  no  clay  too 
stiff  for  Try  to  plough,  no  field  too  wet  for 


206         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK. 

Try  to  drain,  no  hole  too  big  for  Try  to 
mend. 

"  By  little  strokes 
Men  fell  great  oaks." 

By  a  spadeful  at  a  time  the  navvies 
digged  the  cutting,  cut  a  big  hole  through 
the  hill,  and  heaped  up  the  embankment. 

"  The  stone  is  hard,  and  the  drop  is  small, 
But  a  hole  is  made  by  the  constant  fall." 

What  man  has  done  man  can  do,  and  what 
has  never  been  may  be.  Ploughmen  have 
got  to  be  gentlemen,  cobblers  have  turned 
their  lapstones  into  gold,  and  tailors  have 
sprouted  into  Members  of  Parliament.  Tuck 
up  your  shirt-sleeves,  young  Hopeful,  and 
go  at  it.  Where  there's  a  will  there's  a 
way.  The  sun  shines  for  all  the  world.  Be- 
lieve in  God,  and  stick  to  hard  work,  and 
see  if  the  mountains  are  not  removed.  Faint 
heart  never  won  fair  lady.  Cheer,  boys, 
cheer,  God  helps  those  who  help  themselves. 
Never  mind  luck,  that's  what  the  fool  had 
when  he  killed  himself  with  eating  suet 
pudding ;  the  best  luck  in  all  the  world  is 
made  up  of  joint  oil  and  sticking  plaster. 


TRY.  207 

Don't  wait  for  helpers.  Try  those  two 
old  friends,  your  strong  arms.  Self's  the 
man.  If  the  fox  want's  poultry  for  his  cubs 
he  must  carry  the  chickens  home  himself. 
None  of  her  friends  can  help  the  hare;  she 
must  run  for  herself,  or  the  greyhounds  will 
have  her.  Every  man  must  carry  his  own 
sack  to  the  mill.  You  must  put  your  own 
shoulder  to  the  wheel  and  keep  it  there,  for 
there's  plenty  of  ruts  in  the  road.  If  you 
wait  till  all  the  ways  are  paved,  you  will 
have  light  shining  between  your  ribs.  If 
you  sit  still  till  great  men  take  you  on  their 
backs,  you  will  grow  to  your  seat.  Your 
own  legs  are  better  than  stilts ;  don't  look 
to  others,  but  trust  in  God  and  keep  your 
powder  dry. 

Don't  be  whining  about  not  having  a  fair 
start.  Throw  a  sensible  man  out  of  a  win- 
dow, he'll  fall  on  his  legs  and  ask  the  near- 
est way  to  his  work.  The  more  you  have 
to  begin  with  the  less  you  will  have  at  the 
end.  Money  you  earn  yourself  is  much 
brighter  and  sweeter  than  any  you  get  out 
of  dead  men's  bags.  A  scant  breakfast  in 
the  morning  of  life  whets  the  appetite  for  a 
feast  later  in  the  day.     He  who  has  tasted 


208  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK. 

a  sour  apple  will  have  the  more  relish  for  a 
sweet  one ;  your  present  want  will  make 
future  prosperity  all  the  sweeter.  Eighteen- 
pence  has  set  up  many  a  pedlar  in  business, 
and  he  has  turned  it  over  till  he  has  kept 
his  carriage. 

As  for  the  place  you  are  cast  in,  don't 
find  fault  with  that.  You  need  not  be  a 
horse  because  you  were  born  in  a  stable. 
If  a  bull  tossed  a  man  of  mettle  sky  high  he 
would  drop  down  into  a  good  place.  A 
hard-working  young  man,  with  his  wits 
about  him,  will  make  money  where  others 
do  nothing  but  lose  it. 

Who  loves  his  work  and  knows  to  spare, 
May  live  and  flourish  anywhere. 

As  to  a  little  trouble,  who*  expects  to  find 
cherries  without  stones,  or  roses  without 
thorns?  Who  would  win  must  learn  to 
bear.  Idleness  lies  in  bed  sick  of  the  mulli- 
grubs, where  industry  finds  health  and 
wealth.  The  dog  in  the  kennel  barks  at 
the  fleas  ;  the  hunting  dog  does  not  even 
know  they  are  there.  Laziness  waits  till 
the  river  is  dry  and  never  gets  to  market ; 
"Try "swims  it  and  makes  all  the  trade. 


TR  Y.  209 

Can't  do  it  couldn't  eat  the  bread  and  but- 
ter which  was  cut  for  him,  but  Try  made 
meat  out  of  mushrooms. 

Everybody  who  does  not  get  on  lays  it 
all  on  competition.  When  the  wine  was 
stolen  they  said  it  was  the  rats ;  it's  very 
convenient  to  have  a  horse  to  put  the  sad- 
dle on.  A  mouse  may  find  a  hole,  be  the 
room  even  so  full  of  cats.  Good  workmen 
are  always  wanted.  There's  a  penny  to  be 
turned  at  the  worst  booth  in  the  fair.  No 
barber  ever  shaves  so  close  but  another  bar- 
ber will  find  something  left.  Nothing  is  so 
good  but  what  it  might  be  better ;  and  he 
who^sells  the  best  wins  the  trade.  We  were 
all  going  to  the  workhouse  because  of  the 
new  machines,  so  the  prophets  down  at  the 
taproom  were  always  telling  us ;  but,  in- 
stead of  it,  all  these  threshing,  and  reaping, 
and  hay-making  machines  have  helped  to 
make  those  men  better  off  who  had  sense 
enough  to  work  them.  If  a  man  has  not 
a  soul  above  clodhopping  he  may  expect  to 
keep  poor,  but  if  he  opens  his  sense-box, 
and  picks  up  here  a  little  and  there  a  little, 
even  Johnny  Raw  may  yet  improve.  "  Times 
are  bad,"  they  say;  yes,  and  if  you  go  gap- 


210         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

ing  about  and  send  your  wits  wool  gather- 
ing, times  always  will  be  bad. 

Many  don't  get  on  because  they  have  not 
the  pluck  to  begin  in  right  earnest.  The 
first  pound  laid  by  is  the  difficulty.  The 
first  blow  is  half  the  battle.  Over  with  that 
beer  jug,  up  with  the  "Try  "  flag,  then  out 
to  your  work  and  away  to  the  savings  bank 
with  the  savings,  and  you  will  be  a  man  yet. 
Poor  men  will  always  be  poor  if  they  think 
they  must  be.  But  there's  a  way  up  out 
of  the  lowest  poverty  if  a  man  looks  after  it 
early,  before  he  has  a  wife  and  half-a-dozen 
children :  after  that  he  carries  too  much 
weight  for  racing,  and  most  commonly  he 
must  be  content  if  he  finds  bread  for  the 
hungry  mouths  and  clothes  for  the  little 
backs.  Yet,  I  don't  know;  some  hens 
scratch  all  the  better  for  having  a  great 
swarm  of  chicks.  To  young  men  the  road 
up  the  hill  may  be  hard,  but  at  any  rate  it 
is  open,  and  they  who  set  stout  heart  against 
a  stiff  hill  shall  climb  it  yet.  What  was  hard 
to  bear  will  be  sweet  to  remember.  If  young 
men  would  deny  themselves,  work  hard, 
live  hard,  and  save  in  their  early  days,  they 
need  not  keep  their  noses  to  the  grindstone 


TRY.  211 

all  their  lives,  as  many  do.  Let  them  be 
teetotalers  for  economy's  sake ;  water  is  the 
strongest  drink,  it  drives  mills.  It's  the 
drink  of  lions  and  horses,  and  Samson 
never  drank  anything  else.  The  beer  money 
would  soon  build  a  house. 

If  you  want  to  do  good  in  the  world,  the 
little  word  "  Try  "  comes  in  again.  There 
are  plenty  of  ways  of  serving  God,  and  some 
that  will  fit  you  exactly  as  a  key  fits  a  lock. 
Don't  hold  back  because  you  cannot  preach 
in  St.  Paul's ;  be  content  to  talk  to  one  or 
two  in  a  cottage ;  very  good  wheat  grows 
in  little  fields.  You  may  cook  in  small  pots 
as  well  as  in  big  ones.  Little  pigeons  can 
carry  great  messages.  Even  a  little  dog  can 
bark  at  a  thief,  and  wake  up  the  master  and 
save  the  house.  A  spark  is  fire.  A  sen- 
tence of  truth  has  heaven  in  it.  Do  what 
you  do  right  thoroughly,  pray  over  it 
heartily,  and  leave  the  result  to  God. 

Alas !  advice  is  thrown  away  on  many, 
like  good  seed  on  a  bare  rock.  Teach  a 
cow  for  seven  years,  but  she  will  never  learn 
to  sing  the  Old  Hundredth.  Of  some  it 
seems  true  that  when  they  were  born  Solo- 
mon went  by  the  door,  but  would  not  look 


212  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

in.  Their  coat  of  arms  is  a  fool's  cap  on  a 
donkey's  head.  They  sleep  when  it  is  time 
to  plough,  and  weep  when  harvest  comes. 
They  eat  all  the  parsnips  for  supper,  and 
wonder  they  have  none  left  for  breakfast. 
Our  working  people  are  shamefully  un- 
thrifty, and  so  old  England  swarms  with 
poor.  If  what  goes  into  the  mash-tub 
went  into  the  kneading-trough,  families 
would  be  better  fed  and  better  taught. 
If  what  is  spent  in  waste  were  only  saved 
against  a  rainy  day,  work  houses  would 
never  be  built. 

Once  let  every  man  say  Try> 
Very  few  on  straw  would  lie, 
Fewer  still  of  want  would  die ; 
Pans  would  all  have  fish  to  fry; 
Pigs  would  fill  the  poor  man's  sty; 
Want  would  cease  and  need  would  fly; 
Wives  and  children  cease  to  cry; 
Poor  rates  would  not  swell  so  high ; 
Things  wouldn't  go  so  much  awry — 
You'd  be  glad,  and  so  would  I. 


MONUMENTS. 


"  Some  men  are  nothing  better  than  walking  beer  barrels  while  they 
live." — Page  214. 

EVERY  man  should  leave  a  monument 
behind  him  in  the  recollection  of  his 
own  life  by  his  neighbors.  There  must  be 
something  very  much  amiss  about  a  man 

(213) 


214         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

who  is  not  missed  when  he  dies.  A  good 
character  is  the  best  tombstone.  Those 
who  loved  you,  and  were  helped  by  you, 
will  remember  you  when  forget-me-nots  are 
withered.  Carve  your  name  on  hearts,  and 
not  on  marble.  So  live  towards  others  that 
they  will  keep  your  memory  green  when 
the  grass  grows  on  your  grave.  Let  us 
hope  there  will  be  something  better  to  be 
said  about  us  than  of  the  man  whose  epitaph 
is — 

"Here  lies  a  man  who  did  no  good, 
And  if  he'd  lived  he  never  would; 
Where  he's  gone,  and  how  he  fares, 
Nobody  knows  and  nobody  cares." 

May  our  friends  never  remember  us  as  great 
gormandizers  of  meat  and  drink,  like  the 
glutton  over  whose  grave  is  written — 

"  Gentle  reader,  gentle  reader, 
Look  on  the  spot  where  I  do  lie, 
I  always  was  a  very  good  feeder, 
But  now  the  worms  do  feed  on  I." 

As  much  as  that  might  be  said  of  a  prize 
pig,  or  a  fat  bullock,  if  it  died  of  disease. 
Some  men  are  nothing  better  than  walking 
beer  barrels  while  they  live  ;  when  death 


MONUMENTS.  215 

staves  in  the  cask,  they  deserve  to  rot  out 
of  notice. 

However,  a  plain-speaking  tombstone  is 
better  than  downright  lying.  To  put  flattery 
on  a  grave  is  like  pouring  melted  butter 
down  a  stone  sink.  What  queer  tastes 
those  must  have  who  puff  off  the  departed, 
as  if  they  wanted  to  blow  the  trumpet  of 
the  dead  before  the  last  angel  makes  his 
appearance !  Here's  an  apple  out  of  their 
basket — 

"  Here  lies  the  body  of  Martha  Gwyn, 
Who  was  so  very  pure  within  ; 
She  crack' d  the  outer  shell  of  sin, 
And  hatch' d  herself  a  cherubim.' ' 

Where  do  they  bury  the  bad  people? 
Right  and  left  in  our  churchyard,  they  seem 
all  to  have  been  the  best  of  folks,  a  regular 
nest  of  saints  ;  and  some  of  them  so  precious 
good,  it  is  no  wonder  they  died — they  were 
too  fine  to  live  in  such  a  wicked  world  as 
this.  Better  give  bread  to  the  poor  than 
stones  to  the  dead.  Better  kind  words  to 
the  living  than  fine  speeches  over  the  grave. 
Some  of  the  fulsome  stuff  on  monuments  is 
enough  to  make  a  dead  man  blush. 


216         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

What  heaps  of  marble  are  stuck  over 
many  big  people's  tombs  !  Half  enough  to 
build  a  house  with !  What  a  lift  they  will 
have  at  the  resurrection  !  It  makes  me  feel 
as  if  I  could  not  get  my  breath  to  think  of 
all  those  stones  being  heaped  on  my  bones  ; 
not  that  there's  any  fear  of  it.  Let  the 
earth  which  I  have  turned  over  so  often  lie 
light  upon  my  corpse  when  it  is  turned  over 
me.  Let  John  Ploughman  be  buried  some- 
where under  the  boughs  of  a  spreading 
beech,  with  a  green  grass  mound  above 
him,  out  of  which  primroses  and  daisies 
peep  in  their  season :  a  quiet  shady  spot 
where  the  leaves  fall,  and  the  robins  play, 
and  the  dewdrops  gleam  in  the  sunshine. 
Let  the  wind  blow  fresh  and  free  over  my 
grave,  and  if  there  must  be  a  line  about  me, 
let  it  be— 


JOHN    PLOUGHMAN, 

waiting  for  the  appearing  of  his 

Lord  and  Saviour, 

Jesus  Christ. 

IVe  often  heard  tell  of  patience  on  a  monu- 


MONUMENTS.  217 

ment,  but  I  have  never  seen  it  sitting  there 
when  I  have  gone  through  churchyards; 
I  have  a  good  many  times  seen  stupidity  on 
a  monument,  and  I  have  wondered  why  the 
parson,  or  the  churchwarden,  or  the  beadle, 
or  whoever  else  has  the  ruling  of  things, 
let  people  cut  such  rubbish  on  the  stones. 
Why,  a  Glos'tershire  man  told  me  that  at 
Dymock  graveyard  there's  a  writing  like 
this— 


"  Too  sweetur  babes  you  nare  did  see 
Than  God  amity  gave  to  wee  ; 
But  they  wur  ortaken  wee  agur  fits, 
And  hear  they  lys  has  dead  as  nits." 


IVe  read  pretty  near  enough  silly  things 
myself  in  our  Surrey  burying-grounds  to 
fill  a  book.  Better  leave  the  grave  alone 
than  set  up  a  monument  to  your  own  igno- 
rance. 

Of  all  places  for  jokes  and  fun  the  queerest 
are  tombstones,  yet  many  a  time  gravestones 
have  had  such  oddities  carved  upon  them 
that  one  is  led  to  think,  the  nearer  the  church 
the  further  from  common  decency.  This  is 
a  cruel  verse,  but  I  dare  say  a  true  one : 


218         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S  TALK. 

"  Here  lies,  return' d  to  clay, 
Miss  Arabella  Young, 
Who  on  the  first  of  May 
Began  to  hold  her  tongue." 

This  is  not  much  better : 


"  John  Adams  lies  here,  of  the  parish  Southwell, 
A  carrier  who  carried  his  can  to  his  mouth  well ; 
He  carried  so  much,  and  he  carried  so  fast, 
He  could  carry  no  more,  so  was  carried  at  last; 
For  the  liquor  he  drunk  being  too  much  for  one, 
He  could  not  carry  off,  so  he's  now  carri-on" 

Why  could  not  these  people  poke  their  fun 
somewhere  else  ?  A  man's  wit  must  be 
nearly  dead  when  he  can  find  no  place  for  it 
but  the  grave.  The  body  of  the  raggedest 
beggar  is  too  sacred  a  thing  to  crack  jokes 
upon.  What  a  queer  fish  must  Roger 
Martin  have  been,  who  lived  in  Walworth, 
and  put  on  his  wife's  tomb — 

"  Here  lies  the  wife  of  Roger  Martin, 
She  was  a  good  wife  to  Roger — that's  sartain." 

And  whoever  was  the  foolish  creature  at 
Ockham,  one  of  the  prettiest  spots  in  these 
parts,  who  wrote  these  outrageous  lines  ? 


MONUMENTS.  219 

u  The  Lord  saw  good,  I  was  topping  off  wood, 
And  down  fell  from  the  tree  ; 
I  met  with  a  check,  and  I  broke  my  blessed  neck, 
And  so  death  topped  off  me/' 

There,  that's  enough,  and  quite  as  good 
as  a  feast.  Here's  proof  positive  that  some 
fools  are  left  alive  to  write  on  the  monu- 
ments of  those  who  are  buried.  Well  may 
there  be  ghosts  about.  No  wonder  the 
sleepers  get  out  of  bed  when  they  are  so 
badly  tucked  in.  I  say  let  us  have  a  lawT  to 
let  nobody  put  nonsense  over  the  dead  un- 
less he  likes  to  take  out  a  certificate  to  be 
an  ass,  just  like  the  license  to  shoot  patridges 
and  pheasants.  At  the  same  time,  let  all 
puffery  be  saved  for  drapers'  shops  and 
quack  doctors,  and  none  be  allowed  at  the 
grave.     I  say  as  our  minister  does — 


"  Let  no  proud  stone  with  sculptur'd  virtues  rise, 
To  mark  the  spot  wherein  a  sinner  lies, 
Or  if  some  boast  must  deck  the  sinner's  grave, 
Boast  of  His  love  who  died  lost  man  to  save." 


One  more  Surrey  rhyme,  and  John 
Ploughman  leaves  the  churchyard  to  go 
about  his   work,    and   turn   up  other  sods. 


220  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK. 

It  is  in  St.  Saviour's,  Southwark,  and  is,  I 
think,  a  rare  good  one. 

"  Like  to  the  damask  rose  you  see, 
Or  like  the  blossom  on  the  tree, 
Or  like  the  dainty  flow'r  of  May, 
Or  like  the  morning  of  the  day, 
Or  like  the  sun,  or  like  the  shade, 
Or  like  the  gourd  which  Jonah  had ; 
Even  so  is  man,  whose  thread  is  spun, 
Drawn  out,  and  cut,  and  so  is  done  : 
The  rose  withers,  the  blossom  blasteth, 
The  flower  fades,  the  morning  hasteth, 
The  sun  sets,  the  shadow  flies, 
The  gourd  consumes,  and  man  he  dies." 


VERY  IGNORANT   PEOPLE. 


"The  fox  admires  the  cheese,  not  the  raven." — Page  229. 

I  HAVE  heard  tell  of  a  man  who  did 
not  know  a  great  A  from  a  bull's  foot, 
and  I  know  a  good  many  who  certainly 
could   not   tell  what    great  A  or   little  A 

(221) 


222  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

either  may  mean ;  but  some  of  these  peo- 
ple are  not  the  most  ignorant  in  the  world 
for  all  that.  For  instance,  they  know  a 
cow's  head  from  its  tail,  and  one  of  the 
election  gentlemen  said  lately  that  the  can- 
didate from  London  did  not  know  that. 
They  know  that  turnips  don't  grow  on  trees, 
and  they  can  tell  a  mangold-wurtzel  from  a 
beet  root,  and  a  rabbit  from  a  hare,  and 
there  are  fine  folk  who  play  on  pianos  who 
hardly  know  as  much  as  that.  If  they  can- 
not read  they  can  plough,  and  mow,  and 
reap,  and  sow,  and  bring  up  seven  children 
on  ten  shillings  a-week,  and  yet  pay  their 
wray ;  and  there's  a  sight  of  people  who  are 
much  too  ignorant  to  do  that.  Ignorance 
of  spelling  books  is  very  bad,  but  ignorance 
of  hard  work  is  worse.  Wisdom  does  not 
always  speak  Latin.  People  laugh  at 
smock-frocks,  and  indeed  they  are  about  as 
ugly  garments  as  could  well  be  contrived, 
but  some  who  wear  them  are  not  half  such 
fools  as  people  take  them  for.  If  no  igno- 
rant people  ate  bread  but  those  who  wear 
hobnail  shoes,  corn  would  be  a  fine  deal 
cheaper.  Wisdom  in  a  poor  man  is  like  a 
diamond    set    in    lead,  for   none  but   good 


VERY  IGNORANT  PEOPLE.  223 

judges  can  discover  its  value.  Wisdom 
walks  often  in  patched  clothes,  and  then 
folks  do  not  admire  her;  but  I  say,  never 
mind  the  coat,  give  me  the  man :  shells  are 
nothing,  the  kernel  is  everything.  You 
need  not  go  to  Pirbright  to  find  ignoram- 
uses, there  are  heaps  of  them  near  St.  Paul's. 
I  would  have  everybody  able  to  read, 
and  write,  and  cipher;  indeed,  I  don't  think 
a  man  can  know  too  much ;  but  mark  you, 
the  knowing  of  these  things  is  not  educa- 
tion ;  and  there  are  millions  of  your  read- 
ing and  writing  people  who  are  as  ignorant 
as  neighbor  Norton's  calf,  that  did  not 
know  its  own  mother.  This  is  as  plain  as  the 
nose  on  your  face,  if  you  only  think  a  little. 
To  know  how  to  read  and  write  is  like 
having  tools  to  work,  but  if  you  don't  use 
these  tools,  and  your  eyes,  and  your  ears 
too,  you  will  be  none  the  better  off.  Every- 
body should  know  what  most  concerns  him 
and  makes  him  most  useful.  If  cats  can 
catch  mice  and  hens  can  lay  eggs,  they 
know  the  things  which  most  suits  what  they 
wrere  made  for.  It  is  little  use  for  a  horse 
to  know  how  to  fly,  it  will  do  well  enough 
if  it  can  trot.     A  man  on  a  farm  ought  to 


224         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

learn  all  that  belongs  to  farming,  a  black- 
smith should  study  a  horse's  foot,  a  dairy- 
maid should  be  well  up  in  skimming  the 
milk  and  making  the  butter,  and  a  laborer's 
wife  should  be  a  good  scholar  in  the 
sciences  of  boiling  and  baking,  washing 
and  mending;  and  John  Ploughman  ven- 
tures to  say  that  those  men  and  women 
who  have  not  learned  the  duties  of  their 
callings  are  very  ignorant  people,  even  if 
they  can  tell  the  Greek  name  for  a  croco- 
dile, or  write  a  poem  on  a  black  beetle.  It 
is  too  often  very  true — 


*  Jack  has  been  to  school 
To  learn  to  be  a  fool." 


When  a  man  falls  into  the  water,  to  know 
how  to  swim  will  be  of  more  use  to  him 
than  all  his  mathematics,  and  yet  how  very 
few  boys  learn  swimming  !  Girls  are  taught 
dancing  and  French  when  stitching  and 
English  would  be  a  hundred  per  cent,  more 
use  to  them.  When  men  have  to  earn 
their  livings,  in  these  hard  times,  a  good 
trade  and  industrious  habits  will  serve  their 
turn  a  world  better  than  all  the  classics  in 


VERY  IGNORANT  PEOPLE.  225 

Cambridge  and  Oxford  :  but  who  nowadays 
advocates  practical  training  at  our  schools  ? 
Schoolmasters  would  go  into  fits  if  they 
were  asked  to  teach  poor  people's  boys  to 
hoe  potatoes  and  plant  cauliflowers,  and 
yet  school  boards  would  be  doing  a  power 
of  good  if  they  did  something  of  the  sort. 
If  you  want  a  dog  to  be  a  pointer  or  a  set- 
ter, you  train  him  accordingly :  why  ever 
don't  they  do  the  same  with  men  ?  It 
ought  to  be  "  every  man  for  his  business, 
and  every  man  master  of  his  business."  Let 
Jack  and  Tom  learn  geography  by  all 
means,  but  don't  forget  to  teach  them  how 
to  black  their  own  boots,  and  put  a  button 
onto  their  own  trousers ;  and  as  for  Jane  and 
Sally,  let  them  sing  and  play  the  music  if 
they  like,  but  not  till  they  can  darn  a  stock- 
ing and  make  a  shirt.  When  they  mend 
up  that  Education  Act  I  hope  they  will  put 
in  a  clause  to  teach  children  practical  com- 
mon-sense home  duties  as  well  as  the  three 
R's.  But  there,  what's  the  use  of  talking 
this  way,  for  if  children  are  to  learn  com- 
mon sense  where  are  we  to  get  the  teachers  ? 
Very  few  people  have  any  of  it  to  spare, 
and  those  who  have  are  never  likely  to  take 
*5 


226  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

to  school  keeping.  Lots  of  girls  learn 
nothing  except  the  folderols  which  I  think 
they  call  "  accomplishments."  There's 
poor  Gent  with  six  girls,  and  about  fifty 
pounds  a-year  to  keep  his  family  on,  and 
yet  not  one  of  them  can  do  a  hand's  turn, 
because  their  mother  would  go  into  fits  lest 
Miss  Sophia  Elfrida  should  have  chapped 
hands  through  washing  the  family  linen,  or 
lest  Alexandra  Theodora  should  spoil  her 
complexion  in  picking  a  few  gooseberries 
for  a  pudding.  It's  enough  to  make  a  cat 
laugh  to  hear  the  poor  things  talk  about 
fashion  and  etiquette,  when  they  are  not 
half  as  well  off  as  the  higgler's  daughters 
down  the  lane,  who  earn  their  own  living, 
and  are  laying  money  by  against  the  time 
when  some  young  farmer  will  pick  them  up. 
Trust  me,  he  who  marries  these  highty- 
tighty  young  ladies  will  have  as  bad  a  bar- 
gain as  if  he  married  a  wax  doll.  How  the 
fat  would  be  in  the  fire  if  Mrs.  Gent  heard 
me  say  it,  but  I  do  say  it  for  all  that, — she 
and  her  girls  are  ignorant,  very  ignorant,  be- 
cause they  do  not  know  what  would  be  of 
most  service  to  them. 
Every  spratciowadays  calls  itself  a  herring : 


VERY  IGNORANT  PEOPLE.  227 

every  donkey  thinks  itself  fit  to  be  one  of 
the  queen's  horses ;  every  candle  reckons 
itself  the  sun.  But  when  a  man  with  his 
best  coat  on,  and  a  paper  collar,  a  glass  in 
his  eye,  a  brass  chain  on  his  waistcoat,  a 
cane  in  his  hand,  and  emptiness  in  his  head, 
fancies  that  people  cannot  see  through  his 
swaggers  and  brags,  he  must  be  ignorant, 
very  ignorant,  for  he  does  not  know  him- 
self. Flats,  dressed  up  to  the  top  of  the 
fashion,  think  themselves  somebodies,  but 
nobody  else  does.  Dancing  masters  and 
tailors  may  rig  up  a  fop,  but  they  cannot 
make  a  nothing  into  a  man.  You  may  color  a 
millstone  as  much  as  you  like,  but  you  can- 
not improve  it  into  a  cheese. 

Round  our  part  we  have  a  lot  of  poets, 
at  least  a  set  of  very  ignorant  people  who 
think  they  are;  and  these  folks  worry  me 
more  than  a  little  because  I  have  written  a 
book,  and  therefore  ought  to  listen  to  their 
rigmaroles.  Nonsense  is  nonsense  whether 
it  rhymes  or  not,  just  as  bad  halfpennies 
are  good  for  nothing  whether  they  jingle  or 
lie  quiet.  "  Here,  John,"  said  a  man  to  me, 
"  I  want  to  read  you  some  of  my  verses." 
"  No,  thank  you,"  said  I,  "  I  don't  feel  in  a 


228  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK. 

poetical  frame  of  mind  to-day."  Mark  you, 
I  shan't  feel  a  bit  more  so  to-morrow. 
What  right  has  that  fellow  to  shoot  his 
rubbish  at  my  door  ?  I  have  enough  of  my 
own.  I  don't  intend  to  have  my  ear  stuffed 
up  with  cobbler's  wax  or  cobbled  verses. 
I  had  a  double  dose  the  other  morning  from 
two  of  our  great  village  poets,  and  I  must 
confess  it  was  rather  better  than  most  of  the 
rhymes  that  I  meet  with  in  books.  Chub- 
bins  said, 

"  It  is  a  sin  to  steal  a  pin," 

And  then  Padley  topped  it  up  by  adding, 

"  It  is  a  greater  to  steal  a  tater." 

Now,  there's  rhyme  and  reason  for  you,  as 
the  sexton  said  when  he  wrote  three  lines 
for  the  poor  man's  tombstone: 

"  Here  I  lie, 
Killed  by  a  sky- 
Rocket  in  my  eye." 

When  tradesmen  put  their  earnings  into 
companies  and  expect  to  see  it  again  ;  when 
they  lend  money  at  outrageous  interest  and 
think  to  make  their  fortunes  by  it,  they  must 
be  ignorant,  very  ignorant.     As  well  hang  a 


VERY  IGNORANT  PEOPLE.  229 

wooden  kettle  over  the  fire  to  boil  the 
water  for  tea,  or  sow  beans  in  a  river  and 
look  for  a  fine  crop. 

When  men  believe  in  lawyers  and  money- 
lenders (whether  Jews  or  Gentiles),  and  bor- 
row money,  and  speculate,  and  think  them- 
selves lucky  fellows,  they  are  shamefully 
ignorant.  The  very  gander  on  the  com- 
mon would  not  make  such  a  stupid  of  him- 
self, for  he  knows  when  anyone  tries  to 
pluck  him,  and  won't  lose  his  feathers  and 
pride  himself  in  the  operation. 

The  man  who  spends  his  money  with 
the  publican,  and  thinks  that  the  landlord's 
bows  and  "  How  do  ye  do,  my  good  fellow  ?  " 
mean  true  respect,  is  a  perfect  natural ;  for 
with  them  it  is — 


If  you  have  money,  take  a  seat ; 
If  you  have  none,  take  to  your  f 


feet. 

The  fox  admires  the  cheese ;  if  it  were  not 
for  that  he  would  not  care  a  rap  for  the 
raven.  The  bait  is  not  put  in  to  the  trap  to 
feed  the  mouse,  but  to  catch  him.  We 
don't  light  a  fire  for  the  herring's  comfort, 
but  to  roast  him  for  our  own  eating.  Men 
do  not    keep  pot-houses  for  the  laborer's 


230         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

good ;  if  they  do,  they  certainly  miss  their 
aim.  Why,  then,  should  people  drink  "  for 
the  good  of  the  house "  ?  If  I  spend 
money  for  the  good  of  any  house  let  it  be 
my  own  and  not  the  landlord's.  It's  a  bad 
well  into  which  you  must  put  water;  and 
the  beerhouse  is  a  bad  friend,  because  it 
takes  your  all,  and  leaves  you  nothing  but 
heeltaps  and  headaches.  He  who  calls 
those  his  friends  who  let  him  sit  and  drink 
by  the  hour  together,  is  ignorant,  very  ig- 
norant. Why,  Red  Lions,  and  Tigers,  and 
Eagles,  and  Vultures,  are  all  creatures  of 
prey,  and  none  but  fools  put  themselves 
within  the  power  of  their  jaws  and  talons. 

He  who  believes  that  either  Whigs  or 
Tories  will  let  us  off  with  light  taxes  must 
have  been  born  on  the  day  after  the  last  of 
March;  and  he  who  imagines  that  parish 
boards  and  vestries  will  ever  be  free  from 
jobbery  must  have  been  educated  in  an 
idiot  asylum.  He  who  believes  in  promises 
made  at  elections  has  long  ears,  and  may 
try  to  eat  thistles.  Mr.  Plausible  has  been 
around  asking  all  the  workingmen  for  their 
votes,  and  he  will  do  all  sorts  of  good 
things  for  them.     Will  he  ?     Yes,  the  day 


VERY  IGNORANT  PEOPLE.  231 

after  to-morrow — a  little  later  than  never. 
Poor  men  who  expect  the  "  friends  of  the 
workingman  "  to  do  anything  for  them, 
must  be  ignorant,  very  ignorant.  When 
they  get  their  seats,  of  course  they  cannot 
stand  up  for  their  principles  except  when  it 
is  to  their  own  interest  to  do  so. 

To  lend  umbrellas  and  look  to  have  them 
sent  home,  to  do  a  man  a  good  turn  and 
expect  another  from  him  when  you  want 
it,  to  dream  of  stopping  some  women's 
tongues,  to  try  to  please  everybody,  to  hope 
to  hear  gossips  speak  well  of  you,  or  to 
reckon  upon  getting  the  truth  of  a  story 
from  common  report,  are  all  evidences  of 
great  ignorance.  Those  who  know  the 
world  best  trust  it  least :  those  who  trust  it 
at  all  are  not  wise ;  as  well  trust  a  horse's 
heel  or  a  dog's  tooth  !  Trusting  to  others 
ruins  many.  He  who  leaves  his  business  to 
bailiffs  and  servants,  and  believes  it  will  be 
well  done,  must  be  ignorant,  very  ignorant. 
The  mouse  knows  when  the  cat  is  out  of 
the  house,  and  servants  know  when  the 
master  is  away.  No  sooner  is  the  eye  of 
the  master  gone  than  the  hand  of  the  work- 
man slackens ;  at  least,  it  is  so  nine  times 


232  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK. 

out  of  ten.  "  I'll  go  myself,"  and  "  I'll  see 
to  it,"  are  two  good  servants  on  a  farm. 
Those  who  lie  in  bed,  and  bolster  themselves 
up  with  the  notion  that  their  trade  will  carry- 
on  itself,  are  ignorant,  very  ignorant. 

Such  as  drink  and  live  riotously,  and  won- 
der why  their  faces  are  so  blotchy  and  their 
pockets  so  bare,  would  leave  off  wondering 
if  they  had  two  grains  of  wisdom.  Those 
who  go  to  the  public-house  for  happiness 
climb  a  tree  to  find  fish.  We  might  put  all 
their  wit  in  an  eggshell,  or  they  would 
never  be  such  dupes  as  to  hunt  after  com- 
fort where  it  is  no  more  to  be  found  than  a 
cow  in  a  crow's  nest ;  but,  alas !  good-for- 
nothings  are  common  as  mice  in  a  wheat- 
rick.  I  only  wish  we  could  pack  them  off 
to  Lubberland,  where  they  have  half-a- 
croWn  a  day  for  sleeping.  If  some  one 
could  let  loose  fellows  see  the  sure  result  of 
ill-living,  perhaps  they  might  reform ;  and 
yet  I  don't  know,  for  they  do  see  it,  and  yet 
go  on  all  the  same ;  like  a  moth  that  burns 
its  wings  in  the  flame  and  yet  dashes  into 
the  candle  again.  Certainly  for  loitering 
lushingtons  to  expect  to  thrive  by  keeping 
their  hands  in  their  pockets,   or  their  noses 


VER  Y  IGNORANT  PEOPLE.  233 

in  pewter  pots,  proves  them  to  be  ignorant, 
very  ignorant. 

When  I  see  a  young  lady  with  a  flower 
garden  on  her  roof,  and  a  draper's  shop  on 
her  body,  tossing  her  head  about  as  if  she 
thought  everybody  was  charmed  with  her, 
I  am  sure  she  must  be  ignorant,  very  ig- 
norant. Sensible  men  don't  marry  a  ward- 
robe or  a  bonnet-box ;  they  want  a  woman 
of  sense,  and  women  of  that  kind  always 
dress  sensibly,  and  not  gaudily. 

To  my  mind,  those  who  sneer  at  religion, 
and  set  themselves  up  to  be  too  knowing  to 
believe  in  the  Bible,  are  shallow  fellows. 
They  generally  use  big  wTords,  and  bluster 
a  great  deal,  but  if  they  fancy  they  can 
overturn  the  faith  of  thinking  people,  who 
have  tried  and  proved  the  power  of  the 
grace  of  God,  they  must  be  ignorant,  very 
ignorant.  He  who  looks  at  the  sunrise  and 
the  sunset,  and  does  not  see  the  footprints 
of  God,  must  be  inwardly  blinder  than  a 
mole,  and  only  fit  to  live  underground. 
God  seems  to  talk  to  me  in  every  primrose 
and  daisy,  to  smile  upon  me  from  every  star, 
to  whisper  to  me  in  every  breath  of  morn- 
ing air,  and  to  call  aloud  to  me  in  every 


234         JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S   TALK. 

storm.  It  is  strange  that  so  many  educated 
gentlemen  see  God  nowhere,  while  John  the 
ploughman  feels  him  everywhere.  John 
has  no  wish  to  change  places,  for  the  sense 
of  God's  presence  is  his  comfort  and  joy. 
They  say  that  man  is  the  god  of  the  dog : 
those  men  must  be  worse  than  dogs  who 
will  not  listen  to  the  voice  of  God,  for  a 
dog  obeys  its  master's  whistle.  They  call 
themselves  "  philosophers,"  don't  they? 
Their  proper  name  is  fools,  for  the  fool  hath 
said  in  his  heart,  "  There  is  no  God."  The 
sheep  know  when  rain  is  coming,  the  swal- 
lows foresee  the  winter,  and  even  the  pigs, 
they  say,  can  see  the  wind;  how  much 
worse  than  a  brute  must  he  be  who  lives 
where  God  is  everywhere  present,  and  yet 
sees  him  not !  Thus  it  is  very  clear  that  a 
man  may  be  a  great  hand  at  learning  and 
yet  be  ignorant,  very  ignorant. 


FINIS. 


ttbe  aitemus  TLibxaty. 

A  choice  collection  of  Standard  and  Popular  books, 
handsomely  printed  on  fine  paper,  from  large  clear  type, 
and  bound  in  faultless  styles  in  handy  volume  size : 

1.  Sesame  and  Lilies.     3  Lectures.    By  John  Ruskin. 

I.  Of  King's  Treasuries. 
II.  Of  Queen's  Gardens. 
III.  Of  the  Mystery  of  Life. 

2.  The  Pleasures  of  Life.     By  Sir  John  Lubbock. 

Complete  in  one  volume.     (Contains  the  list  of 
The  100  Best  Books.) 

3.  The  Essays  of  Lord  Francis  Bacon,  with  Memoirs 

and  Notes. 

4.  Thoughts  of  the  Emperor  Marcus  Aurelius  Anto- 

ninus.    Translated  by  George  Long. 

5.  A  Selection  from  the  Discourses  of  Epictetus,  with 

the  Encheridion.     Translated  by  George  Long. 

6.  Essays,  First  Series.     Ey  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson. 

7.  Essays,  Second  Series.    By  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson. 

8.  Cranford.     By  Mrs  Gaskell. 

9.  Of  the  Imitation   of   Christ.     Four  books  com- 

plete in  one  volume.     By  Thomas  A'Kempis. 

10.  The  Vicar  of  Wakefield.     By  Oliver  Goldsmith. 

11.  Letters,  Sentences  and  Maxims.     By  Lord  Ches- 

terfield.    "  Masterpieces  of   good   taste,  good 
writing,  and  good  sense." 

12.  The  Idle  Thoughts  of  an  Idle  Fellow.     A  book 

for  an  Idle  Holiday.     By  Jerome  K.  Jerome. 

13.  Tales  from  Shakespeare.     By  Charles  and  Mary 

Lamb,  with  an  introduction  by  Rev.  Alfred 
Ainger,  M.  A. 

(375) 


XTbe  Sltemus  library 

14.  Natural  Law  in  the  Spiritual  World.     By  Henry 

Drummond,  F.  R.  S.  E.,  F.  G.  S.  The  rela- 
tions of  Science  and  Religion  clearly  expounded. 

15.  Addresses.     By  Henry  Drummond,  F.  R.  S.  E., 

F.  G.  S.  The  Greatest  Thing  in  the  World ; 
PaxVobiscum;  The  Changed  Life;  How  to 
Learn  How;  Dealing  with  Doubt;  Prepara- 
tion for  Learning ;  What  is  a  Christian  ?  The 
Study  of  the  Bible ;  A  Talk  on  Books. 

16.  u  My  Point  of  View."     Representative  selections 

from  the  works  of  Professor  Drummond.  By 
William  Shepard. 

17.  The  Scarlet  Letter.     By  Nathaniel  Hawthorne. 

18.  Representative  Men.     Seven  lectures.     By  Ralph 

Waldo  Emerson. 

19.  My  King  and  His  Service.     By  Frances  Ridle/ 

Havergal.  Containing — My  King;  Royal 
Commandments;  Royal  Bounty;  Royal  Invi- 
tation ;  Loyal  Responses. 

20.  Reveries  of  a  Bachelor.     By  Ik  Marvel.     A  Book 

of  the  Heart. 

21.  The  House  of  the  Seven  Gables.     By  Nathaniel 

Hawthorne. 

22.  Dream    Life.     By   Ik    Marvel.      A  Companion 

volume  to  Reveries  of  a  Bachelor. 

23.  Rab  and    His   Friends,  Marjorie  Fleming,  etc* 

By  John  Brown. 

24.  Essays  of  Elia.     By  Charles  Lamb. 

25.  Sartor  Resartus.     By  Thomas  Carlyle. 

26.  Heroes  and  Hero  Worship.     By  Thomas  Carlyle. 


Kbe  Bltemus  TLibtzvy. 

27.  Ethics  of  the  Dust.     By  John  Ruskin. 

28.  A  Window  in  Thrums.     By  J.  M.  Barrie. 

29.  Mosses    from    an    Old    Manse.     By   Nathaniel 

Hawthorne. 

30.  Twice-Told  Tales.     By  Nathaniel    Hawthorne. 

31.  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin.     By  Harriet  Beecher  Stowe. 

32.  The  Sketch  Book.     By  Washington  Irving. 
2^.  Greek  Heroes.     By  Charles  Kings! ey. 

34.  Undine.     By  De  La  Molte  Fouque. 

35.  A  Wonder  Book.     By  Nathaniel  Hawthorne. 

36.  Balzac's  Shorter  Stories. 

37.  Two  Years  Before  the  Mast.     By  R.  H.  Dana,  Jr. 
3$.  Autobiography  of  Benjamin  Franklin. 

39.  Weird  Tales.     By  Edgar  iUlan  Poe. 

40.  The  Crown  of  Wild  Olive.     By  John  Ruskin. 

41.  Tom  Brown's  School  Days.     By  Thomas  Hughes. 

Cloth,  various  handsome  designs  stamped  in  gold  and 
silver,  .  •         •         •         75  cents. 

Half-crushed  levant,  super-extra  hand-finished,  gold 
tops,  untrimmed  edges,  sewn  with  silk,      .         $1.50. 

Half-genuine  English  calf,  super-extra  hand-finished, 
gold  tops,  untrimmed  edges,  sewn  with  silk,  .    $2.00. 

HENRY  ALTEMUS,  Publisher,   Philadelphia, 


H    12*   81 


cP 


♦^    * 


**" 


*«<&  ■  * 


,^% 


vV-* 


iT)  *«  _    .  *  A. 


o  V 


4  0. 


&        ,  o  *  •  .       <> 


»0^  v 


'  l« 


VV 


<>..  *••* 


LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS  ^1 

0  021  899  102  6 


