
Full text of "The Metropolitan Tabernacle pulpit : sermons"
See other formats
Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


THE 


Metropolitan  Tabernacle 

Pulpit. 


^triiioii5  Irtaikb  imb  ^tiristir 


IJY 


C.    H.    SPURGEON, 


DURING  THE  YEAR  1871. 


VOL.  XVI r. 


s    s      s  «  « 

*  *         *       » 


*  « 


*     * 


*  '  t  *  *  *  *  *    • 

*  t»  ••    •  • 

*  »       «  t  s  *  *     t 

•  *  *  *         *    s 


*   *  *  »    *  » t         *         t  t      *       * 
**      *  »  •»*       ,     *    *    J 


4  « 


3^0nbon: 

PASSMORE   &  ALAI5ASTKR,    i8,  PATKRNOSTER   ROW. 


ENTERED   AT   STATIOXERb'   HALL. 

1872. 


TIIK  t:t:"l  <■:■■; 
PUBLIC  LFr'.AKY 

810^18 


TO 
THE  ONE  GOD  OF  HEAVEN  AND  EARTH, 

IN 
THE     TRINITY    OF     HIS     SACRED     PERSONS, 

BE  ALL  HONOUR  AND  GLORY, 

WORLD  WITHOUT  END, 
AMEN. 

TO  THE  GLORIOUS  FATHER  AS  THE  COVENANT  GOD 

OF  ISRAEL  ; 

-TO  THE  GRACIOUS  SON,  THE  REDEEMER  OF  HIS  PEOPLE; 

TO  THE  HOLY  GHOST  THE  AUTHOR  OF 
SANCTIFICATION; 

13E  EVERLASTING  PRAISE  FOR  THAT  GOSPEL  OF  THE 


»  .  • 


FREE  GRACE  OF  GOD, 
HEREIN  PROCLAIMED  UNTO  MEN. 


•  •  »     <     *    < 

»  »        »  »  *  •  • 


•       «      < 

•      •  • 


'    *    »     •  •     *    •   ,        •  ,  - 

•     »    . »    » ,      , » 


t :  . ••    •  •  •••  •• 

...•,.;•.. 


•  -• 


■     -  •  ' 


CONTENTS. 


N.-».  Pa?:** 

{^^^      Life  in  Christ...        ..•        •••        ...        •••        •••        •••       1 

"  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also."— John  riv.  11». 

%'u«/      xtiCsCy  x«esu      ...        •••        ...        •■•        •••        •••        •>•     io 

**  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  tliat  labour  and  are  heavj'  laden,  and  I  will  givo 
you  rest  Take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me ;  for  I  am  meek  and 
lowly  in  heart :  and  ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  soub.  For  my  yoke  is 
easy,  and  my  burden  is  light." — Matthew  xi.  28 — 30. 

070  The  Lost  Silver  Piece  25 

"  Either  what  woman  having  ten  pieces  of  silver,  if  she  lose  one  piece, 
doth  not  light  a  candle,  and  sweep  the  house,  and  seek  diligently  till  she  find 
it  ?  And  when  she  hath  found  it,  she  calleth  her  friends  and  her  neighbours 
together,  saying,  Eejoico  with  me ;  for  I  have  found  the  piece  which  I  hud 
h>8t  Likewise,  I  say  unto  you,  there  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angilH 
of  God  over  one  sinner  that  ropentcth." — Luke  xv.  8 — 10. 

071  The  Open  Fountain 37 

"  In  that  day  there  shall  be  a  fountain  opened  to  the  house  of  David 
and  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness." — 
Zechariah  xiii.  1. 


.»  a 


9       a 


072  New  Uses  for  Old  Trophies ^.;,.   v  v..    V  '-i/  ;  '49' 

'*  King  David's  spears  and  shields,   that  were  in  ^tJSi*  temjjle.'  of  Zi\rC  - 
Lord."— 2  Kings  xi  10.  t     *,,-:/-      ' '. 

073  The  Power  of  Christ  Illustrated  by  the  Re^u^^eotioa  /:    ...     61 

%        m 

"  For  our  conversation  is  in  heaven ;  from  whence  also  we  look  for 
the  Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ:  who  shall  change  our  vile  body, 
that  it  may  be  fashioned  like  unto  his  glorious  body,  according  to  tlie 
working  wherebj'  he  is  able  even  to  subdue  all  things  unto  himself." — 
Philippians  iii.  20,  21. 

074  Compassion  for  Souls  73 

"  She  went,  and  sat  her  down  over  against  him  a  good  way  off,  as  it 
were  a  bowshot ;  for  she  said.  Let  me  not  see  the  death  of  the  cmld.  And 
she  sat  over  against  him,  and  lift  up  her  voice,  and  wept" — Genesis  xxL  IC. 


▼1.  CONTENTS. 

Nt».  Page 

D75      Tlie  Parable  of  the  AVcdding  Feast  85- 

"  Thf  kiugdom  of  lieavcu  is  lik*'  unto  a  certaiu  kin  jr.  which  niado  a  iiiar- 
riaj^c  fur  hiH  son,  and  8t.»nt  forth  his  siTvanta  to  (•all  them  that  won*  bidden 
to  the  \Vf<lding:  and  thoy  wouUl  not  conn*.  Aijain,  he  sent  forth  oth<*r 
wrvants,  paring,  Tell  them  wliich  are  bidden.  Bfhohl,  1  have  premrcd  my 
dinner:  niy  oxi«n  and  my  fatlings  an*  killetl,  and  all  things  are  ready :  come 
unto  the  marriage." — Matthew  xxii.  *2,  3,  L. 

07G      The  AVedding  Garment  ...         ...         ...         ...         ...      97 

'"  And  wlien  the  king  came  in  to  see  the  guests,  he  siw  there  a  man  which 
had  not  t>n  a  weddi:ig garment :  and  he  s-iith  nnti»  him.  Friend,  how  earnest 
thou  in  hither  not  hav'ng  a  wc<lding  gannent?  And  he  was  spct'chless. 
Then  sjiid  the  king  to  the  servants,  Lind  him  hand  and  f(K)t,  and  take  him 
away,  and  cast  him  int<»  outer  darkness  ;  there  shall  be  weeping  and  gna>h- 
ing  of  teeth.  For  many  are  called,  but  few  are  chosen." — Matthew  xxii. 
11-11. 

977  Tlie  Master's  Profession — The  Disciple's  Pursuit 100 

'*  I  have  i>reached  nghttHmsness  in  the  groat  cong^'egaticm :  lo,  I  have 
not  refniined  my  lips,  O  Lord,  thou  knowest.  I  liave  not  hid  thy  righteous- 
n«»s8  within  my  hi».«rt  ;  I  have  declaretl  thy  faithfulness  an«l  thy  sjilvatioii : 
I  have  n«)t  ron<M*ah'd  thy  lovingkindneas  and  thy  truth  from  the  great  con- 
grcg:\ti«>n."— Pwilm  xl.  0,  10. 

978  All  Fuhicss  in  Christ  ...    121 

*-F<ir  it  pleased  the  Father  that  in  him  shov.M  all  fuln(33  dwell.'' — 
Colossians  i.  V.K 

970     Faitli  and  Rc<^eneration        ...    13J 

*'  Whosoevor  lM»lieveth  that  Jesus  is  the  Cliristis  bi^^rn  of  Goil :  and  every 
one  that  h>veth  him  that  begot  loveth  him  also  that  is  In-gutt. n  of  him." — 
1  .lohn  V.  1. 

980  Hidden  Manna  ...    113 

"  'i'hy  words  were  found,  and  1  did  eat  them  :  and  thy  wonl  way  unt<» 
me  the  joy  antl  r<*joicing  of  mine  heart :  for  1  am  called  by  thy  name, 
O  Lord  Ciod  of  luKSts." — tferemiah  xv.  Ui. 

981  Carried  bv  Four         ...    \7)7 

"  I   •''  \  **AIid  3ie.'wi1t3i*i^|t«v  himself  into  the  wilderness,  and  prayed.     And  it 

/  ^  I     leiyiu?  ncpds-**  'ui>,"tt^  certain   day,  as  he  was  teaching,  that  there  wrn? 

'  •    •••  l'hari&4'^s  flndMocloitj  of  the  law  sitting  by,  which  wen»  come  out  of  ev^ry 

..  JLowG  4Tf  <vnlHtf^;aud  Juda'a,  and  Jerusalem  :  and  the  ixtwer  of  the  Lord  was 

;  I^>re!*eii*ti»hijiTtiirm.     And,  iM'hohl,  men  brought  in  a  Ixtl  a  man  which  was 

•  .*  lirAkun'w^rkil  \msy :  and  they  sought  means  to  bring  him  in,  and  to  lay  him 

.     .  ^..Ix'tore.kiiu.'*  Anc^wiien  they  eould  not  lind  by  what  way  they  might  bring 

\*  l_*hi7a  iiT  J&.>rNM«6#  of^he  multitude,  they  went  U|»on  the  houscttip,  and  let  him 

r    yvU*^"^  /liltiiglilJuJ  tiling  with  his  ctmch  into  the  midst  U'foru  .Fesus.     And 

when  he  saw  their  faitli,  he  said  unto  hira,  Man,  thy  sins  ai*e  f»irgiven  thee. 

And  the  serilioa  and  the  Pharisees  lx.'gan  to  reason,  saying.  Who  is  this 

wliieh  s]x*nketh  blHsjihcniies  ?     Who  can  forgive  sins  bui*  Cfod  abrne  ?     r>ut 

when  Jesus  perceive<l  their  thoughts,  he  answering  said  unto  them.  What 

reason   ye  in  your  lu*arth?      Whether  is  easier,   to  say,    Thy  sins   Ih^ 

forgiven  thee;  or  to  say,  Kise  up  and  walk  ?     Ihit  that  ye  may  know  that 

tlie  S«m  of  man  hath  power  ujwn  I'arth  to  forgive  sins  (he  said  unto  the 

sick  of  the  jialsy),  T  say  unto  thee,  Arisi»,  and  take  up  thy  couch,  and  go 

into  thine  house.     And  immediately  h(>  rose  up  before  then\,  and  toi>k  up 

that  wheri\»n  he  lay,  and  dei»arted  to  his  own  hou.-*!',  glorifying  (iimI. 

And  they  were  all  anuizcnl,  and  they  glorified  (JimI,  and  were  rtlle<l  with  f»'ar, 

Buying)  *Vt?  l**ve  seen  strange  things  to-day." — Luke  v.  IG— 20. 


CONTENTS.  Vll. 

Ka  Pago 

982  The  Ascension  of  Christ        IGD 

"  UdIo  every  one  of  us  is  given  grace  according  to  the  mcnsure  of  tin* 
gift  of  Christ  Wherefore  he  saith,  when  he  ascended  up  ou  higli,  he  led 
captivity  captive,  and  gave  gifts  unto  men.  (Now  that  he  aacendt-d.  what 
is  it  but  that  he  also  descended  first  into  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth  ?  He 
that  descended  is  the  same  also  that  ascended  up  far  aU^ve  all  heaven h, 
that  he  might  fill  all  tilings.)  And  he  gave  some,  apostles;  and  some, 
prophets;  and  some,  evangelists:  and  some,  pastors  and  teachers;  for  the 
perfecting  of  the  saints,  for  the  work  of  the  ministry,  for  the  edifying  of 
ihe  body  of  Christ"— Ephesians  iv.  7—12. 

983  Moab  is  My  Washpot 181 

"  Moab  is  my  washpot"— Psalm  Ix.  8. 

984  The  Church  as  she  should  be lOd 

"  Thou  art  beautiful,  0  my  love,  as  Tirzah,  comely  as  Jerusalem,  terrible 
as  an  army  with  banners." — Canticles  vi.  4. 

985  The  Touchstone  of  Godly  Sincerity 205 

"  Will  ho  always  call  upon  God  ?"— Job  xxvii.  10. 

986  Victor  Emmanuel,  Emancipator      217 

**  To  open  the  blind  eyes,  to  bring  out  the  prisoners  from  the  prison,  and 
them  that  sit  in  darkness  out  of  the  prison  house." — Isaiah  xlii.  7. 

987  Marah;  or,  The  Bitter  Waters  Sweetened 22^ 

"  And  when  they  came  to  Marah,  thoy  could  not  drink  of  the  waters  of 
Manih,  for  they  were  bitter:  therefore  the  name  of  it  was  called  Alarah. 
And  the  people  murmured  against  Moses,  saying,  What  shall  we  drink  ? 
And  he  cried  unto  the  Lord ;  and  the  Lord  showed  him  a  tree,  which  when 
he  had  cast  into  ihe  waters,  the  waters  were  made  sweet." — Exodus  xv. 
23,  24.  26. 

988  The  Pastor's  Parting  Blessing         ...    241 

*'The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you  all.  Amen." — 
Komans  xvi.  24. 

980     A  Last  Look-out       253 

"  The  time  of  my  departure  is  at  hand.'* — 2  Timothy  iv.  6. 

900  Self-Humbling  and  Self-Searching 265 

"  Look  not  upon  me,  because  I  am  black,  because  the  sun  hath  looked 
upon  me :  my  mother*^  children  were  an^ry  with  me ;  they  made  me  the 
keeper  of  the  vineyards ;  but  mine  own  vineyard  have  I  not  kept." — Song 
of  Solomon  L  G. 

901  The  Fourfold  Treasure  277 

"But  of  him  are  ye  in  Christ  Jesus,  who  of  God  is  made  unto  us 
wisdom,  and  righteousness,  and  sanctiti cation,  and  redemption:  that, 
according  as  it  is  written,  he  that  glorieth,  let  him  glory  in  the  Lord." — 
1  Corinthians  i.  30,  31. 


VUl.  CONTEXTS. 

No.  Tiige 

992  A  New  Order  of  Priests  and  Levitcs  289 

**AndI  wiH  also  teke  of  them  for  priests  and  for  Lcvites,  saith  the 
Lord." — Isaiah  \xvi,  21. 

993  The  Northern  Iron  and  the  Steel oOl 

^^  Shall  iron  break  the  northern  iron  and  the  steeL" — Jcreniinh  xv.  12. 

904     The  Prayer  of  Jabez ...   ol3 

"Oh  that  thou  woiildest  bless  nic  indeed  I  " — 1  Chronicles  iv.  lO. 

995     The  Sheep  and  their  Shepherd         325 

*'My  sheep  liear  my  voice,  and  I  know  them,  and  they  follow  me." — 
John  X.  27. 

990     The  Alaram    ...         ...         ...        •••         ..•         •••         ...    337 

"  I  myself  will  awake  early." — Psalm  Ivii.  8. 

997     Prosperity  under  Persecution  349 

"  Come  on,  let  us  deal  AWsely  with  them;  lest  they  multiply,  and  it  come 
to  pass,  that,  when  there  fallt-th  out  any  war,  tlu»y  join  aU>o  unto  mir 
enemies,  and  fight  against  us,  and  so  pet  thi-m  up  out  ol  the  land,     Tli.  ic- 


998  More  and  More  3G1 

"  But  I  will  lioiK*  continually,  and  will  yetj^raise  thee  more  and  more." — 
Psalm  Ixxi.  14. 

999  The  Withering  Work  of  the  Spirit 373 

*'  The  voice  said,  Crv.  And  he  said.  What  shall  I  crj-  ?  All  flesh  is 
grass,  and  all  the  goodliness  thereof  is  as  the  flower  of  the  Held:  th<'  pniss 
withereth,  the  flower  fadeth  :  because  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  blowt-th  upon 
it:  surely  the  people  is  grass.  The  grass  withereth,  the  flower  fadeth: 
but  the  word  oi  our  God  sliall  stand  for  ever.*' — Isaiah  xL  0 — 8. 

"Peing  bom  again,  not  of  corruptible  seed,  but  of  incorruntiblo,  by  the 
word  of  Gotl,  which  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever.  For  all  flesh  is  as  grass, 
and  all  the  glory  of  man  as  tht;  flower  of  grass.  The  grass  withereth, 
and  the  flower  thereof  falleth  awav  :  but  the  word  of  the  Lord  eudurtih  for 
ever.  And  this  is  the  word  which  by  the  gospel  is  preached  unto  you.*' — 
1  Peter  i.  23— 2o. 

1,000  Number  One  Thousand;  or,  **  Bread  Enough  and  to  Spare  "  385 

**  And  when  he  came  to  himself,  he  said.  How  many  hired  st^rvauts  of 
my  fatlier's  have  bread  enough  and  to  spare,  and  I  perish  with  hunger! " — 
Luke  XV.  17. 


CJONTENTS,  IX 

5a  Pago 

1.001  Altogether  Lorelj     397 

"  Yea,  he  is  altogether  lovely." — Canticles  v.  16. 

1.002  Xow,  and  Then         409 

^*  For  now  we  see  through  a  glass,  darkly ;  but  then  face  to  face." — 
1  Corinthians  xiii.  12. 

1.003  "Your  Own  Salvation"        421 

**  Your  own  salvation.*— Philippians  ii.  12. 

1.004  "  Bought  with  a  Price "        483 

"  Ye  are  not  your  own :  for  ye  are  bought  with  a  price :  therefore  glorify 
God  in  your  body,  and  in  your  spirit,  which  are  God's." — 1  Cor.  vi.  19,  20. 

1.005  Lessons  from  Nature 445 

*'  Where  the  birds  make  their  nests :  as  for  tlie  stork,  the  fir  trees  arc  her 
house.  The  high  hills  are  a  refuge  for  the  wild  goats;  and  the  rocks  for 
the  conies.*' — Psulm  civ.  17,  18. 

1.006  Glirist  is  All 457 

*' Christ  is  all,  and  in  all." — Colossians  iii.  11. 

1,C07  North  and  South        409 

'*  I  will  say  to  the  north,  Give  up ;  and  to  the  souili,  Keep  not  back." — 
Isaiah  xliii.  6. 

1.008  Love's  Logic  ...         481 

**  We  love  him  because  he  first  loved  us.'' — 1  John  iv.  19. 

1.009  Travailing  for  Souls 493 

'*  As  soon  as  Zion  travailed,  she  brought  forth  her  childi-en." — Isaiah 
IxvL  8. 

1.010  Light  for  those  who  Sit  in  Darkness  505 

**  Tlie  land  of  Zabulon,  and  the  land  of  Nephtlialim,  by  the  way  of  the  sea, 
beyond  Jordan,  Galilee  of  the  Gentiles  ;  the  people  which  sat  in  darkness 
saw  great  light ;  and  to  thcni  which  sat  in  thu  region  and  shadow  of  death 
light  is  Bpruug  up." — Matthew  iv.  15,  10. 

1.011  Job's  Regret  and  Our  Own  517 

**  Oh  that  I  were  as  in  months  past,  as  in  the  days  when  God  preserved 
me ;  when  his  candle  shined  upon  my  head,  and  when  by  his  light  I  walked 

L  through  darkness;  as  I  was  in  the  djiys  of  my  youth,  when  the  secret  of 

God  was  upon  my  tabernacle." — Job  xxix.  2,  3,  4. 


X  00NTEMT8. 

No.  rag© 

1.012  The  Unbeliever's  Unhappy  Condition         529 

"  He  that  believeth  not  the  Son  shall  not  see  life ;  bat  the  wrath  of  God 
abideth  on  him."— John  iiL  Sli. 

1.013  Our  Watchword        541 

'*  Let  such  as  love  thy  salvation  say  continually,  Let  God  be  mngui- 
fied."— I'salm  Ixx.  4. 

1.014  "  Nunc  Dimittis  "      553 

*'  Lord,  now  lettcst  thou  thy  servant  depart  in  peace,  according  to  thy 
word :  for  mine  eyes  have  seen  thy  salvation.'* — Luke  ii.  20,  30. 

1.015  The  One  Thing  Needful        5G5 

**  But  one  thing  is  needful." — Luke  x.  42. 

1,010  Beauty  for  Ashes       ...    577 

'*  To  appoint  unto  them  that  mourn  in  Z:on,  to  give  unto  tlirm  Ix'auty 
for  ashes,  the  oil  of  joy  for  mourning,  the  garment  of  praise  for  the  spirit 
of  heaviness;  that  thev  mi^ht  bo  called  trees  of  righteousness,  tho  planting 
.  of  the  Lord,  that  ho  nught  be  glonlied.'' — Isaiah  Ixi.  S. 

1.017  The  Talking  Book 589 

**  When  thou  avrakest,  it  shall  talk  with  the**.*' — Proverbs  vi.  22. 

1.018  Pleading         COl 

**  But  I  am  poor  and  needy :  make  haste  unto  roe.  O  God :  thou  ait  my 
help  and  my  deliverer ;  0  Lord,  make  lo  tanyiug." — Psalm  Ixx.  0. 

1,010  Household  Salvation  G13 

*''  And  they  spake  unto  him  the  word  of  the  I^ord,  and  to  all  that  woro  in 
his  house.  And  ho  took  them  the  same  hour  of  the  night,  an<l  waNlitsl 
their  8trii>e8 ;  and  was  ba[)tizc<l,  he  and  all  his,  sti-aightway.  And  m  Im'U  lie 
had  bruught  them  into  his  house,  he  set  meat  bt^fore  them,  and  rfjuiccd, 
believing  in  God  with  all  his  house." — Acts  xvi.  82 — 34. 

1.020  The  Sun  of  Righteousness C25 

'*  In  them  hath  he  set  a  tabernacle  for  the  sun,  which  is  as  a  l)ridt'gr«H»in 
coming  out  of  his  chamber,  and  rejoiceth  as  a  stmng  man  to  run  n  r.io<'. 
His  going  forth  is  from  the  end  of  the  heaven,  and  his  circuit  unto  tho  ends 
of  it :  and  there  is  nothing  hid  from  the  heat  theivof.'' — l^fralm  xix.  4,  o,  0. 

**  The  Sun  of  righteousness.** — Makchi  iv.  2. 

1.021  HeaTen's  Nurse  Children      C37 

**  1  taught  Ephraim  also  to  go,  taking  them  by  their  arms.** — llot^ca.  xi.  3. 

1.022  Sleep  not         649 

**■  Let  us  not  sleep,  as  do  others.** — 1  Thessalonians  y.  C 


CONTENTS.  XI. 

No.  Tago 

1.023  Praises  and  Vows  Accepted  in  Zk)n CGI 

*'  Praise  waiteth  for  thee,  O  God,  in  Sion :  and  unto  theo  shall  the  vow 
be  perfonned.  0  thon  that  hearest  prayer,  unto  thee  shall  all  flesh  come." — 
Psahn  Ixv.  1,  2. 

1.024  "  The  Throne  of  Grace "       C78 

"  The  throne  of  grace." — Hebrews  iv.  16. 

1.025  A  Visit  to  the  Harvest  Field  685 

"  Be  patient  therefore,  brethren,  unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  Behold, 
the  husbandman  waiteth  for  the  precious  fruit  of  the  earth,  and  hath  long 
pati«>ncc  for  it,  until  he  receive  the  early  and  latter  rain.  Be  ye  also  patient ; 
Ktablisli  your  hearts:  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord  diaweth  nigh." — James 
V.  7,  8. 

1.026  Joy  Bom  at  Bethlehem        697 

^*  And  the  angel  said  unto  them.  Fear  not :  for,  behold,  1  bring  you  good 
tidings  of  great  joy,  which  shall  be  to  all  people.  For  unto  you  is  c>om  this 
day  in  the  city  of  David  a  Saviour,  which  is  Christ  the  Lord.  And  this 
shall  be  a  sign  unto  you;  Ye  shall  find  the  babe  wrapped  in  swaddling 
clutht-s,  lying  in  a  manger.'* — Luke  ii.  10,  11,  12. 

1.027  The  Joy  of  the  Lord,  the  Strength  of  His  People 709 

"  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength." — Nehemiah  viii.  10. 

*' And  the  singers  sang  loud,  with  Jezrahiah  their  overseer.  Also  that 
day  they  offered  great  sticrificos,  and  rejoiced :  for  God  had  made  them  re- 
jf<ic«»  with  great  joy  :  the  wives  also  and  the  children  rejoiced :  so  that  the 
joy  of  Jcinisalem  was  heard  even  afar  off."— Nehemiah  xiL  42,  43. 


INDEX  OF  SCRIPTURE  TEXTS. 


VOLUME    XVII. 


•  •  •  •  •  • 


GENESIS. 
CbAp.  &  Verse. 

A.X1«      Jv«*»  •••  •••  ■•• 

EXODUS. 

1»    1V~^~  !«■•••     ■••       •••        ««•        ••        ••• 

ZV«  juH^^Jbv    >••       .••       ».•       •••       ••• 

2  KINGS. 

jLl»    Iv     «.•      •«>       «..       •«*       •••       ••• 

1  CHRONICLES. 

IV.  Iv     •••     .«•      •••     •.•     •••     ••• 

NEHEMIAII. 
Vlll.  lu  •«.     .••      ...     ••«     •••     *•• 

3kll.   42C|   4o      ••«       ...       •«.       •••       «•• 

JOB. 

3CXV11.    lU         ...       .••       •••       •.•       ... 

^XIX.   SB^""!     ••.       •».       •«•       •••       ••• 

PSALMS. 

?CIS.  ^'"O  ...  .•*  •.•  •••  .«. 

!Xl.  SJ^  lU  ...  ...  ...  ••»  .»• 

JVII.  o     ...  ...  •«•  •..  ••.  ••. 

JX.    O         ,,t  ...  •••  *•■  ***  *** 

Ixv.    t|^  ...  ••*  •••  ••*  *** 

JXX.    4     ...  ...  ...  ...  •*.  <•* 

IXX.   O    ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ■•* 

JXXl.    1 4  ...  ...  •«.  ...  •*. 

OIV*  1/yJO  •..  ...  ...  ••>  ••* 

PROVERBS. 

VI.        JbM         ...  •••  •••  ...  ••.  ••• 

SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 

i.  6 

V.  16 
vi.  4. 

ISAIAH. 

/I  I •  o ^^o  ...  ...  ...  ... 

Xlll.  /      •>.  •«.  ••.  •*.  ••• 

Xllll.  o    •••  •••  ••.  •••  ... 

JXI.  •>      ...  ••.  ...  ••.  ... 

l?Wil.  o       ...        •..        ...        ...        ... 

Ixvi.  21 

JEREMIAH. 
XV.  12    ... 

XVa      lO  ...  *••  ...  ...  ...  ••• 

HOSEA. 

XI.  «»      ...     •«•     ...     •••     •••     ••• 

ZECHARIAH. 

**  *        1 

jiLlll*    1      •••       •••      •••       ••*       ***       *** 

MALACHL 

1V«2   •••   •••   •••   •••   •••   ••• 


•  •  •      •  •  • 

•  ••      •  •• 
• ••      ••• 


■  •  •       •  I 


!•  •••  •••  ••• 


>   •  •  •  • 


»•  •••  •••  •••  ••• 


Patto 
73 


349 
229 

49 

313 


709 
709 


205 
617 

625 
109 
337 
181 
661 
541 
601 
361 
445 

589 


265 
397 
193 

373 
217 
469 
.')77 
493 
289 


301 
145 

637 

37 

625 


MATTHEW. 
Clmp.  &  Verse. 

1  Va       1  Of       lO  «••  •••  •••  •••  *** 

XI*      *0^^«Jv  •••  ••«  •••  •••  ••• 

JW^Xll*    m" '  "W  •«•  •••  •••  •••  ••• 

xxii.  11 — 14... 


#••  •••  •••  ••• 


LUKE. 

11«     I  Vr*"^  1  *  ••«         «•«         •••         ••• 

&••     ^9 1     0«/  #••  •••  ••«  ••• 

V.   IC— 26 
X.  42 
XV.  8—10 

^V  V*      Af        •••  •••  •••  •••  ••• 


•••  •••  •••  •»« 

•••  •••  «••  ••• 

•••  •••  •••  ■•• 


JOHN. 

111.    .50      ...       ...        ...        ***        .  •        ••* 

X.    a4        ...       ...       ••«       •«.       ...       ••• 

XIV.    19  ...        •«•       ...       ...        •*•        ••• 

ACTS, 
xvi.  .32 — 34 

ROMANS. 

Avis      m^      •••  ••«  ••• 


•••  «••  ••• 


I  •  •  •  •  •  •  • 


1  CORINTHIANS. 

!•   0\lf  •ll***       •••       «••       *••       •••       ••« 

Vl«     '^•^f    AV  •••         #••         •••         •••         ••• 

•  •  •      •    - 

^llls   J^   •••      •••      •■•      •••      **•      ••• 


iv.  7—12 


EPHESIANS. 


•••  •••  •••  ••( 


PHILIPPIANS. 

Ha   E2      •••     •••     •••     •••     •••     ••• 

iii.  20.  21      


■  •  •  •  f  • 


>••  ■••  ••• 


COLOSSIANS. 

la    1^        •«•      •••      «••      •••      •••      ••• 

111*   £1      •••      •••      •••     •••      •••      ••• 

1  THESSALONIANS. 

T •   O        ••#     •••     •••     •••     •••     •■• 

2  TIMOTIIV. 
iv.  6 

HEBREWS. 

IV*     lO       •••        •••        •••        •»•        ■< 

JAMES. 

V*       #aO         •••  •••  •••  ***  * 

1  PETEK. 
1  JOHN. 

ft  V  •    A.«F       •••        •••        •••        ••# 

V.    I 


•  •  •  •  < 


•  •  •  •  •  < 


Pupro 

505 

13 

85 

97 


697 
553 
It" 
665 
25 
385 


529 

325 

1 

613 
241 


277 
433 
4U9 


169 


421 
61 


121 

>7 


457 


«••    •« 


•  •  •     •  •  •     •  < 


649 

253 

673 

685 

373 

481 
133 


ttito^fllilatt  Wenrntk 


LIFE  IN  CHRIST. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  January  1st,  1871,  by 

C.  H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNAOLB,  NEWINGTON. 


*^  Because  I  Uto,  ye  shall  live  also/' — John  xiv.  19.* 

Tffls  world  saw  otir  Lord  Jesus  for  a  very  litfcle  time,  but  now  it  seetli 
him  no  more.  It  only  saw  him  with  the  outward  eye  and  afler  a 
carnal  sort,  so  that  when  the  clouds  received  him  and  concealed  him 
from  bodily  vision,  this  spiritually  blind  world  lost  sight  of  him  al- 
together. Here  and  there,  ^however,  among  the  crowds  of  the  sightless 
there  were  a  few  chosen  men  who  had  received  spiritual  sight ;  Christ 
had  been  light  to  them,  he  had  opened  their  blind  eyes,  and  they  had 
seen  him  as  the  world  had  not  seen  him.  In  a  high  and  full  sense  they 
could  say,  **We  have  seen  the  Lord,"  for  they  had  in  some  degree 
l)erceived  his  Godhead,  discerned  his  mission,  and  learned  his  spiritual 
character.  Since  spiritual  sight  docs  not  depend  upon  the  bodily 
presence  of  its  object,  those  persons  who  had  seen  Jesus  spiritually,  saw 
him  after  he  had  gone  out  of  the  world  unto  the  Father.  We  who  have 
the  same  sight  still  see  him.  Read  carefully  the  words  of  the  verse  before 
us:  "  Yet  a  little  while,  and  the  world  seeth  me  no  more ;  but  ye  see  me." 
It  is  a  distinguishing  mark  of  a  true  follower  of  Jesus  that  he  sees  his 
Lord  and  Master  when  he  is  not  to  be  seen  by  the  bodily  eye ;  he  sees 
him  intelligently  and  spiritually;  he  knows  his  Lord,  discerns  his 
character,  apprehends  him  by  faith,  gazes  upon  him  with  admiration, 
and  looks  to  nim  for  all  he  needs.  Now,  my  brethren,  remember  that 
as  our  first  sight  of  Christ  brought  us  into  spiritual  life,  for  we  looked 
unto  him  and  were  saved,  so  it  is  by  the  continuance  of  this  spiritual 
sight  of  Christ  that  our  spiritual  life  is  consciously  maintained.  We 
lived  by  looking,  we  live  still  by  looking.  Faith  is  still  the  medium  by 
which  Ufe  comes  to  us  from  the  life-giving  Lord.  It  is  not  only  upon 
the  first  day  of  the  Christian's  life  that  he  must  needs  look  to  Jesus 
only,  but  every  day  of  that  life,  even  until  the  last,  his  motto  must 
be,' "  Looking  unto  Jesus,  the  author  and  finisher  of  our  faith."  The 
world  sees  him  no  more,  for  it  never  saw  him  aright ;  but  ye  have  seen 

*  This  text  has  heen  sent  ns  by  a  venerable  clergyman  of  the  Church  of  Enj^land, 
'^vho  has  for  many  years  selectod  a  now  year's  text  for  us,  and  others  of  his  friends. 
In  tho  calm  enjoyment  of  divine  consolations,  such  as  this  verse  affords,  may  his  last 
davs  ivkSH  away  in  tranquillity  and  rejoicing. 

No.  968. 


2  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

him  and  lived,  and  now,  throngh  continuing:  still  to  see  him,  you 
remain  ia  life.  Let  us  ever  remember  the  intimate  connection  between 
faith  and  spiritual  life.  Faith  is  the  life-look.  We  must  never  think 
that  we  live  by  works,  by  feelings,  or  by  ceremonies.  "  The  just  shall 
live  by  faith."  We  dare  not  preach  to  the  ungodly  sinner  a  way  of 
obtaining  life  by  the  works  of  the  law,  neither  dare  we  hold  up  to  the 
most  advanced  believer  a  way  of  sustaining  life  by  legal  means.  We 
should  in  such  a  case  expect  to  bear  the  apostle's  expostulation,  '^  Are 
ye  so  foolish  ?  having  begun  in  the  Spirit,  are  ye  now  made  perfect  by 
the  flesh  ?"  Our  gloiying  is  that  our  life  is  not  dependent  on  ourselves, 
but  is  safe  in  our  Lord,  as  saith  the  apostle,  "I  am  crucified  with  Christ : 
nevertheless  I  live ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me:  and  the  life 
which  I  now  live  in  the  flesh  I  live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God,  who 
loved  me,  and  gave  himself  for  me."  Because  he  lives,  we  live,  and 
shall  live  for  ever.  God  grant  that  our  eye  may  ever  be  clear  towards 
Jesus,  our  life.  May  we  have  no  confidence  but  in  our  Redeemer; 
may  our  eye  be  so  fixed  upon  him,  that  no  other  object  may  in  any 
measure  or  degree  shut  out  our  view  of  him  as  our  all  in  all. 

The  text  contains  in  it  very  much  of  weighty  truth,  far  more  than 
we  shall  be  able  to  bring  forth  from  it  this  morning.  First,  we  see  in 
it  a  }ife ;  secondly,  that  life  preserved;  and  thirdly,  the  reason  for  tJ^e  pre- 
servation of  that  life :  *'  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also." 

I.  First,  we  have  life  here  spoken  of. 

We  must  not  confound  this  with  existence.  It  were  indeed  to  reduce 
a  very  rich  text  to  a  poverty-stricken  sentence  if  we  read  it,  "  Because  I 
exist,  ye  shall  exist  also."  We  could  not  say  of  such  a  use  of  words  that 
the  water  of  ordinary  speech  was  turned  to  wine,  but  rather  that  the 
wine  was  turned  to  water.  Before  the  disciples  believed  in  Jesus  they 
existed,  and  altogether  apart  from  him  as  their  spiritual  life  their 
existence  would  have  been  continued  ;  it  was  something  far  other  and 
higher  than  immortal  existence  which  our  Lord  was  here  dealing  with. 

Life,  what  is  it  ?  We  know  practically,  but  we  cannot  tell  in  words. 
We  know  it,  however,  to  be  a  mystery  of  diflPerent  degrees.  As  all  flesh 
is  not  the  same  flesh,  so  all  life  is  not  the  same  life.  There  is  the  life  of 
the  vegetable,  the  cedar  of  Lebanon,  the  hyssop  on  the  wall.  There  is 
a  considerable  advance  when  we  come  to  animal  life — the  eagle  or  the 
ox.  Animal  life  moves  in  quite  a  different  world  from  that  in  which 
the  plant  vegetates — sensation,  appetite,  instinct,  are  things  to  which 
plants  are  dead,  though  they  may  possess  some  imitation  of  them,  for 
one  life  mimics  another.  Animal  life  rises  far  above  the  experience 
and  apprehension  of  the  flower  of  the  field.  Then  there  is  mental  life, 
which  we  all  of  us  possess,  which  introduces  us  into  quite  another 
realm  from  that  which  is  inhabited  by  the  mere  beast.  To  judge,  to 
foresee,  to  imagine,  to  invent,  to  perform  moral  acts,  are  not  these  new 
functions  which  the  ox  hath  not?  Now,  let  it  be  clear  to  you,  that  far 
above  mental  life  there  is  another  form  of  life  of  which  the  mere 
carnal  man  can  form  no  more  idea  than  the  plant  of  the  animal,  or  the 
animal  of  the  poet.  The  carnal  mind  knoweth  not  spiritual  things, 
because  it  has  no  spiritual  capacities.  As  the  beast  cannot  compre- 
liend  the  pursuits  of  the  philosopher,  so  the  man  who  is  but  a  natural 
cannot  comprehend  the  experience  of  the  spiritually  minded.  Thus 


LIFK  IN  CHRIST.  3 

saiUi  the  Scripture:  "The  natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things  of 
iht  Spirit  of  God  :  for  they  are  foolishness  unto  him  :  neither  can  he 
know  them,  because  they  are  spiritually  discerned.  But  he  that  is 
spiritual  judgeth  all  things,  yet  he  himself  is  judged  of  no  man.'^ 
There  is  in  l^lievers  a  life  which  is  not  to  be  found  in  other  men — 
nobler,  diviner  &r ;  education  cannot  raise  the  natural  man  into  it, 
neither  can  refinement  reach  it ;  for  at  its  best,  "  that  which  is  born  of 
the  flesh  is  flesh,"  and  to  all  must  the  humbling  truth  be  spoken,  ^*  Ye 
must  be  bom  again." 

It  is  to  be  remarked  concerning  our  life  in  Christ,  that  it  is  the 
remoTal  of  the  penalty  which  fell  upon  our  race  for  Adam's  sin.  "In 
Ihe  day  that  thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt  surely  die,"  was  the  Lord's 
threatening  to  our  first  parent,  who  was  the  representative  of  the  race. 
He  did  eat  of  that  fruit,  and  since  God  is  true,  and  his  word  never  fails, 
we  may  be  sure  of  this,  that  in  that  selfsame  day  Adam  died.  It  is 
true  that  he  did  not  cease  to  exist,  but  that  is  quite  another  thing 
from  dying.  The  threatening  was  not  that  he  should  ultimately 
die,  but  '*  In  the  day  thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt  surely  die  ;*  and  it 
is  beyond  all  doubt  that  the  Lord  kept  his  word  to  the  letter.  If  the 
first  threatening  was  not  carried  out  we  might  take  liberty  to  tnflc 
with  all  others.  Best  assured,  then,  that  the  threat  was  on  the  spot 
fulfilled.  The  spiritual  life  departed  from  Adam ;  he  was  no  longer  at 
one  with  God,  no  more  able  to  live  and  breathe  in  the  same  sphere  as 
the  Lord.  He  fell  from  his  first  estate ;  he  had  need  if  he  should  enter  into 
spiritual  life  to  be  bom  again,  even  as  you  and  I  must  be.  As  he  hides 
himself  from  his  Maker,  and  utters  vain  excuses  before  his  God,  you 
see  that  he  is  dead  to  the  life  of  God,  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  We 
also,  being  heirs  of  wrath  even  as  others,  are  through  the  fall  dead, 
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins;  and  if  ever  we  are  to  possess  spiritual  life, 
it  must  be  said  of  us,  "  And  you  hath  he  quickened."  We  must  be  as 
"  those  that  are  alive  from  the  dead."  The  world  is  the  valley  of  dry 
bones,  and  grace  raises  the  chosen  into  newness  of  life.  The  fall 
brought  universal  death,  in  the  deep  spiritual  sense  of  that  word,  over 
all  mankind ;  and  Jesus  delivers  us  from  the  consequences  of  the  fall 
by  implanting  in  us  a  spiritual  life.  By  no  other  means  can  this  death 
be  removed :  "  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life :  and 
he  that  believeth  not  the  Son  shall  not  see  life  ;  but  the  wrath  of  God 
abideth  on  him."  The  work  of  regeneration,  in  which  the  new  lifS  is 
implanted,  effectually  restores  the  ram  of  the  fall,  for  we  are  born  again 
"not  of  corraptible  seed,  but  of  incorraptible,  by  the  word  of  God, 
which  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever."  But  you  remind  me  that  still  sin 
remains  in  us  after  we  have  received  the  divine  life.  I  know  it  does, 
and  it  is  called  "  the  body  of  this  death ;"  and  this  it  is  which  the 
new  life  has  to  straggle  with.  There  is  a  contention  which  rages 
within,  between  the  power  of  the  death  in  the  first  Adam,  and  the 
power  of  the  life  of  the  second  Adam;  but  the  heavenly  life  will 
ultimately  overcome  the  deadly  energy  of  sin.  Even  to-day  our  inner 
life  groans  after  deliverance,  but  with  its  groan  of  **  0  wretched  man 
that  I  am !  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ?  "  it 
mingles  the  thankful  song,  **  I  thank  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord." 


4  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

This  life  is  of  a  purely  spiritual  kind.  We  find  analogies  and  resem- 
blances of  it  in  the  common  mental  life,  but  they  are  only  analogies,  the 
spiritual  life  is  far  and  high  above  the  carnal  life,  and  altogether  out 
of  6ip:ht  of  the  fleshly  mind.  Scarce  are  there  words  in  which  it  can  be 
described.  To  know  this  life  you  must  have  it;  it  must  pulsate 
within  jrour  own  bosom,  for  no  explanations  of  others  can  tell  you 
what  this  life  is;  it  is  one  of  the  secrets  of  the  Lord.  It  would 
not  be  possible  for  us  with  the  greatest  skill  to  communicate  to 
a  horse  any  conception  of  what  imagination  is;  neither  could  we 
by  the  most  diligent  use  of  words,  communicate  to  carnal  minds 
what  it  is  to  be  joined  unto  the  Lord  so  as  to  be  one  spirit  One  thing 
we  know  of  it,  namely,  that  the  spiritual  life  is  intimately  connected 
with  the  indwelling  oi  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  souL  When  be  comes  we 
are  "  bom  again  from  above,"  "  bom  of  the  Spirit"  While  he  works  in 
us  mightily  our  life  is  active  and  powerful;  if  he  withdraws  his  active 
operations  our  new  life  becomes  faint  and  sickly.  Christ  is  our  life,  but 
he  works  in  us  through  his  Holy  Spirit,  who  dwelleth  in  us  evermore. 

Further,  we  know  that  this  life  very  much  consists  in  union  with  God. 
"  For  to  be  carnally  minded  is  death  ;  but  to  be  spiritually  minded  is 
life  and  peace.  Because  the  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God :  for  it 
is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  be.  So  then  they 
that  are  in  the  flesh  cannot  please  God."  Death  as  to  the  body  con- 
sists in  the  body  being  separated  from  the  soul ;  the  death  of  the  soul 
lies  mainly  in  the  soul's  being  separated  from  its  God.  For  the  soul  to 
be  in  union  with  God  is  the  soul's  highest  life;  in  his  presence  it  unfolds 
itself  like  an  opening  flower;  away  from  him  it  pines,  and  loses  all  its 
beauty  and  excellence,  till  it  is  as  a  thing  destroyed.  Let  the  soul  obey 
God,  let  it  be  holy,  pure,  gracious,  then  is  it  happy,  and  truly  living ; 
but  a  soul  sunden^  from  God  is  a  soul  blasted,  killed,  destroyed ;  it 
exists  in  a  dreadful  death ;  all  its  trae  peace,  dignity,  and  glory,  are  gone; 
it  is  a  hideous  rain,  the  mere  corpse  of  manhood.  The  new  lue  brings  us 
near  to  God,  makes  us  think  of  him,  makes  us  love  him,  and  ultimately 
makes  us  like  him.  My  brethren,  it  is  in  proportion  as  you  get  near  to 
God  that  you  enter  into  the  full  enjoyment  of  life — that  life  which  Jesus 
Christ  gives  you,  and  which  Jesus  Christ  preserves  in  you.  **In  his 
favour  is  life."  Psalmxxx.  5.  "  The  fear  ofthe  Lord  is  a  fountain  of  life." 
Prov.  xiv.  27.  To  turn  to  God  is  "  repentance  unto  life."  To  forget  God 
is  for  a  man  to  be  "  dead  whilst  he  iiveth."  To  believe  the  witness  of  God 
is  to  possess  the  faith  which  overcometh  the  world.  "  He  that  believeth 
on  the  Son  of  God  hath  the  witness  in  himself:  he  that  believeth  not  God 
hath  made  him  a  liar  ;  because  he  believeth  not  the  record  that  God 
gave  of  his  Son.  And  this  is  the  record,  that  God  hath  given  to  us 
eternal  life,  and  this  life  is  in  his  Son.  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life ; 
and  he  that  hath  not  the  Son  of  God  hath  not  life." 

This  life  within  the  soul  bears  fmit  on  earth  in  righteousness  and  true 
holiness.  It  blooms  with  sweetest  flowers  of  fellowship  with  God  below, 
and  it  is  made  perfect  in  the  presence  of  God  in  heaven.  The  life  of 
glorified  spirits  above  is  but  the  life  of  justified  men  here  below  ;  it  is 
file  same  life,  only  it  is  delivered  from  encumbrances,  and  has  come  to 
the  fulness  of  its  strength.  The  life  of  lieaven  is  in  every  believer  even 
now.    The  moment  a  sinner  believes  in  Jesus  he  i-eceives  from  God  that 


LIFE  IN  CHBIST.  5 

selfBame  life  which  shall  look  down  serenely  npon  the  coDflaf2:ration  of 
earth,  and  the  passing  away  of  these  lower  skies.  Blessed  is  that  man 
who  hath  everlasting  life,  who  is  made  a  partaker  of  the  divine  nature, 
who  is  bom  a^ain  from  above,  who  is  bom  of  God  by  a  seed  which 
remaineth  in  him,  for  he  is  the  man  npon  \diom  the  second  death  hath 
no  power,  who  shall  enjoy  life  eternal  when  the  wicked  go  away  into 
everlaFting  punishment. 

Thns  much  concerning  this  life.  We  have  now  to  ask  each  of 
you  whether  you  have  received  it.  Have  you  been  bom,  not  of  blood, 
nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God  ? 
Was  there  a  time  with  you  when  you  passed  from  death  unto  life,  or 
are  you  abiding  in  death  ?  Have  you  the  witness  in  yourself  that 
you  have  been  operated  upon  by  a  divinely  spiritual  power?  Is 
there  something  in  you  which  was  not  once  there,  not  a  faculty  de- 
veloped bv  education,  but  a  life  implanted  by  God  himself  ?  Do  you  feel 
an  inward  craving  unknown  to  carnal  miuds,  a  longing  desire  which 
this  world  could  neither  excite  nor  gratify?  Is  there  a  strange 
tenant  within  this  body  of  yours,  a  prince  incognito,  an  exiled  spirit 
sighing  for  a  land  as  yet  unseen,  of  which  it  is  a  native,  and  for 
which  it  yearns?  Do  you  walk  among  the  sons  of  men  as  a  being 
of  another  race,  not  of  the  world,  even  as  Christ  was  not  of  the  world  ? 
Can  you  say,  with  the  favoured  apostle,  "  We  know  that  the  Son  of 
God  is  come,  and  hath  given  us  an  understanding,  that  we  may  know 
him  that  is  trae,  and  we  are  in  him  that  is  tme,  even  in  his  Son  Jesus 
Christ  This  is  the  tme  God,  and  eternal  life."  Oh !  then,  thank  God 
for  this,  and  thank  God  yet  more  that  you  have  an  infallible  guarantee 
that  your  life  shall  be  continued  and  perfected,  for  so  saith  the  text, 
"  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also." 

II.  Our  second  head  treats  of  life  preserved.  "  Because  I  live,  ye 
shall  live  also."  There  stands  the  promise,  '*  Ye  shall  live  aUoJ'  This 
heavenly  life  of  yours  which  ye  have  received  shall  be  preserved  to  you. 

Concerning  tnis  sentence  let  me  draw  your  attention,  first  of  all,  to 
i\s  fulness :  "  Ye  shall  live."  I  think  I  see  in  that  much  more  than 
lies  upon  the  surface.  Whatever  is  meant  by  living  shall  be  ours.  All 
the  degree  of  life  which  is  secured  in  the  covenant  of  grace,  believers 
shall  have.  Moreover,  all  your  new  nature  shall  live,  shall  thoroughly 
live,  shall  etemally  live.  By  this  word  it  is  secured  that  the  eternal 
life  implanted  at  regeneration  shall  never  die  out.  As  our  Lord  said 
80  shall  it  be.  '^  Whosoever  drinketh  of  the  water  that  I  shall 
give  him  shall  never  thirst;  but  the  water  that  I  shall  give  him 
Siall  be  in  him  a  well  of  water  springing  up  into  everlasting  life."  We 
may  be  tempted,  but  we  shall  not  be  so  led  astray  as  to  cease  to  live  in 
Christ.  It  may  be  that  we  shall  decline  in  grace,  a  thousand  sorrows 
that  it  should  be  so !  but  we  shall  not  so  decline  as  to  become  utter 
apostates,  or  sons  of  perdition.  '^  He  that  is  begotten  of  God  keepeth 
himself,  and  that  evil  one  toucheth  him  not.'*  Thus  saith  the  Redeemer 
unto  you,  ye  trembling  children  of  God,  **  Ye  shall  live,"  ye  shall  never 
perish,  neither  shall  any  pluck  you  out  of  his  hands.  May  I  not  view 
this  precious  word  as  referring  to  all  the  essential  spiritual  graces 
which  make  up  the  new  man  ?  Not  even,  in  part,  shall  the  new  man  die. 
"  Ye  shall  live,"  applies  to  all  the  parts  of  our  new-born  nature.   If  there 


6  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

be  any  believer  here  who  has  not  lived  to  the  full  extent  he  might 
have  done,  let  him  lay  hold  upon  this  promise ;  and  seeing  that  it 
secnres  the  preservation  of  all  his  new  nature,  let  him  have  courage  to 
seek  a  higher  degree  of  health.  "  I  am  come,"  saith  Christ,  **  that  ye 
might  have  life,  and  have  it  more  abundantly."  There  is  no  reason, 
Christian,  why  your  love  to  Jesus  should  not  become  flaming,  ardent, 
conquering  ;  for  it  lives,  and  ever  must  live.  As  to  your  faith,  it  also 
has  immortal  vitality  in  it,  and  though  it  be  just  now  weak,  and 
staggering,  lift  up  the  hands  that  hang  doAvn  and  confirm  the  feeble 
knees,  for  your  faith  shall  not  die  out.  Here  in  your  Lord's  promise 
the  abiding  nature  of  the  vital  faculties  of  your  spirit  is  guaranteed. 
There  is  no  stint  to  the  fulness  of  life  which  is  given  you  in  ('hrist 
Jesus.  I  know  not  who  shall  tell  me  what  it  must  be  to  live  in  all  the 
fulness  of  Christian  life.  Beneath  the  skies  I  would  labour  to  attain  it, 
but  herein  is  my  joy,  that  it  shall  be  most  surely  mine,  for  this  word  is 
faithful  and  true.  As  surely  as  I  have  this  day  eternal  life  by  reason 
of  faith  in  Christ  Jesus,  so  surely  shall  I  reach  its  fulness  when 
Christ  who  is  my  life  shall  appear.  Even  here  on  earth  I  have  the 
permit  to  seek  for  the  fullest  aevelopment  of  this  life  ;  nay,  I  have 
a  precept  in  this  promise  bidding  me  to  seek  after  it.  "Te  shall  live,'' 
means  that  the  new  life  shall  not  be  destroyed — no,  not  as  to  any 
of  its  essentials.  All  the  members  of  the  spiritual  man  shall  bo 
safe ;  we  may  say  of  it  as  of  the  Lord  himself,  "  Not  a  bone  of  him 
shall  be  broken."  The  shield  of  Christ's  owa.  life  covers  all  the 
faculties  of  our  spiritual  nature.  We  shall  not  enter  into  life  halt  or 
maimed ;  but  he  will  present  us  faultless  before  the  presence  of  his 
glory,  not  having  spot  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing,  much  less  any 
dead  limbs  or  decayed  faculties.  It  is  a  grand  promise,  and  covers 
the  spiritual  nature  as  with  the  wings  of  6od,  so  that  we  may  apply 
to  it  the  words  of  David,  in  the  ninety-first  Psalm  :  "  Surely  he  shaft 
deliver  thee  from  the  snare  of  the  fowler,  and  from  the  noisome 
pestilence.  He  shall  cover  thee  with  his  feathers,  and  under  his  wings 
shalt  thou  trust:  his  truth  shall  be  thy  shield  and  buckler.  Thou 
shalt  not  be  afraid  for  the  terror  by  night;  nor  for  the  arrow  that 
flieth  by  day ;  nor  for  the  pestilence  that  walketh  in  darkness  ;  nor  for 
the  destruction  that  wastcth  at  noonday.  A  thousand  shall  fall  at  thy 
side,  and  ten  thousand  at  thy  right  hand ;  but  it  shall  not  come  nigh 
thee." 

The  text  secures  that  the  death-penalty  of  the  law  shall  never 
fall  upon  believers.  The  quickened  man  shall  never  fall  back  into  the 
old  death  from  which  he  has  escaped  ;  he  shall  not  be  numbered  with 
the  dead,  and  condemned  either  in  this  life  or  the  next.  Never  shall 
the  spiritually  living  become  again  dead  in  sin.  As  Jesus  being 
raised  from  the  dead  dieth  no  more,  death  hath  no  more  dominion  over 
him ;  even  so  sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  us  again.  Once, 
through  the  offence  of  one,  death  reigned  in  us;  but  now  having 
received  abundance  of  ^race  and  of  the  gift  of  righteousness,  we  shall 
reign  in  life  by  one,  Christ  .Jesus.  Rom.  v.  17.  **  For  if,  when  we  were 
enemies,  we  were  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  his  Son,  much  more, 
being  reconciled,  we  shall  be  saved  by  his  life."    Rom.  v.  10. 

We  are  united  to  Christ  this  day  by  bands  of  spiritual  life  which 


LIFE  IK  0HBI6T.  7 

neither  things  present  nor  things  to  come  caii  separate.  Our  union  to 
Jesns  is  eternal.  It  may  be  assailed ;  bnt  it  shidl  never  be  destroyed. 
The  old  body  of  this  death  may  for  awhile  prevail,  and  like  Herod  it 
may  seek  the  yonne  child's  life,  but  it  cannot  die.  Who  shall  condemn 
to  death  that  which  is  not  nnder  the  law  ?  Who  shall  slay  that  which 
abides  under  the  shadow  of  the  Almighty  ?  Even  as  sin  reigned  unto 
death,  even  so  mnst  grace  reign  nnto  eternal  Life,  by  Jesns  Christ  onr 
Lord. 

Bemark  careftQly  the  carUmuance  insisted  npon  in  this  verse.  Gon^ 
tinnance  is  indeed  the  main  element  of  this  promise — *'  Ye  shall  live." 
It  means  certainly  that  during  onr  abode  in  this  body  we  shall  live. 
We  shall  not  be  again  reduced  to  onr  death-state  during  our  sojourn 
here.  Ten  thousand  attempts  will  be  made  to  bring  us  under  dominion 
to  the  law  of  sin  and  death,  bnt  this  one  word  baffles  all.  Your  soul 
may  be  so  assailed  that  it  idiall  seem  as  if  you  could  not  keep  your  hold 
on  Christ,  bnt  Christ  shall  keep  his  hold  on  you.  The  incorruptible 
seed  may  be  crushed,  bruised,  buried,  but  the  life  within  it  shall  not  be 
extingoished,  it  shall  yet  arise.  "  Ye  shall  live."  When  ye  see  all 
around  you  ten  thousand  elements  of  death,  think  ye,  believers,  how 
grand  is  this  word,  "  Ye  shall  live."  No  falling  from  grace  for  you,  no 
being  cast  out  of  the  covenant,  no  being  driven  from  the  Father's  house 
and  left  to  perish.    "  Ye  shall  live." 

Nor  is  this  all,  for  when  the  natural  death  comes,  which  indeed  to  us 
is  no  longer  death,  our  inner  life  shall  suffer  no  hurt  whatever ;  it  will 
not  even  be  suspended  for  a  moment.  It  is  not  a  thing  which  can  be 
touched  by  death.  The  shafts  of  the  last  enemy  can  have  no  more  efTect 
upon  the  spiritual,  than  a  javelin  upon  a  cloud.  Even  in  the  very 
crisis,  when  the  soul  is  separated  from  the  body,  no  damage  shall  be 
done  to  the  spiritual  nature.  And  in  the  awful  future,  when  the 
judgment  comes,  when  the  thrones  are  set,  and  the  multitudes  are 
gathered,  and  to  the  right  the  rigliteous,  and  to  the  left  the  wicked, 
let  what  may  of  terror  and  of  horror  come  forth,  the  begotten  of 
God  shall  live.  Onward  through  eternity,  whatever  may  be  the 
changes  which  yet  are  to  be  disclosed,  nothing  shall  affect  our  God- 
given  life.  Like  the  life  of  God  himself — eternal,  and  ever-blessed, 
it  shall  continue.  Should  all  things  else  be  swept  away,  the  righteous 
must  live  on ;  I  mean  not  merely  that  they  shall  exist,  but  they  shall 
live  in  all  the  ftilness  of  that  far-reaching,  much-comprehending  word 
"life."  Bearing  the  nature  of  God  as  far  as  the  creature  can  partici- 
pate in  it,  the  begotten  from  the  dead  shall  prove  the  sureness  of  the 
promise,  "  Ye  shall  live." 

Let  me  further  call  to  your  notice  that  the  fact  here  stated  is 
universal,  in  application  to  all  spiritual  life.  The  promise  is,  '^  Ye 
shall  live,"  that  is  to  say,  every  child  of  God  shall  live.  Every  one 
who  sees  Christ,  as  the  world  sees  him  not,  is  living  and  shall  live.  I 
can  understand  such  a  promise  given  to  eminent  saints  who  live  near 
to  God,  but  my  soul  would  prostrate  herself  before  the  throne  in 
reverent  loving  wonder  when  she  hears  this  word  spoken  to  the  very 
least  and  meanest  of  the  saints,  "  Ye  shall  live."  Thou  art  not  ex- 
empted, thou  whose  faith  is  but  as  a  smoking  flax,  thou  shalt  live. 
The  Lord  bestows  security  upon  the  least  of  his  people  as  well  as  upon 


8  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

the  greatest.  It  is  plain  that  the  reason  given  for  the  preservation  of 
the  new  life  is  as  applical)le  to  one  saint  as  to  another.  If  it  Itad  been 
said,  '^  Because  ^'onr  faith  is  strong,  ye  shall  live/'  then  weak  faith 
would  have  perished;  bnt  when  it  is! written,  "Because  I  live,"  the 
argument  is  as  powerful  in  the  one  case  as  in  the  other.  Take  it  home 
to  thyself,  my  brother,  however  heavy  thy  heart,  or  dim  thy  hnpe. 
Jesus  lives,  and  you  shall  live. 

Remark  yet  again  that  this  text  is  exceeding  broad.  Mark  its  hreacUh 
and  see  bow  it  meets  everything  to  the  contrary,  and  overturns  all  the 
hopes  of  the  adversary.  "  Ye  shall  live.'*  Then  the  inbred  corrup- 
tion which  rises  within  us  shall  not  stifle  the  new  creature.  Chained 
as  the  spirit  seems  to  be  to  the  loathsome  and  corrupt  body  of  this 
death,  it  shall  live  in  spite  of  its  hideous  companionship.  Though 
besetting  sins  may  be  as  arrows,  and  fleshly  lusts  like  drawn  swords, 
yet  grace  shall  not  be  slain.    Neither  the  fever  of  hasty  passion,  nor  the 

Salsy  of  timorousness,  nor  the  leprosy  of  covctousness,  nor  any  other 
isease  of  sin,  shall  so  break  forth  in  the  old  nature  as  to  destroy  the 
new.  Nor  shall  outward  circumstances  overthrow  the  inner  life. 
'*  For  he  shall  give  his  angels  charge  over  thee,  to  keep  thee  in  all 
thy  ways.  They  shall  bear  thee  up  in  their  hands,  lest  thou  dash  thy 
foot  against  a  stone."  If  providence  should  cast  you  into  a  godless 
family,  where  you  dwell  as  in  a  sepulchre,  and  the  air  you  breathe  is 
laden  with  the  miasma  of  death,  yet  shall  vou  live.  Evil  example 
shall  not  poison  your  spirit,  you  shall  drink  this  deadly  thing  and 
it  shall  not  hurt  you,  you  shall  bo  kept  from  giving  way  to  evil. 
You  shall  not  be  decoyed  by  fair  temptation,  you  shall  not  be 
cowed  by  fierce  persecution :  mightier  is  he  that  is  in  you  than  he 
which  is  in  the  world.  Satan  will  attack  you,  and  his  weapons 
are  deadly,  but  you  shall  foil  kim  at  all  points.  To  you  is  it  given 
to  tread  upon  the  lion  and  adder,  the  young  lion  and  the  dragon 
shall  you  trample  under  foot.  If  God  should  allow  you  for  awhile 
to  be  sorely  tried,  as  he  did  his  servant  Job,  and  if  the  devil  should 
have  all  the  world  to  help  him  in  his  attempt  to  destroy  your 
spiritual  life,  yet  even  on  the  dunghill  of  poverty,  and  in  the  wretched- 
ness of  sickness,  your  spirit  shall  still  maintain  its  holy  life,  and 
you  shall  prove  it  so  by  blessing  and  magnifying  God,  notwith- 
standing all.  We  little  dream  what  may  be  reserved  for  us  ;  we  may 
have  to  climb  steeps  of  prosperity,  slippery  and  dangerous,  but  we  shall 
live ;  we  may  be  called  to  sink  in  the  dark  waters  of  adversity,  all 
God's  waves  and  billows  may  go  over  us,  but  we  shall  live.  AVe  may 
traverse  pestilent  swamps  of  error,  or  burning  deserts  of  unbelief 
but  the  divine  life  shall  live  amid  the  domains  of  death.  Let  the 
future  be  bright  or  black,  we  need  not  wish  to  turn  the  page  ;  that 
which  we  prize  best,  namely,  our  spiritual  life,  is  hid  with  Christ  in 
God,  beyond  the  reach  of  harm,  and  we  shall  live.  If  old  age  shall  be 
our  portion,  and  our  crown  shall  be  delayed  till  we  have  fought  a  long 
and  weary  battle,  yet  nevertheless  we  shall  live ;  or  if  sudden  death 
should  cut  short  the  time  of  our  trial  here,  yet  we  shall  have  lived  in  the 
fulness  of  that  word.  • 

III.  Onr  third  point  is,  the  ueasox  for  the  secuuity  of  tuk 

SPIRITUAL  LIFE. 


LIFE  IX  GHEIST.  9 

The  reason  assigned  is  this,  '*  Because  I  live,  je  shall  live  also." 
Christ  has  life  essentially  as  God.  Christ,  as  man,  having  fulfilled  his 
life-work,  having  offered  full  atonement  for  human  sin,  dieth  no.  more, 
death  hath  no  more  dominion  over  him.  His  life  is  communicated 
to  us,  and  becomes  the  guarantee  to  us  that  we  shall  live  also. 

Observe,  first,  that  this  is  the  sole  reason  of  the  believer's  spiritual 
life.  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also."  The  means  by  which  the 
soul  is  pardoned  is  found  in  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus ;  the  cause 
of  its  obtaining  spiritual  life  at  first  is  found  in  Clurist's  finished 
work ;  and  the  only  reason  why  the  Christian  continues  still  to  live 
after  he  is  quickened,  lies  in  Jesus  Christ,  who  liveth  and  was  dead  and 
is  alive  for  evermore.  AVhen  I  first  come  to  Christ,  I  know  I  must  find 
all  in  him,  for  I  feel  I  have  nothing  of  my  own ;  but  all  my  life  long  I 
am  to  acknowledge  the  same  absolute  dependence;  I  am  stiU  to  look  for 
eveiything  to  him.  **  I  am  the  vine,  ye  are  the  branches :  he  that  abideth 
in  me,  and  I  in  him,  the  same  bringeth  forth  much  fi*uit :  for  without  me 
ye  can  do  nothing."  The  temptation  is  after  we  have  looked  to  Jesus  and 
found  life  there,  to  fancy  that  in  future  time  we  are  to  sustain  ourselves 
in  spiritual  existence  by  some  means  within  ourselves,  or  by  supplies 
extra  and  apart  from  Christ.  But  it  must  not  be  so ;  all  for  the  Mure 
as  well  as  all  for  the  past  is  wrapped  up  in  the  person  and  the  work  of 
the  Lord  Jesus.  Because  he  died,  ye  are  pardoned  ;  because  he  lives, 
ye  live ;  all  your  life  still  lies  in  him  who  is  the  way,  the  truth,  and 
the  life.  Does  not  the  Christian's  life  depend  upon  his  prayerfulness  ? 
Could  he  be  a  Christian  if  he  ceased  to  pray  ?  We  reply,  the  Christian's 
q)iritual  health  depends  upon  his  prayerfulness,  but  that  prayerful- 
ness depends  on  something  else.  The  reason  why  the  hands  of  the 
clock  move  may  be  found  first  in  a  certain  wheel  which  operates  upon 
them,  but  if  you  go  to  the  primary  cause  of  all,  you  reach  the  main-spring, 
or  the  weight,  which  is  the  source  of  all  the  motion.  Many  secondary 
causes  tend  to  sustain  spiritual  life ;  but  the  primary  cause,  the  first  and 
foremost,  is  because  Jesus  Christ  lives.  '^  All  my  fresh  springs  are  in 
thee."  While  JesuB  lives,  he  sends  the  Spirit ;  the  Spirit  being  sent,  we 
pray ;  our  prayer  becomes  the  evidence  of  our  spiritual  life.  "  But  are  not 
good  works  essential  to  the  maintenance  of  the  spiritual  life  ?"  Cer- 
tainly, if  there  be  no  good  works,  we  have  no  evidence  of  spiritual  life. 
In  its  season  the  tree  must  bring  forth  its  fruit  and  its  leaves ;  if  there 
be  no  outward  2\^n  we  suspect  that  there  is  no  motion  of  the  sap 
within.  StiU,  to  the  tree  the  fruit  is  not  the  cause  of  life,  but  the 
result  of  it,  and  to  the  life  of  the  Christian,  good  works  bear  the 
same  relationship,  they  are  its  outgrowth,  not  its  root.  If  then  my 
spiritual  life  is  low,  what  am  I  to  look  to  ?  I  am  not  to  look  to  my 
prayers,  I  am  not  to  find  comfort  in  my  works.  I  may  from  these 
aiscover  how  declining  I  am  ;  but  if  I  wane  my  life  to  be  renovated,  I 
must  fly  to  the  fountain  of  my  life,  even  Jesus,  for  there,  and  there 
only,  shall  I  find  restoration.  Do  let  us  recollect  this,  that  we  are  not 
saved  because  of  anything  that  we  are,  or  anything  that  we  do  ;  and 
that  we  do  not  remain  saved  because  of  anything  we  are  or  can  be.  A 
man  is  saved  because  Christ  died  for  him,  he  continues  saved  because 
Christ  lives  for  him.  The  sole  reason  why  the  spiritual  life  abides  is 
because  Jesus  lives.     This  is  to  get  upon  a  rock,  above  the  fogs  which 


INDEX  OF  SCRIPTURE  TEXTS. 


VOLUME    XVII. 


GENESIS. 

Chap,  ft  Venc. 

3CX1*  Id.**     «••     .«•     •••     •••     ••• 

EXODUS. 

1*  m~^i*.»»  •«•    •.•    •••     ••     ••• 

XVs  3»0"^d    «••      >«•      •••      •••      ••• 

2  KINGS. 

ZI*    lU     •••      •••       •••      •••      •••       •** 

1  CHRONICLES. 

iv*  lu    ...     •••     •«•     •••     •••     •*• 

NEHEMIAH. 
viii.  lo...     ...     ...     •••     •••     *** 

2L1].    •^1    '•*'     ***       ■**       ***       ***       *** 

JOB. 
xxvii.  10       ...     ...     •••     •••     •«• 

3^X1X.  Jb"""**     ••*       ...       •••       •••       ••• 

PSALMS. 

XIX.    ^r"""©  ...  ••.  •••  ••• 

Xl.  9,  lU  ..•  •••  ...  ••* 

JVll.  O       •«.  ••*  •«•  '•.  ••• 

IX.    o         .,«  ...  

JXV.    1|  *  *•*  .*•  ••*  •.. 

JXX.    4      •*•  ...  ...  •••  *.. 

JXX.    O     ...  ...  *..  ••.  ••* 

JXXl.    I*»  •••  ••»  ••«  ••• 

CIV.  17)  18      •*.     •• 

PROVERBS. 

VI.       mm       ...  ••»  •••  ».»  •••  ••• 

SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 

1.  o         «■•      ■••      ...      ...      ••«      ... 

V,  10        ...       ...       ...       ...       •••       •*. 

VI.  4.       ...     ••• •.•     ••• 

ISAIAIL 

X 1  •  ti  ^^o         •••     ••.     •..     •*.     ••• 
Xlll.  /      ••«     ...     ••«     •••     

Xllll.  u •••       •••       ••.       ■•* 

JXl.  >'      ...     ...     ««.     ••.     ..■     *** 

IXVl.o      ...       ••.       .*.       ...       ...       ... 

IWI.  221  ...       •••       •••       ••.       ...       ••■ 

JEREMIAH. 

XV.       la»         ...  •••  ...  •*•  ..•  ••* 

XV.  lo    ...     ...      ...     ...     *.•     **■ 

HOSEA. 
XI.  •»     ••«     •••     ...     •••     •••     ••• 

ZECHARIAH. 

Xllla       I  ••■  •••  •••  •••  "•*  *"* 

MALACHL 
IV.  2      *••     •     ••• 


Pairc 
73 


349 
229 

49 

313 

709 
709 

205 
617 

625 
109 
337 
181 
661 
541 
601 
361 
445 

589 

265 
397 
193 

373 
217 
469 
.'577 
493 
289 

301 
145 

637 

37 

625 


MATTHEW. 
Chnp.  &  Vcnw. 
IV.    1  Of   xo       ...      ...      •••      ••• 

XI.   ^B       «jv       ••«       ...       •».       ••« 
XXll.  J»      4       ...       ...       ...      ... 

xxii.  11 — 14 


»  •  •  •  •• 


•••  •••  •••  ■•• 

•••  •*•  •••  ••• 

•••  •••  ••«  ••• 


LUKE. 

II*      1 11         1 2  •••         ••«  •••         ••• 

lla       ^aFyOl/  •••  •••  •••  ••• 

V.   16—26 
X.  42 

XV.  8—10 

•vV«       At  •••  a««  •«»  •«•  ••• 

JOHN. 

111.  .So     «••      *■•      ...       *••       •*       ••* 
X.   2^        ..«      ...      ...      .••      ...      ••• 

XIV.    19  •..       •*•      ...      ...      •••       ••• 

ACTS. 

XVI.  32—34 .••      ••» 

ROMANS. 

XVI.    ^4    ...       ••*        •••       •••       ...       ••• 

1  CORINTHIANS. 

1.  oUf  .11...      ...      ...      •..      ...      ••• 

VI.     Ivf    2b\/  .«•        ...         «•*        ••.         ••• 

Xlll.    J^*».       ...        ••«       ••*        ***       **• 

EPHESIANS. 

1  W%     4  ^^*  Xi       •••     •••     •••     •••     ••• 

PHILIPPIANS. 

lla       IZ  •••  •••  ■••  ••«  •••  »•• 

lll«     i\w%     mk  •••  •••  •••  •••  ••• 

COLOSSIANS. 

!•   1  tf      •••    •••    •••    *•■    •••    ••• 

]11«   11    •••    •••    «••    •••    •••    ••• 

1  THESSALONIANS 

v«o     •••   •••   •••   •••   •••   ••• 

2  TIMOTIIV. 

1V«  o         ...       ...       •••       •••       •••       ••• 

HEBREWS. 

1  V«     10       •••        #••        ■••        •■• 

JAMFIS. 
1  PETER. 

1.    ^v^^»3  ••»        •••        •"• 

1  JOHN. 

I V  •     l.«f         •••         •••  •••         •'• 

V  •      m  •••  •••  •••  ■•!  •••  ••• 


•  •  •  •  •  • 


•••  •••  ••« 


>  •  •  •  « 


Pajro 

.505 

13 

85 

97 


697 
553 
IC" 
665 
25 
385 


529 

325 

1 

613 
241 


277 
433 
409 


169 


421 
61 


121 

457 

649 

253 

673 

685 

373 

481 
133 


riitijjfltttatt  ^^sbmmit 


LIFE  IN  CHRIST. 


DiaJVEBED  ON  LORD'8-DAY  MORXING,  JANUARY  1ST,   1871,  BY 

C..H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOUTAN  TABERNAOLB,  NEWINGTOS. 


**  Because  I  liTd,  ye  shall  live  also." — John  xiv.  19.* 

This  world  saw  our  Lord  Jesns  for  a  very  little  time,  but  now  it  seetli 
him  no  more.  It  only  saw  him  with  the  outward  eye  and  after  a 
carnal  sort,  bo  that  when  the  clouds  received  him  and  concealed  him 
from  bodily  vision,  this  spiritually  blind  world  lost  sight  of  him  al- 
together. Here  and  there,  ^however,  among  the  crowds  of  the  sightless 
there  were  a  few  chosen  men  who  had  received  spiritual  sight ;  Christ 
had  been  light  to  them,  he  had  opened  their  blind  eyes,  and  they  had 
seen  him  as  the  world  had  not  seen  him.  In  a  high  and  full  sense  they 
could  say,  **We  have  seen  the  Lord,"  for  they  had  in  some  degree 
jxirceived  his  Godhead,  discerned  his  mission,  and  learned  his  spiritual 
character.  Since  spiritual  eight  does  not  depend  upon  the  bodily 
presence  of  its  object,  those  persons  who  had  seen  Jesus  spiritually,  saw 
him  after  he  had  gone  out  of  the  world  unto  the  Father.  We  who  have 
the  same  sight  still  see  him.  Read  carefiiUy  the  words  of  the  verse  before 
tir:  "  Yet  a  little  while,  and  the  world  seeth  me  no  more ;  but  ye  see  me." 
It  is  a  distinguishing  mark  of  a  true  follower  of  Jesus  that  he  sees  his 
Lord  and  Master  when  he  is  not  to  be  seen  by  the  bodily  eye ;  he  sees 
him  intelligently  and  spiritually;  he  knows  his  Lord,  discerns  his 
character,  apprehends  him  by  faith,  gazes  upon  him  with  admiration, 
and  looks  to  him  for  all  he  needs.  Now,  my  brethren,  remember  that 
as  our  first  sight  of  Christ  brought  us  into  spiritual  life,  for  we  looked 
unto  him  and  were  saved,  so  it  is  by  the  continuance  of  this  spiritual 
sight  of  Christ  that  our  spiritual  life  is  consciously  maintained.  We 
lived  by  looking,  we  live  still  by  looking.  Faith  is  still  the  medium  by 
which  life  comes  to  us  from  the  life-giving  Lord.  It  is  not  only  upon 
the  first  day  of  the  Christian's  life  that  he  must  needs  look  to  Jesus 
only,  but  every  day  of  that  life,  even  until  the  last,  his  motto  must 
be,  "  Looking  unto  Jesus,  the  author  and  finisher  of  our  faith."  The 
world  sees  him  no  more,  for  it  never  saw  him  aright ;  but  ye  have  seen 


•  This  text  has  heen  sent  ns  by  a  venerable  clerg3mian  of  the  Church  of  England, 
^vho  has  for  many  years  selected  a  now  year's  text  for  us,  and  others  of  his  friends. 
In  tlio  calm  enjoyment  of  diyine  consolations,  such  as  this  verse  affords,  may  his  last 
^hv^  i^sL-iH  SLVfaj  in  tranquillity  and  rejoicing. 

No.  968. 


2  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

him  and  lived,  and  now,  throngh  continuing  still  to  see  him,  you 
remain  in  life.  Let  us  ever  remember  the  intimate  connection  between 
faith  and  spiritual  life.  Faith  is  the  life-look.  We  must  never  think 
that  we  live  by  works,  by  feelings,  or  by  ceremonies.  "  The  just  shall 
live  by  faith."  We  dare  not  preach  to  the  ungodly  sinner  a  way  of 
obtaining  life  by  the  works  of  the  law,  neither  dare  we  hold  up  to  the 
most  advanced  believer  a  way  of  sustaining  life  by  legal  means.  We 
should  in  such  a  case  expect  to  bear  the  apostle's  expostulation,  "  Are 
ye  so  foolish  ?  having  begun  in  the  Spirit,  are  ye  now  made  perfect  by 
the  flesh  ?"  Our  gloiying  is  that  our  life  is  not  dependent  on  ourselves, 
but  is  safe  in  our  Lord,  as  saith  the  apostle,  "I  am  crucified  with  Christ : 
nevertheless  I  live  ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me :  and  the  life 
which  I  now  live  in  the  flesh  I  live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God,  who 
loved  me,  and  gave  himself  for  me."  Because  he  lives,  we  live,  and 
shall  live  for  ever.  God  grant  that  our  eye  may  ever  be  clear  towards 
Jesus,  our  life.  May  we  have  no  confidence  but  in  our  Redetmer; 
may  our  eye  be  so  fixed  upon  him,  that  no  other  object  may  in  any 
measure  or  degree  shut  out  our  view  of  him  as  our  all  in  all. 

The  text  contains  in  it  very  much  of  weighty  truth,  far  more  than 
we  shall  be  able  to  bring  forth  from  it  this  morning.  First,  we  see  in 
it  a  Ufa;  secondly,  that  life  preserved ;  and  thirdly,  thereasonfor  tJie pre- 
servaiwn  of  that  life :  **  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also." 

I.  First,  we  have  life  here  spoken  of. 

We  must  not  confound  this  with  existence.  It  were  indeed  to  reduce 
a  very  rich  text  to  a  poverty-stricken  sentence  if  we  read  it,  "  Because  I 
exist,  ye  shall  exist  also."  We  could  not  say  of  such  a  use  of  words  that 
the  water  of  ordinary  speech  was  turned  to  wine,  but  rather  that  the 
wine  was  turned  to  water.  Before  the  disciples  believed  in  Jesus  they 
existed,  and  altogether  apart  from  him  as  their  spiritual  life  then* 
existence  would  have  been  continued  ;  it  was  something  far  other  and 
higher  than  immortal  existence  which  our  Lord  was  here  dealing  with. 

Life,  what  is  it  ?  We  know  practically,  but  we  cannot  tell  in  words. 
We  know  it,  however,  to  be  a  mystery  of  different  degrees.  As  all  flesh 
is  not  the  same  flesh,  so  all  life  is  not  the  same  life.  There  is  the  life  of 
the  vegetable,  the  cedar  of  Lebanon,  the  hyssop  on  the  wall.  There  is 
a  considerable  advance  when  we  come  to  animal  life — the  eagle  or  the 
ox.  Animal  life  moves  in  quite  a  different  world  from  that  in  which 
the  plant  vegetates — sensation,  appetite,  instinct,  are  things  to  which 
plants  are  dead,  though  they  may  possess  some  imitation  of  them,  for 
one  life  mimics  another.  Animal  life  rises  far  above  the  experience 
and  apprehension  of  the  flower  of  the  field.  Then  there  is  mental  life, 
which  we  all  of  us  possess,  which  introduces  us  into  quite  another 
realm  from  that  which  is  inhabited  by  the  mere  beast.  To  judge,  to 
foresee,  to  imagine,  to  invent,  to  perform  moral  acts,  are  not  these  new 
functions  which  the  ox  hath  not?  Now,  let  it  be  clear  to  you,  that  far 
above  mental  life  there  is  another  form  of  life  of  which  the  mere 
carnal  man  can  form  no  more  idea  than  the  plant  of  the  animal,  or  the 
animal  of  the  poet.  The  carnal  mind  knoweth  not  spiritual  things, 
because  it  has  no  spiritual  capacities.  As  the  beast  cannot  compre- 
hend the  pursuit*  of  the  philosopher,  so  the  man  who  is  but  a  natural 
man  cannot  comprehend  the  experience  of  the  spiritually  minded.  Thus 


LIFK  IN  CHBIST.  '^ 

saith  the  Scripture :  "  The  natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things  of 
the  ^irit  of  God  :  for  they  are  foolishness  unto  him  :  neither  can  ho 
know  them,  because  they  are  spiritually  discerned.  But  he  that  is 
spiritual  judgeth  all  things,  yet  he  himself  is  judged  of  no  man.'* 
There  is  in  believers  a  life  which  is  not  to  be  found  in  other  men — 
nobler,  diviner  far ;  education  cannot  raise  the  natural  man  into  it, 
neither  can  refinement  reach  it;  for  at  its  best,  " that  which  is  born  of 
the  flesh  is  flesh,"  and  to  all  must  the  humbling  truth  be  spoken,  '*  Ye 
must  be  bom  again.'' 

It  is  to  be  remarked  concerning  our  life  m  Christ,  that  it  is  the 
removal  of  the  penalty  which  fell  upon  our  race  for  Adam's  sin.  **  In 
the  day  that  thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt  surely  die,"  was  the  Lord's 
threatening  to  our  first  parent,  who  was  the  representative  of  the  race. 
He  did  eat  of  that  fruit,  and  since  God  is  true,  and  his  word  never  fails, 
we  may  be  sure  of  this,  that  in  that  selfsame  day  Adam  died.  It  is 
true  that  he  did  not  cease  to  exists  but  that  is  quite  another  thing 
from  dying.  The  threatening  was  not  that  he  should  ultimately 
die,  but  "  In  the  day  thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt  sm-ely  die ;"  and  it 
is  beyond  all  doubt  that  the  Lord  kept  his  word  to  the  letter.  If  the 
first  threatening  was  not  carried  out  we  might  take  liberty  to  trifle 
with  all  others.  Best  assured,  then,  that  the  threat  was  on  the  spot 
fulfilled.  The  spiritual  life  departed  from  Adam ;  he  was  no  longer  at 
one  with  God,  no  more  able  to  live  and  breathe  in  the  same  sphere  as 
the  Lord.  He  fell  from  his  first  estate ;  he  had  need  if  he  should  enter  into 
spiritual  life  to  be  bom  again,  even  as  you  and  I  must  be.  As  he  hides 
himself  from  his  Maker,  and  utters  vain  excuses  before  his  God,  you 
see  that  he  is  dead  to  the  life  of  God,  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  We 
also,  being  heirs  of  wrath  even  as  others,  are  through  the  fall  dead, 
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins;  and  if  ever  we  are  to  possess  spiritual  life, 
it  must  be  said  of  us,  "  And  you  hath  he  quickened."  We  must  be  as 
**  those  that  are  alive  from  the  dead."  The  world  is  the  valley  of  dry 
bones,  and  grace  raises  the  chosen  into  newness  of  life.  The  fall 
brought  universal  death,  in  the  deep  spiritual  sense  of  that  word,  over 
all  mankind ;  and  Jesus  delivers  us  from  the  consequences  of  the  fall 
by  implanting  in  us  a  spiritual  life.  By  no  other  means  can  this  death 
be  removed :  "  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life :  and 
he  that  believeth  not  the  Son  shall  not  see  life ;  but  the  wrath  of  God 
abideth  on  him."  The  work  of  regeneration,  in  which  the  new  lif?  is 
implanted,  effectually  restores  the  min  of  the  fall,  for  we  are  born  again 
**not  of  corraptible  seed,  but  of  incorraptible,  by  the  word  of  God, 
which  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever."  But  you  remind  me  that  still  sin 
remains  in  us  after  we  have  received  the  divine  life.  I  know  it  does, 
and  it  is  called  ''  the  body  of  this  death ;"  and  this  it  is  which  the 
new  life  has  to  stmggle  with.  There  is  a  contention  which  rages 
within,  between  the  power  of  the  death  in  the  first  Adam,  and  the 
power  of  the  life  of  the  second  Adam ;  but  the  heavenly  life  will 
ultimately  overcome  the  deadly  energy  of  sin.  Even  to-day  our  inner 
life  groans  after  deliverance,  but  with  its  groan  of  *^  0  wretched  mwi 
that  I  am !  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ? "  it 
mingles  the  thankful  song,  **  I  thank  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord." 


4  HKTROPOLITAN  TABEBNACLE  PULPIT. 

This  life  is  of  a  purely  spiritnal  kind.  We  find  analogies  and  resem- 
blances of  it  in  the  common  mental  life,  bnt  they  are  only  analogies,  the 
spiritnal  life  is  far  and  high  above  the  carnal  life,  and  altogether  ont 
of  si^ht  of  the  fleshly  mind.  Scarce  are  there  words  in  which  it  can  be 
described.  To  know  this  life  yon  mnst  have  it;  it  mnst  pnlsate 
within  yonr  own  bosom,  for  no  explanations  of  others  can  tell  you 
what  this  life  is;  it  is  one  of  the  secrets  of  the  Lord.  It  wonld 
not  be  possible  for  ns  with  the  greatest  skill  to  communicate  to 
a  horse  any  conception  of  what  imagination  is;  neither  could  we 
by  the  most  diligent  use  of  words,  communicate  to  carnal  minds 
what  it  is  to  be  joined  unto  the  Lord  so  as  to  be  one  spirit  One  thing 
we  know  of  it,  namely,  that  the  spiritual  life  is  intimately  connected 
with  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  souL  When  he  comes  we 
are  "  bom  again  from  aboye,"  "  bom  of  the  Spirit"  While  he  works  in 
us  mightily  our  life  is  active  and  powerful;  if  he  withdraws  his  active 
operations  our  new  life  becomes  faint  and  sickly.  Christ  is  our  life,  but 
he  works  in  us  through  his  Holy  Spirit,  who  dwelleth  in  us  evermore. 

Further,  we  know  that  this  life  very  much  consists  in  union  with  God. 
"  For  to  be  carnally  minded  is  death  ;  but  to  be  spiritually  minded  is 
life  and  peace.  Because  the  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God :  for  it 
is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  be.  So  then  they 
that  are  in  the  flesh  cannot  please  God."  Death  as  to  the  body  con- 
sists in  the  body  being  separated  from  the  soul ;  the  death  of  the  soul 
lies  mainly  in  the  soul's  being  separated  from  its  God.  For  the  soul  to 
be  in  union  with  God  is  the  soul's  highest  life ;  in  his  presence  it  unfolds 
itself  like  an  opening  flower;  away  from  him  it  pines,  and  loses  all  its 
beauty  and  excellence,  till  it  is  as  a  thing  destroyed.  Let  the  soul  obey 
God,  let  it  be  holy,  pure,  gracious,  then  is  it  happy,  and  truly  living ; 
but  a  soul  sundered  from  God  is  a  soul  blasted,  killed,  destroyed ;  it 
exists  in  a  dreadful  death ;  all  its  trae  peace,  dignity,  and  glory,  are  gone; 
it  is  a  hideous  rain,  the  mere  corpse  of  manhood.  The  new  lue  brings  us 
near  to  God,  makes  us  think  of  him,  makes  us  love  him,  and  ultimately 
makes  us  like  him.  My  brethren,  it  is  in  proportion  as  you  get  near  to 
God  that  you  enter  into  the  full  enjoyment  of  life — ^that  life  which  Jesus 
Christ  gives  you,  and  which  Jesus  Christ  preserves  in  you.  **In  his 
favour  is  life."  Psalm  xxx.  5.  "  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  a  fountain  of  life." 
Prov.  xiv.  27.  To  turn  to  God  is  "  repentance  unto  life."  To  forget  God 
is  for  a  man  to  be  **  dead  whilst  he  liveth."  To  believe  the  witness  of  God 
is  to  possess  the  faith  which  overcometh  the  world.  "  He  that  believeth 
on  the  Son  of  God  hath  the  witness  in  himself:  he  that  believeth  not  God 
hath  made  him  a  liar  ;  because  he  believeth  not  the  record  that  God 
gave  of  his  Son.  And  this  is  the  record,  that  God  hath  given  to  us 
eternal  life,  and  this  life  is  in  his  Son.  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life ; 
and  he  that  hath  not  the  Son  of  God  hath  not  life." 

This  life  within  the  soul  bears  fruit  on  earth  in  righteousness  and  true 
holiness.  It  blooms  with  sweetest  flowers  of  fellowship  with  God  below, 
and  it  is  made  perfect  in  the  presence  of  God  in  heaven.  The  life  of 
glorified  spirits  above  is  but  the  life  of  justified  men  here  below  ;  it  is 
the  same  life,  only  it  is  delivered  from  encumbrances,  and  has  come  to 
the  fulness  of  its  strength.  The  life  of  heaven  is  in  every  believer  even 
now.    The  moment  a  sinner  believes  in  Jesus  he  receives  from  God  that 


LIFE  IN  CHRI£rr.  5 

gelfsame  life  which  shall  look  down  serenely  upon  the  conflagration  of 
earthy  &iid  the  passing  away  of  these  lower  skies.  Blessed  is  that  man 
who  hath  everlasting  life,  who  is  made  a  partaker  of  the  divine  nature, 
who  is  bom  a^ain  from  above,  who  is  bom  of  God  by  a  seed  which 
remaineth  in  him,  for  he  is  the  man  upon  ^om  the  second  death  hath 
no  power,  who  shall  enjoy  life  eternal  when  the  wicked  go  away  into 
everlaf&ting  pnnishment. 

Thns  much  concerning  this  life.  We  have  now  to  ask  each  of 
you  whether  you  have  received  it.  Have  you  been  bom,  not  of  blood, 
nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God? 
Was  there  a  time  with  you  when  you  passed  from  death  unto  life,  or 
are  you  abiding  in  death  ?  Have  you  the  witness  in  yourself  that 
yon  have  been  operated  upon  by  a  divinely  spiritual  power?  Is 
there  something  in  you  which  was  not  once  there,  not  a  faculty  de- 
veloped by  education,  but  a  life  implanted  by  God  himself  ?  Do  you  feel 
an  inward  craving  unknown  to  carnal  minds,  a  longing  desire  which 
this  world  could  neither  excite  nor  gratify?  Is  there  a  strange 
tenant  within  this  body  of  yours,  a  prince  incognito,  an  exiled  spirit 
sighing  for  a  land  as  yet  unseen,  of  which  it  is  a  native,  and  for 
which  it  yearns?  Do  you  walk  among  the  sons  of  men  as  a  being 
of  another  race,  not  of  the  world,  even  as  Christ  was  not  of  the  world  ? 
Can  you  say,  with  the  favoured  apostle,  "  We  know  that  the  Son  of 
God  is  come,  and  hath  given  us  an  understanding,  that  we  may  know 
him  that  is  trae,  and  we  are  in  him  that  is  tme,  even  in  his  Son  Jesus 
Christ.  This  is  the  tme  God,  and  eternal  life."  Oh !  then,  thank  God 
for  this,  and  thank  God  yet  more  that  you  have  an  infallible  guarantee 
that  your  life  shall  be  continued  and  perfected,  for  so  saith  the  text, 
"  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also." 

II.  Our  second  head  treats  of  life  peeserved.  "  Because  I  live,  ye 
shall  live  also."  There  stands  the  promise,  **  Ye  shall  live  also"  This 
heavenly  life  of  yours  which  ye  have  received  shall  be  preserved  to  you. 

Concerning  this  sentence  let  me  draw  your  attention,  first  of  all,  to 
itR  fulness :  "  Ye  shall  live."  I  think  I  see  in  that  much  more  than 
lies  upon  the  surface.  Whatever  is  meant  by  living  shall  be  ours.  All 
the  degree  of  life  which  is  secured  in  the  covenant  of  grace,  believers 
shall  have.  Moreover,  all  your  new  nature  shall  live,  shall  thoroughly 
live,  shall  etemally  live.  By  this  word  it  is  secured  that  the  eternal 
life  implanted  at  regeneration  shall  never  die  out.  As  our  Lord  said 
so  shall  it  be.  "Whosoever  drinketh  of  the  water  that  I  shall 
give  him  shall  never  thirst;  but  the  water  that  I  shall  give  him 
shall  be  in  him  a  well  of  water  springing  up  into  everlasting  life."  We 
may  be  tempted,  but  we  shall  not  be  so  led  astray  as  to  cease  to  live  in 
Christ.  It  may  be  that  we  shall  decline  in  grace,  a  thousand  sorrows 
that  it  should  be  so  !  but  we  shall  not  so  decline  as  to  become  utter 
apostates,  or  sons  of  perdition.  **  He  that  is  begotten  of  God  keepeth 
himself,  and  that  evil  one  toucheth  him  not.*'  Thus  saith  the  Redeemer 
unto  you,  ye  trembling  children  of  God,  '*  Ye  shall  live,"  ye  shall  never 
perish,  neither  shall  any  pluck  you  out  of  his  hands.  May  I  not  view 
this  precious  word  as  referring  to  all  the  essential  spiritual  graces 
which  make  up  the  new  man  ?  Not  even,  in  part,  shall  the  new  man  die. 
"  Ye  shall  live,"  applies  to  all  the  parts  of  om-  new-born  nature.   If  there 


6  METROPOLITAN  TABERXACLE  PULPIT. 

be  any  believer  here  who  has  not  lived  to  the  full  extent  he  might 
have  done,  let  him  lay  hold  upon  this  promise ;  and  seeing  that  it 
secures  the  preservation  of  all  his  new  nature,  let  him  have  courage  to 
seek  a  higher  degree  of  health.  *'  I  am  come,"  saith  Christ,  *'  that  ye 
might  have  life,  and  have  it  more  abundantly."  There  is  no  reason, 
Christian,  why  your  love  to  Jesus  should  not  become  flaming,  ardent, 
conquering  ;  for  it  lives,  and  ever  must  live.  As  to  your  faith,  it  also 
has  immortal  vitality  in  it,  and  though  it  be  just  now  weak,  and 
staggering,  lift  up  the  hands  that  hang  do^vn  and  confirm  the  feeble 
knees,  for  your  faith  shall  not  die  out.  Here  in  your  Lord's  promise 
the  abiding  nature  of  the  vital  faculties  of  your  spirit  is  guaranteed. 
There  is  no  stint  to  the  fulness  of  life  which  is  given  you  in  (.'hrist 
Jesus.  I  know  not  who  shall  tell  me  what  it  must  be  to  live  in  all  the 
fulness  of  Christian  life.  Beneath  the  skies  I  would  labour  to  attain  it, 
but  herein  is  my  joy,  that  it  shall  be  most  surely  mine,  for  this  word  is 
faithful  and  true.  As  surely  as  I  have  this  day  eternal  life  by  reason 
of  faith  in  Christ  Jesus,  so  surely  shall  I  reach  its  fulness  when 
Christ  who  is  my  life  shall  appear.  Even  here  on  earth  I  hare  the 
permit  to  seek  for  the  fullest  aevelopment  of  this  life  ;  nay,  I  have 
a  precept  in  this  promise  bidding  me  to  seek  after  it.  "Te  shall  live," 
means  that  the  new  life  shall  not  be  destroyed — no,  not  as  to  any 
of  its  essentials.  All  the  members  of  the  spiritual  man  shall  bo 
safe ;  we  may  say  of  it  as  of  the  Lord  himself,  "  Not  a  bone  of  him 
shall  be  broken."  The  shield  of  Christ's  own  life  covers  all  the 
faculties  of  our  spiritual  nature.  We  shall  not  enter  into  life  halt  or 
maimed ;  but  he  will  present  us  faultless  before  the  presence  of  his 
glory,  not  having  spot  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing,  much  less  any 
dead  limbs  or  decayed  faculties.  It  is  a  grand  promise,  and  covers 
the  spiritual  nature  as  with  the  wings  of  God,  so  that  we  may  apply 
to  it  the  words  of  David,  in  the  ninety-first  Psalm  :  "  Surely  he  shall 
deliver  thee  from  the  snare  of  the  fowler,  and  from  the  noisome 
pestilence.  He  shall  cover  thee  with  his  feathers,  and  under  his  wings 
shalt  thou  trust:  his  truth  shall  be  thy  shield  and  buckler.  Thou 
shalt  not  be  afraid  for  the  terror  by  night;  nor  for  the  arrow  that 
flieth  by  day ;  nor  for  the  pestilence  that  walketh  in  darkness  ;  nor  for 
the  destruction  that  wastcth  at  noonday.  A  thousand  shall  fall  at  thy 
side,  and  ten  thousand  at  thy  right  hand ;  but  it  shall  not  come  nigh 
thee." 

The  text  secures  that  the  death-penalty  of  the  law  shall  never 
fall  upon  believers.  The  quickened  man  shall  never  fall  back  into  the 
old  death  from  which  he  has  escaped  ;  he  shall  not  be  numbered  with 
the  dead,  and  condemned  either  in  this  life  or  the  next.  Never  shall 
the  spiritually  living  become  again  dead  in  sin.  As  Jesus  being 
raised  from  the  dead  dieth  no  more,  death  hath  no  more  dominion  over 
him ;  even  so  sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  us  again.  Once, 
through  the  offence  of  one,  death  reigned  in  us;  but  now  having 
received  abundance  of  ^race  and  of  the  gift  of  righteousness,  we  shall 
reign  in  life  by  one,  Christ  Jesus.  Rom.  v.  17.  **  For  if,  when  we  were 
enemies,  we  were  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  his  Son,  much  more, 
being  reconciled,  we  shall  be  saved  by  his  life."    Rom.  v.  10. 

Wc  are  united  to  Christ  this  day  by  bands  of  spiritual  life  which 


LIFE  IK  OHBIST.  7 

neither  things  present  nor  things  to  come  cai;  separate.  Onr  union  to 
Jesus  is  eternal.  It  may  be  assailed ;  but  it  shall  never  be  destroyed. 
The  old  body  of  this  death  may  for  awhile  prevail,  and  like  Herod  it 
may  seek  the  yonn^  child's  life,  but  it  cannot  die.  Who  shall  condemn 
to  death  that  which  is  not  under  the  law  ?  Who  shall  slay  that  which 
abides  under  the  shadow  of  the  Almighty  ?  Even  as  sin  reigned  unto 
death,  even  so  must  grace  reign  unto  eternal  life,  by  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord. 

Bemark  careftilly  ihe  eanttrmance  insisted  upon  in  this  verse.  Con- 
tinuance is  indeed  the  main  element  of  this  promise — "Te  shall  live." 
It  means  certainly  that  during  our  abode  in  this  body  we  shall  live. 
We  shall  not  be  again  reduced  to  our  death-state  during  our  sojourn 
here.  Ten  thousand  attempts  will  be  made  to  bring  us  under  dominion 
to  the  law  of  sin  and  death,  but  this  one  word  baffles  all.  Your  soul 
may  be  so  assailed  that  it  shall  seem  as  if  you  could  not  keep  your  hold 
on  Christ,  but  Christ  shall  keep  his  hold  on  yon.  The  incorruptible 
seed  may  be  crushed,  bruised,  buried,  but  the  life  within  it  shall  not  be 
extinguished,  it  shall  yet  arise.  "  Ye  shall  live."  When  ye  see  all 
around  you  ten  thousand  elements  of  death,  think  ye,  believers,  how 
grand  is  this  word,  "  Ye  shall  live."  No  falling  from  grace  for  you,  no 
being  cast  out  of  the  covenant,  no  being  driven  from  the  Father's  house 
and  left  to  perish.    "  Ye  shall  live." 

Nor  is  this  all,  for  when  the  natural  death  comes,  which  indeed  to  us 
is  no  longer  death,  our  inner  life  shall  suffer  no  hurt  whatever ;  it  will 
not  even  be  suspended  for  a  moment.  It  is  not  a  thing  which  can  be 
touched  by  death.  The  shafts  of  the  last  enemy  can  have  no  more  effect 
upon  the  spiritual,  than  a  javelin  upon  a  cloud.  Even  in  the  very 
crisis,  when  the  soul  is  separated  from  the  body,  no  damage  shall  be 
done  to  the  spiritual  nature.  And  in  the  awftil  future,  when  the 
judgment  comes,  when  the  thrones  are  set,  and  the  multitudes  are 
gathered,  and  to  the  right  the  righteous,  and  to  the  left  the  wicked, 
let  what  may  of  terror  and  of  horror  come  forth,  the  begotten  of 
God  shall  live.  Onward  through  eternity,  whatever  may  be  the 
changes  which  yet  are  to  be  disclosed,  nothing  shall  affect  our  God- 
given  life.  Like  the  life  of  God  himself — eternal,  and  ever-blessed, 
it  shall  continue.  Should  all  things  else  be  swept  away,  the  righteous 
must  live  on ;  I  mean  not  merely  that  they  shall  exist,  but  they  shall 
Uve  in  all  the  fulness  of  that  far-reaching,  much-comprehending  word 
"life."  Bearing  the  nature  of  God  as  far  as  the  creature  can  partici- 
pate in  it,  the  begotten  from  the  dead  shall  prove  the  sureness  of  the 
promise,  **  Ye  shall  live." 

Let  me  further  call  to  your  notice  that  the  fact  here  stated  is 
imiversal,  in  application  to  all  spiritual  life.  The  promise  is,  ^'  Ye 
shall  live,"  that  is  to  say,  every  child  of  God  shall  live.  Every  one 
who  sees  Christ,  as  the  world  sees  him  not,  is  living  and  shall  live.  I 
can  understand  such  a  promise  given  to  eminent  saints  who  live  near 
to  God,  but  my  soul  would  prostrate  herself  before  the  throne  in 
reverent  loving  wonder  when  she  hears  this  word  spoken  to  the  very 
least  and  meanest  of  the  saints,  "  Ye  shall  live."  Thou  art  not  ex- 
empted, thou  whose  faith  is  but  as  a  smoking  flax,  thou  shalt  live. 
The  Lord  bestows  security  upon  the  least  of  his  people  as  well  as  upon 


8  METROPOLITAN  TABEBNACLE  PULPIT. 

the  greatest.  It  is  plain  that  the  reason  given  for  the  preservation  of 
the  new  life  is  as  applicat)le  to  one  saint  as  to  another.  If  it  had  been 
said,  '^  Because  ^our  faith  is  strong,  je  shall  live,"  then  weak  faith 
would  have  perished;  but  when  it  is] written,  "Because  I  live,"  the 
argument  is  as  powerM  in  the  one  case  as  in  the  other.  Take  it  home 
to  thyself,  my  brother,  however  heavy  thy  heart,  or  dim  thy  hape. 
Jesus  lives,  and  you  shall  live. 

Remark  yet  again  that  this  text  is  exceeding  broad.  Mark  its  breadth 
and  see  how  it  meets  everything  to  the  contrary,  and  overturns  all  the 
hopes  of  the  adversary.  "  Ye  shall  live."  Then  the  inbred  corrup- 
tion which  rises  within  us  shall  not  stifle  the  new  creature.  Chained 
as  the  spirit  seems  to  be  to  the  loathsome  and  corrupt  body  of  this 
death,  it  shall  live  in  spite  of  its  hideous  companionship.  Though 
besetting  sins  may  be  as  arrows,  and  fleshly  lusts  like  drawn  swor^ 
yet  grace  shall  not  be  slain.  Neither  the  fever  of  hasty  passion,  nor  the 
palsy  of  timorousness,  nor  the  leprosy  of  covetousness,  nor  any  other 
disease  of  sin,  shall  so  break  forth  in  the  old  nature  as  to  destroy  the 
new.  Nor  shall  outward  circumstances  overthrow  the  inner  life. 
"  For  he  shall  give  his  angels  charge  over  thee,  to  keep  thee  in  all 
thy  ways.  They  shall  bear  thee  up  in  their  hands,  lest  thou  dash  thy 
foot  against  a  stone."  If  providence  should  cast  you  into  a  godless 
family,  where  you  dwell  as  in  a  sepulchre,  and  the  air  you  breathe  is 
laden  with  the  miasma  of  death,  yet  shall  vou  live.  Evil  example 
shall  not  poison  your  spirit,  you  shall  drink  this  deadly  thing  and 
it  shall  not  hurt  you,  you  shall  be  kept  from  giving  way  to  eviL 
You  shall  not  be  decoyed  by  fair  temptation,  you  shall  not  be 
cowed  by  fierce  i>ersecution :  mightier  is  he  that  is  in  you  than  he 
which  is  in  the  world.  Satan  will  attack  you,  and  his  weapons 
are  deadly,  but  you  shall  foil  kim  at  all  points.  To  you  is  it  given 
to  tread  upon  the  lion  and  adder,  the  young  lion  and  the  dragon 
shall  you  trample  under  foot.  If  God  should  allow  you  for  awhile 
to  be  sorely  tried,  as  he  did  his  servant  Job,  and  if  the  devil  should 
have  all  the  world  to  help  him  in  his  attempt  to  destroy  your 
spiritual  life,  yet  even  on  the  dunghill  of  poverty,  and  in  the  wretched- 
ness of  siclmess,  your  spirit  shall  still  maintain  its  holy  life,  and 
you  shall  prove  it  so  by  blessing  and  magnifying  God,  notwith- 
standing all.  We  little  dream  what  may  be  reserved  for  us  ;  we  may 
have  to  climb  steeps  of  prosperity,  slippery  and  dangerous,  but  we  shall 
live ;  wo  may  be  called  to  sink  in  the  dark  waters  of  adversity,  all 
God*8  waves  and  billows  may  go  over  us,  but  we  shall  live.  We  may 
traverse  pestilent  swamps  of  error,  or  burning  deserts  of  unbelief 
but  the  divine  life  shall  live  amid  the  domains  of  death.  Let  the 
future  be  bright  or  black,  we  need  not  wish  to  turn  the  page ;  that 
which  we  prize  best,  namely,  our  spiritual  life,  is  hid  with  Christ  in 
God,  beyond  the  reach  of  harm,  and  we  shall  live.  If  old  age  shall  be 
our  portion,  and  our  crown  shall  be  delayed  till  we  have  fought  a  long 
and  weary  battle,  yet  nevertheless  we  shall  live ;  or  if  sudden  death 
should  cut  short  the  time  of  our  trial  here,  yet  we  shall  have  lived  in  the 
fulness  of  that  word.  • 

III.  Our  third  point  is,  the  reason  for  thk  sKCUuixr  of  thk 

SPIRITUAL  LIFE. 


LIFE  IN  GHEIST.  9 

The  reason  assigned  is  this,  '^  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also.'* 
Christ  has  life  essentially  as  God.  Christ,  as  man,  having  fulfilled  his 
life-work,  having  offered  full  atonement  for  human  sin,  dieth  no.  more, 
death  hath  no  more  dominion  over  him.  His  life  is  communicated 
to  us,  and  becomes  the  guarantee  to  us  that  we  shall  live  also. 

Observe,  first,  that  this  is  the  sole  reason  of  the  believer's  spiritual 
life.  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also."  The  means  by  which  the 
80ul  is  pardoned  is  found  in  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus ;  the  cause 
of  its  obtaining  spiritual  life  at  first  is  found  in  Christ's  finished 
work ;  and  the  only  reason  why  the  Christian  continues  still  to  live 
after  he  is  quickened,  lies  in  Jesus  Christ,  who  liveth  and  was  dead  and 
is  alive  for  evermore.  When  I  first  come  to  Christ,  I  know  I  must  find 
all  in  him,  for  I  feel  I  have  nothing  of  my  own ;  but  all  my  life  long  I 
am  to  acknowledge  the  same  absolute  dependence;  I  am  still  to  look  for 
eyeiyihing  to  him.  '*  I  am  the  vine,  ye  are  the  branches :  he  that  abideth 
in  me,  and  I  in  him,  the  same  bringeth  forth  much  fruit:  for  without  mc 
ye  can  do  nothing."  The  temptation  is  after  we  have  looked  to  Jesus  and 
found  life  there,  to  fancy  that  in  future  time  we  are  to  sustain  ourselves 
in  spiritual  existence  by  some  means  within  ourselves,  or  by  supplies 
extra  and  apart  from  Christ.  But  it  must  not  be  so ;  all  for  the  &turc 
as  weU  as  all  for  the  past  is  wrapped  up  in  the  person  and  the  work  of 
the  Lord  Jesus.  Because  he  died,  ye  are  pardoned  ;  because  he  lives, 
ye  live ;  all  your  life  still  lies  in  him  who  is  the  way,  the  truth,  and 
the  life.  Does  not  the  Christian's  life  depend  upon  his  prayerfulness  ? 
Could  he  be  a  Christian  if  he  ceased  to  pray  ?  We  reply,  the  Christian's 
q>iritual  health  depiends  upon  his  prayerfulness,  but  that  prayerful- 
ness depends  on  something  else.  The  reason  why  the  hands  of  the 
clock  move  may  be  found  first  in  a  certain  wheel  which  operates  upon 
them,  but  if  you  go  to  the  primary  cause  of  all,  you  reach  the  main-spring, 
or  the  weight,  which  is  the  source  of  all  the  motion.  Many  secondary 
causes  tend  to  sustain  spiritual  life ;  but  the  primary  cause,  the  first  ana 
foremost,  is  because  Jesus  Christ  lives.  "  All  my  fresh  springs  are  in 
thee."  While  Jesus  lives,  he  sends  the  Spirit ;  the  Spirit  being  sent,  we 
pray ;  our  prayer  becomes  the  evidence  of  our  spiritual  life.  "  But  are  not 
good  works  essential  to  the  maintenance  of  the  spiritual  life  ?"  Cer- 
tainly, if  there  be  no  good  works,  we  have  no  evidence  of  spiritual  life. 
In  its  season  the  tree  must  bring  forth  its  fruit  and  its  leaves ;  if  there 
be  no  outward  siofn  we  suspect  that  there  is  no  motion  of  the  sap 
within.  Still,  to  the  tree  the  fruit  is  not  the  cause  of  life,  but  the 
result  of  it,  and  to  the  life  of  the  Christian,  good  works  bear  the 
same  relationship,  they  are  its  outgrowth,  not  its  root.  If  then  my 
spiritual  life  is  low,  what  am  I  to  look  to  ?  I  am  not  to  look  to  my 
prayers,  I  am  not  to  find  comfort  in  my  works.  I  may  from  these 
aiscover  how  declining  I  am  ;  but  if  I  want  my  life  to  be  renovated,  I 
must  fly  to  the  fountain  of  my  life,  even  Jesus,  for  there,  and  there 
only,  shall  I  find  restoration.  Do  let  us  recollect  this,  that  we  are  not 
saved  because  of  anything  that  we  are,  or  anything  that  we  do  ;  and 
that  we  do  not  remain  saved  because  of  anything  we  are  or  can  be.  A 
man  is  saved  because  Christ  died  for  him,  he  continues  saved  because 
Christ  lives  for  him.  The  sole  reason  why  the  spiritual  life  abides  is 
Ixjcanse  Jesus  lives.     This  is  to  get  upon  a  rock,  above  the  fogs  which 


10  METftOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

cover  all  things  down  below.  If  my  life  rests  on  something  within  me, 
then  to-day  I  live,  and  to-morrow  I  die;  but  if  my  spiritual  life  rests  in 
Christ,  then  in  my  darkest  frames — ay,  and  when  sin  has  most  raged 
against  my  spirit— still  I  live  in  the  ever-living  One,  whose  life  never 
changes. 

Secondly,  it  is  a  sufficient  cause  for  our  life.  /*  Because  I  live,  ye 
shall  live  also."  It  must  be  enough  to  make  believers  live  that 
-Christ  lives  ;  for  first,  Christ's  life  is  a  proof  that  his  work  has  accom- 
plished the  absolution  of  his  people  from  their  sins.  He  would 
nave  been  in  the  tomb  to  this  hour  had  he  not  made  a  complete  satis- 
faction for  their  sins,  but  his  rising  again  from  the  dead  is  the  testimony 
of  God  that  he  has  accepted  the  atonement  of  his  dear  Son;  his 
resurrection  is  our  full  acquittal.  Then  if  the  living  Christ  be  our 
acquittal,  how  can  God  condemn  us  to  die  for  sins  which  he  has  by  the 
fact  of  Christ's  resurrection  declared  to  be  for  ever  blotted  out  ?  If 
Jesus  lives,  how  can  we  die  ?  Shall  there  be  two  deaths  for  one  sin, 
the  death  of  Christ  and  the  death  of  those  for  whom  he  died  ?  God  forbid 
that  there  should  be  any  such  injustice  with  the  Most  High.  The  very 
fact  that  Jesus  lives,  proves  that  our  sin  has  been  atoned  for,  that  we 
are  absolved,  and  therefore  cannot  die. 

Jesus  is  the  representative  of  those  for  whom  he  is  the  federal  head. 
Shall  the  representative  live,  and  yet  those  represented  die  ?  How  shall 
the  living  represent  the  dead  ?  But  in  his  liie  I  see  my  own  life,  for  as 
Levi  was  in  the  loins  of  Abraham,  so  is  every  saint  in  the  loins  of  Christ, 
and  the  life  of  Christ  is  representatively  the  life  of  all  his  people. 

Moreover,  he  is  the  surety  for  his  people,  under  bonds  and  pledges  to 
bring  his  redeemed  safely  home.  His  own  declaration  is,  **  I  give  unto 
my  sheep  eternal  life,  and  they  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any 
pluck  them  out  of  my  hands."  Will  he  break  his  covenant  bonds  ? 
Shall  his  suretyship  be  cast  to  the  winds  ?  It  cannot  be.  The  fact 
that  Jesus  lives  guarantees  our  life  to  all  eternity.  Remember, 
that  if  any  of  his  people  for  whom  he  died,  to  whom  he  has  given 
spiritual  life,  should  after  all  die,  Christ  would  be  disappointed  of 
his  intent,  which  supposition  involves  the  grossest  'blasphemy.  What 
he  came  to  do  he  \n\\  do.  As  many  as  his  Father  gave  him, 
so  many  shall  he  have  for  his  reward.  The  purchase-price  shall 
not  be  given  in  vain ;  a  redemption  so  marvellous  as  that  which 
he  has  presented  upon  the  tree,  shall  never  in  any  degree  become  a 
failure.  His  life,  which  proves  his  labour  to  be  over,  guarantees  to 
himself  his  reward,  and  that  is  to  be  found  in  the  salvation  of  his 
people.  Know  ye  not,  my  brethren,  that  if  one  of  those  to  whom 
Christ  has  given  spiritual  life  should  after  all  fell  from  it  and  die,  it 
would  argue  either  that  he  had  a  want  of  power  to  keep  them,  or  a 
want  of  will  to  do  so.  Shall  we  conceive  him  to  be  devoid  of  power  ? 
Then  how  is  he  the  mighty  God  ?  Is  he  devoid  of  will  to  keep  his 
people — is  that  conceivable  ?  Cast  out  the  traitorous  thought !  He 
must  be  as  willing  as  he  is  able,  and  as  able  as  he  is  willing.  While  he 
was  in  the  world  he  kept  his  people ;  having  loved  his  own,  he  loved  them 
to  the  end ;  he  is  "  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever,"  he  will 
not  suffer  one  of  these  little  ones  to  perish. 

Recollect,  and  this  perhaps  will  cheer  you  most  of  all,  that  all  who 


LIFE  IN  CHRIST.  11 

haye  spiritnal  life  are  one  with  Christ  Jcsns.  Jesas  is  the  head  of  the 
mystical  body,  they  are  the  members.  Suppose  one  of  the  members  of 
the  mystical  body  of  Christ  should  die,  then  from  that  moment,  with 
TBYerence  be  it  spoken,  Christ  is  not  a  complete  Christ.  What  were  the 
head  without  the  body  ?  A  most  ghastly  sight.  What  were  the  head 
with  only  a  part  of  the  members  ?  Certainly  not  perfect.  There  must 
be  eyery  member  present  to  make  a  complete  body.  Therefore  we  gather 
that  you,  brotlier,  though  you  think  yourself  the  meanest  part  of  the 
body,  are  nevertheless  essential  to  its  perfection;  and  you,  sister,  though 
you  fancy  yeurself  to  be  one  of  the  uncomely  portions  of  the  body,  yet  you 
must  be  there,  or  else  the  body  cannot  be  perfect,  and  Christ  cannot  be  a 
complete  Christ.  From  him,  the  head,  the  life  streams  into  all  the  mem- 
bers, and  while  that  head  lives  as  a  perfect  head  of  a  perfect  body,  all  the 
members  must  live  also.  As  we  have  often  said,  as  long  as  a  man's  head 
18  above  water  you  cannot  drown  his  limbs ;  as  long  as  our  head  is  above 
the  reach  of  spiritual  death  we  also  are  the  same — no  weapons  can  hurt, 
no  poison  can  destroy,  not  all  hell's  fires  could  bum,  nor  all  earth's  floods 
could  drown,  the  spiritual  life  within  us :  it  must  be  safe  because  it  is 
indissolubly  one  with  Jesus  Christ  the  Lord.  What  comfort,  then,  lies 
in  this,  the  sole  but  sufficient  reason  for  the  eternal  maintenance  of  the 
new-bom  life  within  us,  is  this,  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also." 

And  be  it  remembered,  that  this  reason  is  an  abiding  reason — 
**  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also" — a  reason  which  has  as  much  force 
at  one  time  as  another.  From  causes  variable  the  effects  are  variable ; 
but  remaining  causes  produce  permanent  effects.  Now  Jesus  always 
lives.  Yesterday,  dear  brother,  you  were  exalted  in  fellowship  with 
him,  and  stood  upon  the  mountain  top;  then  your  heart  was  glad, 
and  your  spirit  rejoiced,  and  you  could  say,  "  I  live  in  Christ."  To-day 
darkness  has  intervened,  you  do  not  feel  the  motions  of  the  inner  life  as 
you  did  yesterday,  but  do  not  therefore  conclude  that  the  life  is  not 
there.  What  is  to  be  your  sign ;  what  is  to  be  the  rainbow  of  the 
covenant  to  you?  Why,  that  Jeeus  lives.  Do  you  doubt  that  he  lives? 
You  dare  not.  You  trast  him,  doubt  not  then  that  you  live,  for  your 
life  is  as  sure  as  his.  Believe  also  that  you  shall  live,  for  that  also  is 
as  sure  as  the  fact  that  he  lives.  God  gave  to  Noah  a  token  that  he 
would  not  destroy  the  earth — ^it  was  the  rainbow:  but  then  the  rainbow 
is  not  often  seen ;  there  are  peculiar  circumstances  before  the  bow  is 
placed  in  the  cloud.  You,  brother,  you  have  a  token  of  God's  covenant 
given  you  in  the  text  which  can  always  be  seen,  neither  sun  nor  shower 
are  needful  to  its  appearance.  The  living  Christ  is  the  token  that  you 
live  too.  God  gave  to  David  the  token  of  the  sun  and  the  moon ;  he 
said  if  the  ordinances  of  day  and  night  should  be  changed,  then  would 
he  cast  off  the  seed  of  David.  But  there  are  times  when  neither 
sun  nor  moon  appear,  but  your  token  is  plain  when  these  are  hidden. 
Christ  at  all  times  lives.  When  you  are  lowest,  when  you  cannot 
pray,  when  you  can  hardly  groan,  when  you  do  not  seem  to  have 
spiritnal  life  enough  even  to  heave  a  desire,  still  if  you  cling  to  Jesus 
this  life  is  as  surely  in  you  as  there  is  life  in  Christ  himself  at  the 
right  hand  of  the  Father. 

And  lastly,  it  is  a  most  instructive  cause.  It  instracts  us  in  many 
ways :  let  us  hint  at  three.    It  instructs  us  to  admire  the  condescenEiQU 


12  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

of  Christ.  Look  at  the  two  pronouns,  "  ye  "  and  **  I "  ;  shall  they  ever 
come  into  contact  ?  Yes,  here  they  stand  in  close  connection  with 
each  other.  "  I " — ^the  I  -AM,  the  Infinite  ;  **  ye  "  the  creatures  of  an 
hour  ;  yet  I,  the  Infinite,  come  into  union  with  you,  the  finite  ;  I,  the 
Eternal,  take  up  you,  the  fleeting,  and  I  make  you  live  because  I  live. 
What  ?  Is  there  such  a  bond  between  me  and  Christ  ?  Is  there  such  a 
link  between  his  life  and  mine  ?  Blessed  be  his  name !  Adored  be  his 
infinite  condescension  I 

It  demands  of  us  next  abundance  of  gratitude.  Apart  from  Christ 
we  are»dead  in  trespasses  and  sins ;  look  at  the  depth  of  our  degrada- 
tion !  But  in  Christ  we  live,  live  with  his  own  life.  Look  at  the  height 
of  our  excdtation,  and  let  our  thankfulness  be  proportioned  to  wis 
infinity  of  mercy.  Measure  if  you  can  from  the  lowest  hell  to  the 
highest  heayen,  and  so  great  let  your  thankfulness  be  to  him  who  has 
lifted  you  from  death  to  life. 

Let  the  last  lesson  be,  see  the  all-importance  of  close  conmiunion 
with  Jesus.  Union  with  Christ  makes  you  live ;  keep  up  your  enjoy- 
ment of  that  union,  that  you  may  clearly  perceive  ana  enjoy  your 
life.  Begin  this  year  with  the  prayer,  "Nearer  to  thee,  my  Lord, 
nearer  to  thee."  Think  much  of  the  spiritual  life  and  less  of  this  poor 
carnal  life,  which  will  so  soon  be  over.  Go  to  the  source  of  life  for  an 
increase  of  spiritual  life.  Go  to  Jesus.  Think  of  him  more  than  you 
have  done,  pray  to  him  more ;  use  his  name  more  believingly  in  your 
supplications.  Serve  him  better,  and  seek  to  grow  up  into  his  likeness 
in  all  things.  Make  an  advance  this  year.  Life  is  a  growing  thing. 
Your  life  only  ffrows  by  getting  nearer  to  Christ ;  therefore,  get  under 
the  beams  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness.  Time  brings  you  nearer  to 
him,  you  will  soon  be  where  he  is  in  heaven  ;  let  grace  bring  you  nearer 
also.  You  taste  more  of  his  love  as  fresh  mercies  come,  give  him 
more  of  your  love,  more  of  your  fellowship.  Abide  in  him,  and  may 
his  word  a1;)ide  in  you  henceforth  and  for  ever,  and  all  shall  be  to  his 
glory.    Amen. 


Portion  op  Scriptuek  read  before  Sermon— Colossians  iii. 


Now  ready,  price  2s.  6(1.,  handsomely  bound, 

"THE    METROPOLITAX    TABERNACLE;"    or,    an    Historical 

Account  of  the  Society  from  its  first  planting  in  the  Puritan  oi*a  to  the  present  time, 
■with  other  sketches  relating  to  the  rise,  growth,  and  customs  of  Nonconformity  in 
8outhwark.      By    Godfrey   Uolden    Pike.     With   an  Introduction    by    C.   H. 

brUKGEON. 

London :  P.vssmork  &  Alabastbb,  18,  Patemostor  Row. 


^ti[D|0lilan:  SJalrjenmrk  fitlpii 


REST,  REST. 


^  pennon 


Dklivet^bd  on  Lord's-dat  Morning,  January  8th,  1871,  by 

C.  H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THB  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


"CJom©  xuito  mo,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest. 
Take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  loam  of  me ;  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart :  and  ye 
shall  find  rest  xmXo  your  souls.     For  my  yoke  is  easy,  and  my  burdou  is  light.*' — 

Matthew  xi.  28 — 30. 

We  have  often  repeated  these  memorahle  words,  and  they  have  brought 
08  much  comfort;  but  it  is  possible  that  we  may  never  have  looked 
deeply  into  them,  so  as  to  have  seen  the  fulness  of  their  mean- 
ing. The  works  of  man  will  seldom  bear  close  inspection.  You 
shall  take  a  needle  which  is  highly  polished,  which  appears  to  be 
without  the  slightest  inequality  upon  its  surface,  and  you  shall 
put  it  under  a  microscope,  and  it  will  look  like  a  rough  bar  of  iron ; 
but  you  shall  select  what  you  will  from  nature,  ,the  bark  or  the 
leaf  of  a  tree,  or  the  winp:  or  the  foot  of  an  insect,  and  you  shall  dis- 
cover no  flaw,  magnify  it  as  much  as  you  will,  and  gaze  upon  it  as  long 
as  you  please.  So  take  the  words  of  man.  The  first  time  you  hear 
them  they  will  strike  you ;  you  may  hear  them  again  and  still  admire 
their  sentiment,  but  you  shall  soon  weary  of  their  repetition,  and  call 
them  hackneyed  and  over-estimated.  The  words  of  Jesus  are  not  so, 
they  never  lose  their  dew,  they  never  become  threadbare.  You  may 
ring  the  changes  upon  his  words  and  never  exhaust  their  music  :  you 
may  consider  them  by  dav  and  by  night,  but  familiarity  shall  not  breed 
contempt.  You  shall  beat  them  in  the  mortar  of  contemplation,  with 
the  pestle  of  criticism,  and  their  perfume  shall  but  become  the  more 
apparent.  Dissect,  investigate,  and  weigh  the  ;Mast.er*s  teaching  word 
by  word,  and  each  syllable  will  repay  you.  When  loitering  upon  tlie 
Island  of  Liddo,  oft'  Venice,  and  listening  to  the  sound  of  the  city's 
bells,  I  thought  the  music  charming  as  it  floated  across  the  lagune ; 
hnt  when  I  returned  to  the  citv,  and  sat  down  in  the  centre  of  the 
music,  in  the  very  midst  of  all  the  beUs,  the  sweetness  changed  to  a 
horrible  clash,  the  charming  sounds  were  transformed  into  a  maddening 
din ;  not  the  slightest  melody  could  I  detect  in  any  one  bell,  while  har- 
mony in  the  whole  comptmy  of  noisemakers  was  out  of  the  question. 
I>i8tance  had  lent  enchantment  to  the  sound.  The  words  of  poets  and 
el(»qnent  writers  may,  as  a  whole,  and  heard  from  afar,  sound  charm- 
iTi7:v  enough  ;  but  how  few  of  them  bear  a  near  and  minute  investigation ! 
No.  969. 


14  METBOFOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Their  belfry  rings  passably,  bat  one  would  soon  weary  of  each  separate 
bell.  It  is  never  so  with  the  divine  words  of  Jesus.  Yon  hear  them 
ringing  from  afiur,  and  they  are  sweetness  itself.  When  as  a  sinner, 
you  roamed  at  midnight  like  a  traveller  lost  on  the  wilds,  how  sweetly 
did  they  call  you  home  I  But  now  you  have  reached  the  house  of 
mercy,  you  sit  and  listen  to  each  distinct  note  of  love's  perfect  peal,  and 
wonderingly  feel  that  even  angelic  harps  cannot  excel  it. 

We  wiB,  this  morning,  if  we  can,  conduct  you  into  the  inner 
chambers  of  our  text,  place  its  words  under  the  microscope,  and  peer 
into  the  recesses  of  each  sentence.  We  only  wish  our  microscope  were 
of  a  greater  magnifying  power,  and  our  ability  to  expound  the  text 
more  complete  ;  for  there  are  mines  of  instruction  here.  Superficially 
read  this  royal  promise  has  cheered  and  encouraged  tens  of  thousands, 
but  there  is  a  wealth  in  it  which  the  diligent  digger  and  miner  shall 
alone  discover.  Its  shallows  are  cool  and  refreshing  for  the  lambs,  but 
in  its  depths  are  pearls,  for  which  we  hope  to  dive. 

Our  first  head,  this  morning,  is  rest :  "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  tliat 
labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  The  second 
head  is  rest:  "Take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me;  for  I  am 
meek  and  lowly  in  heart :  and  ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls." 

I.  Let  us  be^  at  the  beginning  with  the  first  rest,  and  here 
we  will  make  divisions  only  for  the  sake  of  bringing  out  the  sense 
more  clearly. 

1.  Observe  the  person  invited  to  receive  this  first  rest :  "  Come  unto 
me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden."  The  word  "  alP'  first  de- 
mands attention.*  ^^AUje  that  labour."  There  was  need  for  the  in- 
sertion of  that  wide  word.  Had  not  the  Saviour  said  a  little  before, 
"  I  thank  thee,  0  Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  because  thou  hast 
hid  these  things  from  the  .wise  and  prudent,  and  hast  revealed  them  to 
babes  "?  Some  who  had  been  listenmg  to  the  Saviour  might  have  said, 
''  The  Father,  then,  has  determined  to  whom  he  will  reveal  the  Christ ; 
there  is  a  number  chosen,  according  to  the  Father's  good  pleasure,  to 
whom  the  gospel  isrevealeid  ;  while  from  another  company  it  is  hidden!" 
The  too  hasty  inference,  which  it  seems  natural  for  man  to  draw  from 
the  doctrine  is,  "  Then  there  is  no  invitation  for  me ;  there  is  no  hope 
for  me;  I  need  not  listen  to  the  gospel's  warnings  and  invitations."  So 
the  Saviour,  as  if  to  answer  that  discouraging  notion,  words  his  invitation 
thus,  *^  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden."  Let  it 
not  be  supposed  that  election  excludes  any  of  you  from  the  invitation 
of  mercy;  all  of  you  who  labour  are  bidden  to  come.  Whatever  the 
great  doctrine  of  predestination  may  involve,  rest  assured  that  it  by  no 
means  narrows  or  diminishes  the  extent  of  gospel  invitations.  The 
good  news  is  to  be  preached  to  "  every  creature  "  under  heaven,  and 
in  this  particular  passage  it  is  addressed  to  all  the  labouring  and 
heavy  laden. 

The  description  of  the  person  invited  is  very  full ;  it  describes  him 
both  actively  and  passively.  "^4//  ye  that  labour  " — there  is  the  activity 
of  men  bearing  the  yoke,  and  ready  to  labour  after  salvation;  ^^  heavy 
laden  " — ^there  is  the  passive  form  of  their  religious  condition,  they  sus- 
tain a  burden,  and  are  pressed  down,  and  sorely  wearied  by  the  load  they 
bear.    There  are  to  be  found  many  who  are  actively  engaged  in  seeking 


REST,  BEST.  15 

salyation;  they  believe  that  if  they  obey  the  precepts  of  the  law  they  will 
be  saved,  and  they  are  endeavouring  to  the  utmost  to  do  them ;  they 
have  been  told  that  the  performance  of  certain  rites  and  ceremonies 
will  also  save  them,  they  are  perfonning  those  with  great  care;  the  joke 
is  on  their  shoulders,  and  they  are  labouring  diligently.  Some  are 
labouring  in  prayer,  some  are  labouring  in  sacraments,  others  in  self- 
denials  and  mortifications,  but  as  a  class  they  are  awakened  to  feel  the 
need  of  salvation,  and  they  are  intensely  laborious  to  save  themselves. 
It  is  to  these  the  Saviour  aadresses  his  loving  admonition  :  in  elfoct  he 
tells  them,  "  This  is  not  the  way  to  rest,  your  self-imposed  labours 
will  end  in  disappointment;  cease  your  wearisome  exertions,  and  believe 
in  me,  for  I  will  at  once  give  you  rest — the  rest  which  mj  labours 
have  earned  for  believers."  Very  speedily  those  who  are  active  in  self- 
righteously  working  for  salvation  fall  into  the  passive  state,  and  become 
burdened ;  their  labour  of  itself  becomes  a  burden  to  them.  Besides  the 
burden  of  their  self-righteous  labour,  there  comes  upon  them  the  awful, 
tremendous,  crushing  burden  of  past  sin,  and  a  sense  of  the  wrath  of 
God  which  is  due  to  that  sin.  A  soul  which  has  to  bear  the  load  of  its 
own  sin,  and  the  load  of  divine  wrath,  is  indeed  heavily  laden.  Atlas 
with  the  world  upon  his  back  had  a  light  load  compared  with  a  sinner 
upcm  whom  mountains  of  sin  and  wrath  are  piled.  Such  persons 
fiiquently  are  burdened,  in  addition,  by  fears  and  apprehensions;  some 
of  them  correct,  others  of  them  baseless,  but  anyhow  the  burden  daily 
grows.  Their  active  labours  do  not  diminish  their  passive  sufTerini^s. 
The  acute  anguish  of  their  souls  will  often  be  increased  in  proportion 
as  their  endeavours  are  increased ;  and  while  they  hope  at  first  that  if 
they  labour  industriously  they  will  gradually  diminish  the  mass  of  their 
sin,  it  happens  that  their  labour  adds  to  their  weariness  beneath  its 
pressure;  they  feel  a  weight  of  disappointment,  because  their  labour  has 
not  brought  them  rest ;  and  a  burden  of  despair,  because  they  fear  that 
deliverance  will  never  come.  Now  these  are  the  persons  whom  the  Saviour 
calls  to  himself— those  who  are  actively  seeking  salvation,  those  who  are 
ipassively  bearing  the  weight  of  sin  and  of  divine  wrath. 

It  is  implied,  too,  V.wX  t!:csc  arc  undeserving  of  rest,  for  it  is  said, 
"  Come  unto  me,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  A  gift  is  not  of  merit  but 
of  grace  ;  wages  and  reward  are  for  those  who  earn,  but  a  gift  is  a 
matter  of  charity.  0  you  who  feel  your  unworthiness  this  morning, 
who  have  been  seeking  salvation  earnestly,  and  suftering  the  weight  of 
sin,  Jesus  will  freely  give  to  you  what  you  cannot  earn  or  purchase, 
he  will  give  it  as  an  act  of  his  own  free,  rich,  sovereign  mercy ;  and  he 
is  prepared,  if  you  come  to  him,  to  give  it  to  you  now,  for  so  has  he 

fromised,  "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and 
will  give  you  rest." 

2.  Notice  next,  the  precept  here  laid  doivn :  "  Come."  1 1  is  not "  Leani," 
it  is  not  "  Take  my  yoke  " — that  is  in  the  next  verse,  and  is  intended 
for  the  next  stage  of  experience — but  in  the  beginning  the  word  of  the 
Lord  is,  **  Come  unto  me,"  "  Come,"  "  Come."  A  simple  word,  but  very 
foil  of  meaning.  To  come  is  to  leave  one  thing  and  to  advance  to  another. 
Come,  then,  ye  labouring  and  heavy  laden,  leave  your  legal  labours,  leave 
7our  self-reliant  efforts,  leave  your  sins,  leave  your  presumptions,  leave 
all  in  which  you  hitherto  have  trusted,  and  come  to  Jesus,  that  is,  think  of, 


16  M£TROFOLITAV  TABEBHAOLS  PULPIT. 

advance  towards,  rely  upon  the  Saviour.  Let  your  contemplations  think 
of  him  who  bore  the  load  of  human  sin  upon  the  cross  of  Calvary,  where 
he  was  made  sin  for  us.  Let  your  minds  consider  him  who  from  his  cross 
hurled  the  enormous  mass  of  his  people's  transgressions  into  a  bottomless 
sepulchre,  where  it  was  buried  for  ever.  Think  of  Jesus,  the  divinely- 
appointed  substitute  and  sacrifice  for  guilty  man.  Then,  seeing:  that  he 
is  God's  own  Son,  let  faith  follow  your  contemplation;  rely  upon  him,  trust 
in  him  as  having  suffered  in  your  stead,  look  to  him  for  the  payment 
of  the  debt  which  is  due  from  you  to  the  wrath  of  God.  This  is  to 
come  to  Jesus.  Repentance  and  faith  make  up  this  **Comc- — the 
repentance  which  leaves  the  place  where  you  now  stand,  the  faith  which 
comes  into  reliance  upon  Jesus. 

Observe,  that  the  conmiand  to  **  Come  "  is  put  in  the  present  tense, 
and  in  the  Greek  it  is  iutensely  present.  It  might  be  rendered 
something  like  this :  ''  Hither  to  me  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy 
laden ! "  It  is  a  "  Come  "  which  means  not  "  Come  to-morrow  or  next 
yeai^"  but  "  Now,  at  once.'*  Advance,  ye  slaves,  flee  from  your  task- 
master now !  Weary  ones,  recline  on  the  promise  now,  and  take  your 
rest !  Come  now  1  By  an  act  of  instantaneous  faith  which  will  bring 
instantaneous  peace,  come  and  rely  upon  Jesus,  and  he  will  now  give 
you  rest.  Rest  shall  at  once  follow  the  exercise  of  your  faith.  Perform 
that  act  of  faith  now.  0  may  the  eternal  Spirit  lead  some  labouring 
heavy  laden  soul  to  come  to  tf  esus,  and  to  come  at  thie  precise  moment ! 

It  is  "Come  unto  nw."  Notice  that.  The  Christ  in  his  person- 
ality is  to  be  trusted  in.  Not  "  Come  to  John,  and  hear  him  say, 
*  Repent^  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand,'"  for  no  rest  is  there. 
John  commands  a  preparation  for  the  rest,  but  he  has  no  rest  to  give 
to  the  soul.  Come  not  to  the  Pharisees,  who  will  instruct  you  in 
tradition,  and  in  the  jots  and  tittles  of  the  law ;  but  go  past  these  to 
Jesus,  the  man,  the  God,  the  Mediator,  the  Redeemer,  the  propitiation 
for  human  guilt.  If  you  want  rest  come  to  Christ  in  Gethsemane,  to 
Christ  on  Calvary,  to  Christ  risen,  to  Christ  ascended.  If  you  want  rest, 
0  weary  souls,  ye  can  find  it  nowhere  until  ye  come  and  lay  your 
burdens  down  at  his  dear  pierced  feet,  and  find  life  in  looking  alone  to 
him.  There  Is  the  precept  then.  Observe  it  is  nothing  but  that  one 
word,  "  Come."  It  is  not  **  Do ;  "  it  is  not  even  "  Learn."  It  is  not, 
**  Take  up  my  yoke,"  that  will  follow  after,  but  must  never  be  forced 
out  of  its  proper  place.  To  obtain  the  first  rest,  the  rest  which  is  a 
matter  of  gift— all  that  is  asked  of  you  is  that  you  come  to  have  it.  Now, 
the  least  thing  that  charity  itself  can  ask  when  it  gives  away  its  alms,  is 
that  men  come  for  it  Come,  ye  needy,  come  and  welcome ;  come  and 
take  the  rest  ye  need.  Jesus  saith  to  you,  ''  Come  and  take  what  I 
freely  give."  Without  money  come,  without  merit  come,  without  pre- 
paration come.  It  is  just,  come,  come  now  ;  come  as  you  are,  come  with 
your  burden,  come  with  your  yoke,  though  the  yoke  be  the  yoke  of  the 
devil,  and  the  burden  be  the  burden  of  sin,  yet  come  as  you  are,  and 
the  promise  shall  be  fulfilled  to  you,  **  I  will  give  you  rest." 

3.  Notice  next  the  promise  spoken^  "  I  will  give  you  rest."  "  I  will^ira." 
It  is  a  rest  that  is  a  gift;  not  a  rest  found  in  our  experience  by  degrees, 
but  given  at  once.  As  I  shall  have  to  show  you,  the  next  verse  speaks 
of  the  rest  that  is  found,  wrought  out,  and  discovered  ;  but  this  is  a  rest 


BEST,   REST.  17 

grrexL  We  oome  to  Jesns;  we  put  out  the  empty  hand  of  faith,  ano 
rest  is  giyen  us  at  once  most  freely.  We  possess  it  at  once,  and  it  is  onn 
for  eyer.  It  is  e^  present  rest,  rest  now  ;  not  rest  after  death ;  not  rest 
after  a  time  of  probation  and  growth  and  advancement ;  but  it  is  rest 
given  when  we  come  to  Jesns,  given  there  and  then.  And  it  is  perfeei 
rest  too  ;  for  it  is  not  said,  nor  is  it  implied,  that  the  rest  is  incompletei 
We  do  not  read,  "  I  will  give  yon  partial  rest,"  but  "  rest,  '*  as  muc> 
]  as  if  there  were  no  other  form  of  it.  It  is  perfect  and  complete  in  itself. 
'   In  the  blood  and  righteousness  of  Jesus  our  peace  is  perfect. 

I  shall  not  stay  except  to  ask  you  now,  brethren  and  sisters,  whether 
yon  know  the  meaning  of  this  given  rest.  Have  you  come  to  Jesus 
and  has  he  given  you  perfect  and  present  rest  ?  If  so,  I  know  your 
eye  will  catch  joyously  those  two  little  words,  *^And  /,"  and  I  would 
Ind  yon  lovingly  remember  the  promiser  who  speaks.  Jesus  promises 
and  Jesus  performs.  Did  not  all  your  rest,  when  first  your  sin  was 
forgiven,  come  from  him  ?  The  load  was  gone,  but  who  took  it  ?  The 
yoke  was  removed,  but  who  lifted  it  from  off  the  shoulder  ?  Do  you 
not  give  to  Jesus,  this  day,  the  glory  of  all  your  rest  from  the  burden 
of  guilt?  Do  you  not  praise  his  name  with  all  your  souls?  Yes,  I 
know  you  do.  And  you  know  how  that  rest  came  to  you.  It  was  by 
his  substitution  and  your  faith  in  that  substitution.  Your  sin  was 
not  pardoned  by  a  violation  of  divine  justice;  justice  was  satisfied 
in  Jesus ;  he  gave  you  rest.  The  f&ct  that  he  has  made  full  atonement 
is  the  rest  of  your  spirit  this  morning.  I  know  that  deep  down  in 
your  consciences,  the  calm  which  blesses  you  springs  from  a  belief  in 
your  Lord's  vicarious  sacrifice.  He  bore  the  unrest  that  you  might 
nave  the  rest,  and  you  receive  rest  this  day  as  a  free  gift  from  hinu 
You  have  done  now  with  servile  toils  and  hopeless  burdens,  you  have 
entered  into  rest  through  believing ;  but  all  the  rest  and  deliverance 
still  comes  to  you  as  a  gift  from  his  dear  hands,  who  purchased  with 
a  price  this  blessing  for  your  souls.  I  earnestly  wish  that  many 
who  have  never  felt  that  rest,  would  come  and  have  it ;  it  is  all  they 
have  to  do  to  obtain  it — to  come  for  it ;  just  where  they  now  are,  if  God 
enables  them  to  exercise  a  simple  act  of  faith  in  Jesus,  he  will  give 
dem  rest  from  all  their  past  sin,  from  all  their  efforts  to  save  them* 
selves,  a  rest  which  shall  be  to  his  glory  and  to  their  joy. 

II.  We  must  now  advance  to  our  second  head — rest. 

It  looks  rather  strange  that  after  having  received  rest,  the  next  verse 
should  begin :  "  Take  my  yoke  upon  you."  "  Ah !  I  had  been  set  free 
from  labouring,  am  I  to  be  a  labourer  again  ?"  Yes,  yes,  take  my  yoke 
and  begin.  **  And  my  lurden  is  light."  "  Burden  ?  why,  I  was  heavy 
laden  just  now,  am  I  to  carry  another  burden?  "  Yes.  A  yoke — 
actively,  and  a  burden— passively,  I  am  to  bear  both  of  these.  "  But  I 
found  rest  by  getting  rid  of  my  yoke  and  my  burden  1 "  And  you  are  to 
find  a  further  rest  by  wearing  a  new  yoke,  and  bearing  a  new  burden. 
Your  yoke  galled,  but  Christ's  yoke  is  easy  ;  your  burden  was  heavy, 
but  Christ's  burden  is  light.  Before  we  enter  into  this  matter  more 
fully,  let  us  illustrate  it.  How  certain  it  is  that  a  yoke  is  essential  to 
{NToduce  rest,  and  without  it  rest  is  unknown!  Spain  found  rest  by 
getting  rid  of  that  wretched  monarch  Isabella;  an  iron  yoke  was  her 
dominion  upon  the  nation's  neck,  crushing  every   aspiration   after 


18  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

progress  by  an  intolerable  tyranny.  Up  rose  the  nation,  shook  off  its 
yoke,  and  threw  aside  its  burden,  and  it  had  rest  in  a  certain  sense, 
rest /row  an  evil.  But  Spain  has  not  fally  rested  yet,  and  it  seems 
that  she  will  never  find  permanent  rest  till  she  has  voluntarily 
taken  up  another  yoke,  and  found  for  herself  another  burden.  In  a 
word,  she  must  have  a  strong,  settled,  recognised  government,  and  then 
only  will  her  distractions  ceaae.  This  is  jusD  a  picture  of  the  human 
soul.  It  is  under  the  dominion  of  Satan,  it  wears  his  awful  yoke, 
and  works  for  him  ;  it  bears  bis  accursed  burden,  and  groans  under 
it ;  Jesus  sets  it  free — but  has  it,  therefore,  a  jKirfoct  rest  ?  Yes,  a  rest 
from^  but  not  a  rest  in.  What  is  wanted  now  is  a  new  government ;  the 
soul  must  have  a  sovereign,  a  ruling  pi-inciple,  a  master-motive ;  and 
when  Jesus  has  taken  that  position,  rest  is  come.  This  further  rest  is 
what  is  spoken  of  in  the  second  verse.  Let  me  give  you  another  symbol. 
A  little  stream  flowed  through  a  manufacturing  town  ;  an  unhappy  little 
stream  it  was,  for  it  was  forced  to  turn  huge  wheels  and  heavy  machinery, 
and  it  wound  its  miserable  way  through  factories  where  it  was  dyed  black 
and  blue,  until  it  became  a  foul  and  iilthy  ditch,  and  loathed  itself.  It 
felt  the  tyraimy  which  polluted  its  very  existence.  Now,  there  came  a 
deliverer  who  looked  upon  the  streamlet  and  said,  "  I  will  set  thee  free 
and  give  thee  rest."  So  he  stopped  up  the  water-course,  and  said, 
"Abide  in  thy  place,  thou  shalt  no  more  flow  where  thou  art  enslaved 
and  defiled."  In  a  very  few  days  the  brooklet  found  that  it  had  but 
exchanged  one  evil  for  another.  Its  waters  were  stagnating,  they  were 
gathering  into  a  great  pool,  and  desiring  to  find  a  channel.  •  It  was  in 
its  very  nature  to  flow  on,  and  it  foamed  and  swelled,  and  pressed 
against  the  dam  which  stayed  it.  Every  hour  it  grew  more  inwardl}*" 
restless,  it  threatened  to  break  the  barrier,  and  it  made  all  who  saw  its 
angry  looks  tremble  for  the  mischief  it  would  do  ere  long.  It  never 
found  rest  until  it  was  pennitted  to  pursue  an  active  course  along  a  channel 
which  had  been  prepared  for  it  among  the  meadows  and  the  com  fields. 
Then,  when  it  watered  the  plains  and  made  glad  the  villages,  it  was  a 
liappy  streamlet,  perfectly  at  rest.  So  our  souls  are  made  for  activity, 
and  when  we  are  set  free  from  the  activities  of  our  self-righteousness  and 
the  shivery  of  our  sin,  we  must  do  something,  and  we  shall  never  rest 
until  we  find  that  something  to  do.  Hence  in  the  text  you  will  be 
pleased  to  see  that  there  is  something  said  about  a  yoke,  which  is  the 
ensign  of  working,  and  something  about  a  burden,  which  is  the  emblem 
of  enduring.  It  is  in  man's  mortal  nature  that  he  must  do  or  endure, 
or  else  his  spirit  will  stagnate  and  be  fiu*  from  rest. 

1.  AVe  will  consider  this  second  rest,  and  notice  that  it  is  rest  after  rest. 
"  I  will  give  you  rest "  comes  before  "  Ye  shall  find  rest."  It  is  the 
rest  of  a  man  who  is  already  at  rest,  the  reijose  of  a  man  who  has  received 
a  (/ircn  rest,  and  now  discovers  the  found  rest.  It  is  the  rest  of  a 
leai'ner — *'  Learn  of  me,  and  ye  shall  find  rest."  It  is  not  so  much  the 
rest  of  one  who  was  aforetime  labouiiug  and  heavy  laden,  as  of  one  who 
is  to-day  leai'ning  at  the  Saviour's  feet.  It  is  the  rest  of  a  seeker 
evidently,  for  finding  usually  implies  a  search.  Having  been  pardoned 
and  saved,  the  saved  man  in  the  course  of  his  experience  discovers  more 
and  more  reason  for  peace ;  ho  is  learning,  and  seeking,  and  he  finds. 
The  refit  is  evidently  liglitcd  u])ou,  however,  as  a  thing  unknown,  which. 


&B8T,   REST.  l\i 

becomes  the  sabject  of  discovery.  The  man  had  a  rest  /ram  his  burden ; 
now  he  finds  a  rest  in  Christ,  which  exceeds  what  he  asked  or  even 
thought. 

I  hare  looked  at  this  rest  after  rest  as  being  a  treasure  concealed  in 
a  precious  box.  The  Lord  Jesus  gives  to  his  people  a  priceless  casket, 
called  the  gift  of  rest ;  it  is  set  with  brilliants  and  inlaid  with  gems, 
and  the  substance  thereof  is  of  wrought  gold ;  whosoever  possesses  it 
feels  and  knows  that  his  warfare  is  accomplished  and  his  sin  is  ])ar- 
doned.  After  awhile  the  happy  owner  begins  to  examine  his  treasure. 
It  is  all  his  own,  but  he  has  not  yefc  seen  it  all,  for  one  day  he  detects 
a  secret  drawer,  he  touches  a  hidden  spring,  and  lo  I  before  him  lies  a 
priceless  Koh-i-noor  surpassing  all  the  rest.  It  had  been  given  him  it 
is  certain,  but  he  had  not  seen  it  at  first,  and  therefore  he  finds  it. 
Jesus  Christ  gives  us  in  the  gift  of  himself  all  the  rest  we  can  ever 
enjoy,  even  heaven's  rest  lies  in  him ;  but  after  we  have  received  him  we 
have  to  learn  his  value,  and  find  out  by  the  teaching  of  his  Spirit  the 
fnloess  of  the  rest  which  he  bestows. 

Now,  I  say  to  you  who  are  saved,  you  who  have  looked  to  Jesus 
Christ,  whether  you  looked  this  morning  or  twenty  years  ago,  have 
you  found  out  ail  that  there  is  in  the  gift  which  Christ  has  given  you  ? 
Have  you  found  out  the  secret  drawer  yet  ?  He  has  given  you  rest,  but 
have  you  found  the  innermost  rest  which  he  works  in  your  hearts  ? 
It  is  yours,  for  it  is  included  in  the  one  gift ;  but  it  is  not  yours  en- 
joyed, understood,  and  triumphed  in  as  yet  unless  you  have  found  it, 
for  the  rest  here  meant  is  a  rest  after  rest,  a  spiritual,  experienced  rest, 
which  comes  only  to  those  who  find  it  by  experience. 

2.  Further  observe  that  the  rest  in  this  second  part  of  our  text  is  a  rest 
in  service.  It  is  coupled  with  a  yoke,  for  activity — "  Take  ray  yoke ;" 
it  is  connected  with  a  burden,  for  endurance — "  My  burden  is  light."  He 
who  is  a  Christian  will  not  find  rest  in  being  idle.  There  is  no  unrest 
greater  than  that  of  the  slugirard.  If  you  would  rest  take  Christ's 
yoke,  be  actively  engaged  in  his  service.  As  the  bullock  has  the  yoke 
put  upon  its  neck  and  then  begins  to  draw,  so  have  the  yoke  of  Christ 
put  on  your  neck  and  commence  to  obey  him.  The  rest  of  heaven  is 
not  the  rest  of  sleep ;  they  serve  him  day  and  night  in  his  temple. 
They  are  always  resting,  and  yet,  in  another  sense,  they  rest  not  day  nor 
night.  Holy  activity  in  heaven  is  perfect  rest.  True  rest  to  the  mind 
of  the  child  of  God  is  rest  on  the  wing,  rest  in  motion,  rest  in  service, 
not  rest  with  the  yoke  off,  but  with  the  yoke  on.  We  are  to  enter  upon 
this  service  voluntarily ;  we  are  to  talce  his  yoke  upon  us  voluntarily. 
You  observe,  it  does  not  say,  "  Bear  my  yoke  when  it  is  laid  upon  you, 
but  take  it."  Do  not  need  to  be  told  by  the  minister,  **  My  dear  brother, 
such-and-such  a  work  you  are  bound  to  d^o,"  but  take  up  the 
yoke  of  your  own  accord.  Do  not  merely  submit  to  be  the  Lord's 
servant,  but  seek  his  service.  Ask,  **  What  can  I  do  ? "  Be  desirous 
to  do  it ;  voluntarily,  cheerfully,  do  all  that  lieth  in  you  for  the  exten- 
sion of  his  kingdom  who  has  given  you  rest,  and  you  shall  find  that  the 
rest  of  your  soul  shall  lie  in  your  doing  all  you  can  for  Jesus.  Every 
active  Christian  wiU  tell  you  he  is  never  happier  than  when  he  has 
much  to  do;  and,  on  the  whole,  if  he  communes  with  Jesus,  never 
more  at  rest  than  when  he  has  least  leisure.     Look  not  for  your  rest 


20  HETBOFOLITAK  TABBBNACLE  PULPIT. 

in  the  mere  enjoyments  and  excitements  of  religion,  bnt  find  yonr  restr 
in  wearing  a  yoke  which  yon  lore,  and  which,  for  that  reason,  is  easy 
to  your  neck. 

Bat,  my  dear  brother,  yon  mnst  also  be  willing  to  bear  Christ's  burden. 
Now  the  harden  of  Ohrist  is  his  cross,  which  eveiT  Ohristian  mast  taJ^ 
np.  Expect  to  be  reproached,  expect  to  meet  with  some  degree  of  the 
scandal  of  the  cross,  for  the  offence  of  it  nerer  ceases.  Persecution  and 
reproach  are  a  blessed  burden ;  when  yoar  soul  loves  Jesus  it  is  a  light 
thing  to  suffer  for  him,  and,  therefore,  never  by  any  cowardly  retirement 
or  refusal  to  profess  your  faith,  evade  vour  share  of  this  honourable 
load.  Woe  unto  those  who  say,  "  I  will  never  be  a  martyr."  No  rest 
is  sweeter  than  the  martyr's  rest.  Woe  unto  those  who  sav,  '*  We  will 
go  to  heaven  bv  night  along  a  secret  road,  and  so  avoid  the  shame  of 
the  cross."  The  r^  of  tliud  Ohristian  is  found  not  in  cowardice  but  in 
courage  ;  it  lies  not  in  providing  for  ease  but  in  the  brave  endurance 
of  suffering  for  the  trath.  The  restful  spirit  counts  the  reproach  of 
Christ  to  be  greater  riches  than  all  the  treasures  of  Egypt ;  ne  falls  in. 
love  with  the  cross,  and  counts  the  burden  light,  and  so  finds  rest  in 
service,  and  rest  in  suffermg.    Note  that  well. 

3.  The  rest  before  us  is  rest  through  Uaming.  Does  a  Mend  say,  "  I 
do  not  see  how  I  am  ever  to  get  rest  in  working,  and  rest  in  suffering  "  f 
My  dear  brother,  you  never  will  except  you  go  to  s(ihool,  and  yen  must  so 
to  school  to  Christ  '*  Learn  of  me,"  saith  he,  "  for  I  am  meek  and  lonwy 
in  heart"  Now,  in  order  to  learn  of  Christ  it  is  implied  that  we  lay 
aside  all  prejudices  of  the  past.   These  things  much  prevent  our  finding 

S'ace.  Have  jrou  any  preconceived  notions  of  what  religion  should  be  t 
ave  you  fashioned  on  your  own  anvil  ideas  of  what  \h&  doctrines  of 
the  gospel  ought  to  be?  Throw  them  all  away ;  learn  of  Jesus,  and 
unlearn  your  own  thoughts. 

Then,  when  von  are  willing  to  learn,  please  to  note  what  is  to  be 
learned.  In  oraer  to  get  perfect  rest  of  mind  you  have  to  learn  of  Jesua 
not  only  the  doctrines  wnich  he  teaches,  bat  a  great  deal  more  than, 
that.  To  go  to  school  to  be  orthodox  is  a  good  enough  thing,  but  the 
orthodoxy  which  brings  rest  is  an  orthodoxy  of  the  spirit.  Observe  the 
text,  "  Take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me."  What  ?  For  I  am 
wise  and  learned,  and  can  teach  you  ?  No;  you  are  to  learn  from  his 
example  to  be  ''  meek  and  lowly  in  heart,"  and  in  learning  that  yoa  will 
'^  find  rest  unto  your  souls."  To  catch  the  spirit  of  Jesus  is  the  road  to 
rest  To  believe  what  he  teaches  me  is  something,  to  acknowledge  him 
as  my  religious  leader  and  as  my  Lord  is  much,  but  to  strive  to  be 
conformed  to  his  character,  not  merely  in  its  external  developments,  but 
in  its  interior  spirit,  this  is  the  grammar  of  rest  Learn  to  be  like  the 
meek  and  lowlv-hearted  One,  and  ye  shall  find  rest 

He  tells  us  tne  two  points  in  which  we  are  to  learn  of  him.  First,  he 
is  meeh^  then  be  says  he  is  hwly  in  heart  T^e  the  word  '^  meek"  first 
I  think  that  refers  to  the  yoke-bearing,  the  active  labour.  If  I 
actively  labour  for  Christ  I  can  only  find  rest  in  the  labour  by  possessing 
the  meek  spirit  of  my  Lord ;  for  if  I  go  forth  to  labour  for  Christ 
without  a  meek  spirit,  I  shall  very  soon  find  that  there  is  no  rest  in  it, 
for  the  yoke  will  gall  my  shoulder.  Somebody  will  begin  objecting 
tkat  I  do  not  perform  my  work  according  to  his  liking.    If  I  am  not 


BEST,  BEST.  21 

-meek  I  shall  find  my  prond  spirit  rising  at  once,  and  shall  be  for  dofind- 
ing  myself;  I  shall  be  irritated,  or  I  shall  be  discouraged  and  inclined  to 
do  no  more,  because  I  am  not  appreciated  as  I  should  be.  A  mcclc  spirit 
is  not  apt  to  be  angr^,  and  does  not  soon  take  offence,  therefore  if  others 
find  fanitk  the  meek  spirit  goes  working  on,  and  is  not  offended  ;  it  will 
not  bear  the  sharp  word,  nor  reply  to  the  eevere  criticism.  If  the  meek 
spirit  be  griered  Dy  some  cutting  censure  and  suffers  for  a  moment,  it  is 
always  rc»dy  to  forgive  and  blot  out  the  past,  and  go  on  asjain.  The  meek 
spirit  in  working  only  seeks  to  do  good  to  others;  it  denies  itself;  it 
never  expected  to  be  well  treated;  it  did  not  aim  at  being  honoured;  it 
never  sought  itself,  but  purposed  only  to  do  good  to  others.  The  meek 
spirit  bowed  its  shoulder  to  the  yoke,  and  expected  to  have  to  continue 
bK>wing  in  order  to  keep  the  yoke  in  the  right  place  for  labour.  It  did 
not  look  to  be  ezcdted  by  yoke-bearing;  it  is  fully  contented  if  it  can 
exalt  Ohrist  and  do  good  to  his  chosen  ones.  Remember  how  meek 
and  lowly  Jesus  was  in  all  his  service,  and  how  calmly,  therefore,  he 
bore  witn  those  who  opposed  him  7  The  Samaritans  would  not  receive 
him,  and  therefore  Jonn,  who  felt  the  yoke  a  little  galling  to  his 
nnaccnstomed  shoulder,  cried,  **  Master,  call  fire  from  heaven."  Poor 
John !  But  Christ  bore  the  yoke  of  service  so  well  because  of  his  meek 
spirit  that  he  would  do  nothing  of  the  kind.  If  one  village  would  not 
receive  him  he  passed  on  to  another,  and  so  laboured  on.  Your  labour 
will  become  rerj  easy  if  your  spirits  are  very  meek.  It  is  the  proud 
spirit  that  gets  tured  of  doing  good  if  it  finds  its  labours  not  appreciated; 
but  the  brave,  meek  spirit,  finds  the  yoke  to  be  easy.  '*  Consider  him 
who  endnred  such  contradiction  of  sinners  against  himself,  lest  ye  be 
weary  and  faint  in  your  minds."  If  ye  learn  his  meekness  his  yoke 
will  be  pleasant  to  your  shoulder,  ana  you  will  never  wish  to  have  it 
removeo. 

Then,  as  to  the  passive  part  of  our  rest-lesson,  note  the  text,  *'  I  am 
lowly  m  hearV*  We  shall  all  have  to  bear  something  for  the  truth's 
sake  so  long  as  we  are  here.  The  reproach  is  a  part  of  the  gospel. 
The  rod  is  a  blessing  of  the  covenant.  The  lowly  heart  finds  the 
burden  very  light  because  it  acquiesces  in  the  divine  will.  The  lowly 
heart  says,  "  ifot  my  will,  but  thine  be  done  ;  let  God  be  glorified  in 
me,  it  shall  be  all  I  ask.  Rich,  poor,  sick,  or  in  health,  it  is  all  the 
same  to  me.  If  Ood  the  great  One  has  the  ^lory,  what  matters  where 
such  a  little  one  as  I  am  may  be  placed  ?  "  The  lowly  spirit  does  not 
seek  after  great  things  for  itself,  it  learns  in  whatsoever  state  it  is  there- 
with to  be  content.  If  it  be  poor,  "  Never  mind/*  says  the  lowly  one, 
**  I  never  aspired  to  be  rich;  among  the  great  ones  of  this  earth  I  never 
desired  to  shine."  If  it  be  denied  honour,  the  humble  spirit  says,  "  I 
never  asked  for  earthly  glory,  I  seek  not  mine  own  honour  but  his  that 
sent  me.  Why  should  I  be  honoured,  a.  poor  worm  like  me?  If 
nobody  speaks  a  good  word  of  me,  if  I  get  Christ  to  say,  '*  Well  done, 
good  and  fiaithful  servant,"  that  is  enough."  And  if  the  lowly-hearted 
have  little  worldly  pleasure,  he  says,  "  This  is  not  my  place  for  pleasure, 
I  deserve  eternal  pdin,  and  if  I  do  not  have  pleasures  here  I  shall 
have  them  hereafter.  I  am  well  content  to  bide  my  time."  Our 
blessed  Lord  was  always  of  that  lowly  spirit.  He  did  not  strive,  nor 
^,  nor  cause  his  voice  to  be  heard  in  the  streets.    The  baubles  of 


22  ilETIlOPOUTiiN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

empire  had  no  charm  for  him.  Had  fame  offered  to  sound  her  trnmpet 
for  none  but  him  he  would  have  cared  not  one  whit  for  the  offer. 
The  kingdoms  of  this  world  and  the  glory  thereof  were  offered  him,  and 
he  repelled  the  tempter.  He  was  gentle,  unobtrusive,  self-denying; 
hence  he  treated  his  burden  of  poverty  and  shame  as  a  light  thing,  ^'  He 
endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame."  If  we  once  learn  Christ's 
spirit  we  shall  find  rest  unto  our  souls. 

4.  But  we  must  pass  on  to  notice,  that  it  is  very  evident  that  the 
rest  which  we  are  to  find  is  a  rest  which  grows  entirely  out  of  our  spirits 
being  conformed  to  the  spirit  of  Christ.  "  Learn  of  me,  and  ye  shall  find 
rest."  It  is  then  a  spiritnal  rest,  altogether  independent  of  circum- 
stances. It  is  a  vain  idea  of  ours,  to  suppose  that  if  our  circumstances 
were  altered  we  should  be  more  at  rest.  My  brother,  if  you  cannot 
rest  in  poverty,  neither  would  you  in  riches  ;  if  yon  cannot  rest  in  the 
midst  of  persecution,  neither  would  you  in  the  midst  of  honour.  It 
is  the  spiric  within  that  gives  the  rest,  that  rest  has  little  to  do  with 
anything  without.  Men  have  sat  on  thrones  and  have  found  them 
uneasy  places,  while  others  on  the  rack  have  declared  that  they  were 
at  rest.  The  spirit  is  the  spring  of  rest,  as  for  the  outward  sur- 
roundings they  are  of  small  account.  Let  but  your  mind  be  like  the 
mind  of  Christ,  and  you  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls  :  a  deep  rest, 
a  growing  rest,  a  rest  found  out  more  and  more,,  an  abiding  rest,  not 
only  which  you  have  found,  but  which  you  shall  go  on  to  find. 
Justification  gave  you  rest  from  the  burden  of  sin,  sanctification  will 
give  you  rest  from  molesting  cares;  and  in  proportion  as  it  becomes 
perfect,  and  you  are  like  your  Saviour,  your  rest  shall  become  more  like 
that  of  heaven. 

I  desire  one  other  thing  to  be  called  to  your  mind  before  I  turn  to 
the  practical  use  of  the  text,  and  that  is,  that  here  as  in  the  former  rest, 
we  are  led  to  adore  and  admire  the  blessed  person  of  our  Lord.  Observe 
the  words,  **  For  /."  Oh !  it  all  comes  from  him  still,  the  second  rest  as 
much  as  the  first,  the  casket  and  the  treasure  in  the  secret  drawer.  It 
all  hinges  there,  "  For  I  amy  In  describing  the  second  rest  there  is 
more  said  concerning  him  than  in  the  first.  In  the  first  part  of  our  text  it 
only  says,  "  I  will  give  you  rest  ;**  but  in  the  second  part  his  character  is 
more  fUUy  explained — '*  For  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart ;"  as  if  to 
show  that  as  believers  grow  in  grace,  and  enjoy  more  rest,  they  see 
more  of  Jesus  and  know  more  of  him.  All  they  know  when  sin  is  par- 
doned is  that  he  gives  it,  perhaps  they  hardly  know  how  ;  but  after- 
wards when  they  come  to  rest  in  him  in  sweet  fellowship,  they  know 
more  of  his  personal  attributes,  and  their  rest  for  tliat  very  reason 
becomes  more  deep  and  perfect. 

Come  we  now  to  the  practical  use  of  all  this.  Read  the  chapter 
before  us  and  find  the  clue.  First,  my  dear  brethren,  if  you  find  rest  to 
your  souls  you  will  not  be  moved  by  the  judgment  of  men.  The 
children  in  the  market-place  were  the  type  of  our  Lord's  generation, 
who  railed  both  at  John  the  Baptist  and  at  our  Lord.  The  generation 
which  now  is  follows  the  same  course,  men  are  sure  to  cavil  at  our 
service.  Never  mind  ;  take  Christ's  yoke  on  you,  live  to  serve  him ;  take 
Christ's  burden,  make  it  a  point  to  bear  all  things  for  his  sake,  and  you 
will  not  be  affected  either  by  praise  or  censure,  for  you  will  find  rest 


REST,  REST.  28 

jto  your  souls  in  surrendering  yonrself  to  the  Father's  will  If  yon 
learn  of  Jesns  yon  will  have  rest  from  the  fear  of  men.  I  recollect, 
Jbefore  I  came  to  London,  being  at  a  prayer-meeting  where  a  very 
qnaint  brother  prayed  for  me  that  I  might  be  delivered  from  the 
^bleating  of  the  sheen."  I  nnderstood  it  after  awhile,  he  meant  that 
I  might  live  above  the  fear  of  man,  that  when  snch  a  person  said 
**  How  mnch  we  have  been  edified  to-day,"  I  might  not  be  pnffed  np ; 
or  if  another  said,  '^How  dnll  the  discourse  was  to-day,"  I  might  not 
be  depressed.  Yon  will  be  delivered  from  ''  the  bleating  of  the  sheep  " 
when  yon  bave  the  spirit  of  the  Good  Shepherd. 

Next  yon  will  be  delivered  from  fretfnlness  at  want  of  success.  "  Then 
began  he  to  npbraid  the  cities  wherein  most  of  his  mighty  works  were 
done,  because  they  repented  not."  He  had  wrought  his  mighty  works, 
4ind  preached  the  gospel,  and  they  did  not  repent.  Was  Jesus  dis- 
couraged ?  Was  he,  as  we  sometimes  are,  ready  to  quit  the  work?  No ; 
his  heart  rested  even  then.  If  we  come  to  Jesus,  and  take  his  yoke 
«nd  burden,  we  too  shall  find  rest,  though  Israel  be  not  gathered. 

Then,  too,  our  Lord  denounced  judgments  upon  those  who  repented 
not.  He  told  them  that  those  who  had  heard  the  gospel  and  rejected  it 
wonld  find  it  more  tolerable  for  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  in  the  day  of 
judgment  than  for  them.  There  are  some  who  quaiTel  with  the  judg- 
ments of  Ood,  and  declare  that  they  cannot  bear  to  think  of  the  con- 
denmation  of  the  impenitent.  Is  not  this  because  they  do  not  bear  the 
burden  of  the  Lord,  out  are  self-willed  ?  The  saints  are  described  in 
the  book  of  Revelation  as  singing  "  Hallelujah "  while  the  smoke  of 
Babylon  goeth  up  for  ever  and  ever.  We  shall  never  receive  with  humble 
fidth  the  judgment  of  God  in  its  terror  until  we  take  Christ's  yoke,  and 
are  lowly  in  heart.  When  we  are  like  Jesus  we  shall  not  feel  that  the 
punishment  is  too  much  for  the  sin,  but  we  shall  sympathise  with  the 
justice  of  Gk)d,  and  say  "  Amen "  to  it.  When  the  mind  is  lowly  it 
never  ventures  to  sit  in  judgment  upon  God,  but  rests  in  the  conviction 
that  the  Judge  of  all  must  do  right.  It  is  not  even  anxious  to  make 
apologies  and  smoothe  down  the  fact,  for  it  feels,  it  is  not  mine  to  justify 
hnn,  he  can  justify  himself." 

So,  again,  with  regard  to  the  divine  sovereignty.  Notice  the  rest  of 
the  Saviour's  mind  upon  that  matter :  *'  I  thank  thee,  0  Father,  Lord  of 
heaven  and  earth,  that  thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  the  wise  and 

Srudent"  Learning  of  Jesus,  we  too  shall  rest  in  reference  to  divine 
ecrees  ;  we  shall  rejoice  in  whatever  the  Lord  determines ;  predestina- 
tion will  not  cast  a  gloom  over  us,  but  we  shall  thank  God  for  all  he 
ordains. 

What  a  blessed  rest !  As  we  open  it  up,  does  not  its  compass  and 
depth  surprise  you  7  How  sweet  to  lie  passive  in  his  hands,  reconciled 
to  every  mystery,  content  with  every  dispensation,  honoured  by  every 
sorice  satisfied  in  God ! 

Now,  I  do  not  know  whether  I  am  right,  but  it  struck  me,  when  con- 
sidering this  text  from  various  points,  that  probably  our  Saviour  meant 
to  convey  an  idea  of  deeper  fellowship  than  we  have  yet  considered. 
Did  not  he  mean  this — that  he  carried  a  yoke  on  his  shoulder,  which 
he  calls  **  my  yoke'*  ?  When  bullocks  are  yoked,  there  are  generally  two. 
I  have  watched  them  in  Northern  Italy,  and  noticed  that  when  two  are 


24  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULriT. 

yoked  together,  and  they  are  perfectly  ajj:reed,  the  yoke  is  always  easy  to 
both  of  them.  If  one  were  determined  to  lie  down  and  the  other  to 
stand  up,  the  yoke  would  be  very  uncomfortable ;  but  when  they  are 
both  of  one  mind  you  will  see  them  look  at  each  other  with  those  large, 
lustrous,  brown  eyes  of  theirs  so  lovingly,  and  with  a  look  they  read  each 
other's  minds,  so  that  when  one  wants  to  lie  down,  down  they  go,  or 
when  one  wishes  to  go  forward,  forward  they  both  go,  keeping  step.  In 
this  way  the  yoke  is  easy.  Kow  I  think  the  Saviour  says  to  us,  "  I  am 
bearing  one  end  of  the  yoke  on  my  shoulder ;  come,  my  disciple,  place 
your  neck  under  the  other  side  of  it,  and  then  learn  of  me.  'Keep  step 
with  me,  be  as  I  am,  do  as  I  do.  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart ;  your 
heart  must  be  like  mine,  and  then  we  will  work  together  in  blessed 
fellowship,  and  you  will  find  that  working  with  me  is  a  happy  thing;  for 
my  yoke  is  easy  to  me,  and  will  be  to  you.  Come  then,  true  yoke- 
fellow, come  and  be  yoked  with  me,  take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  leam 
of  me."  If  that  be  the  meaning  of  the  text,  and  perhaps  it  is,  it  invites 
us  to  a  fellowship  most  near  and  honourable.  If  it  be  not  the 
meaning  ef  the  text,  it  is  at  any  rate  a  position  to  be  sought  after,  to 
be  labourers  together  with  Christ,  bearing  the  same  yoke.  Such  be 
our  lot.    Amen. 


Portion  op  Scripture  read  before  Sermon— Matthew  xL 


Xow  ready,  price  2s.  6d.,  handsomely  bound, 

"THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE;"    or,    an    Historical 

Account  oF  the  Society  from  its  first  planting  in  the  Puritan  era  to  the  present  time, 
with  other  sketches  relating  to  tho  rise,  growth,  and  customs  of  Nonconformity  in 
Southwark.  By  Godfrey  Holdex  Piive.  With  an  Introduction  by  C.  H. 
Sri:  KG  EON. 

"  Wi*  voniurc  to  think  that  no  one  will  bogin  tli<'  hook  without  reading  every  V'lfx  of  it,  and  fool 
pmttT'.il  nt  thr  end  to  Mr.  Pike  for  the  pli-  tsMre  jitTordod  by  it**  ponis^nl.  The  )>ii'.ik  U  iiidcwl  hi^hl^ 
m^oiestnisr.  The  chapter  relating  to  tho  a-.toptiiuoe  of  the  pistor.ito  by  Mr.  Spur^reon,  oontaina  two 
lottor-*  wiittcn  by  him  to  tho  demons  in  1^.14,  and  read  in  the  lij;ht  of  hubscqueut  event?,  they  are 
not  11  lii;lo  romaikable." — y/n*  Liteiartj  Wvriii. 

*'  Mr.  i'iko  ha^  my  best  thuiiks  for  his  toil,  and  I  trust  his  work  may  bo  appreciated  as  it  desorves 
CO  he."  —  (',  JI.  Spur^eoH. 

*'  This  vcihimo  hri;*  our  hearty  welcome.  It  will  be  ncreptible  to  all  wlio  take  an  intere?5t  in  tho 
hiiJtorj'  and  customs  of  London  Nonconformity,  and  mojit  especially  of  thib  dep;irim<  nt  of  it  And 
more  e-'peciaily  still  of  that  Nonconfonnist  Eapti-t  Church  uiit  of  which  the  Me tropulit an  Tabernacle 
has  -j.runj:.  Wc  are  8ure,  on  the>e  accounts,  an-l  in»ny  othei"S,  the  l)Ook  will  have  a  wide  circuhition. 
Mr.  i'ike  writes  clearly  and  is  genersiUy  felicitous  in  Ins  gi.jphic descriptions  of  I'eriods.  institutions, 
and  rnni'-rkable  men.  We  hope  for  this  excellent  work  tho  largest  possible  B.iptist  ptitrouage.'* — 
Bapliit  Meiscnger. 

London:  Passhorb  &  Alabasi'EB,  18,  Patomoster  Row. 


Jft^D^oIttan:  ^dbmmk  f  nipt 


THE  LOST  SILVER  PIECE. 


■ 

ThaUVtBXD  ON  LORD'B-DAY  MOBNINa,  JANUARY  15TH,   1871,  BT 

C.  H.    8PURGE0N, 

AT  THB  MSTBOPOLITAN  TABEBNAOLS,  NBWINGTON. 


''Eithar  whsfc  woman  liATmg  ten  pieces  of  silver,  if  she  lose  one  pieoe,  doih  not 
light » ^?wi^1f,  and  sweep  the  house,  und  seek  diligently  till  she  find  it  ?  And  when 
she  hath  found  it,  she  calleth  her  friends  and  lier  neighbours  together,  saying,  Rejoice 
with  me ;  for  I  have  found  the  piece  which  I  had  lost.  Likewise,  I  say  unto  yon^ 
there  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth.*' — 

Luke  XT.  8 — IOL 

Thik  chapter  is  full  of  grace  and  truth.  Its  three  consecntiye  parables 
have  been  thought  to  be  merely  a  repetition  of  the  same  doctrine  under 
different  metaphors,  and  if  that  were  so,  the  truth  which  it  teaches  is  so 
important  that  it  could  not  be  rehearsed  too  often  in  our  hearing. 
Moreover,  it  is  one  which  we  are  apt  to  forget,  and  it  is  well  to  have 
it  again  and  again  impressed  upon  our  minds.  The  truth  here  taught 
i«5  just  this — that  mercy  stretches  forth  her  hand  to  misery,  that  grace 
retreives  men  as  sinners,  that  it  deals  with  demerit,  unworthincss,  and 
worthlessness ;  that  those  who  think  themselves  righteous  are  not  the 
objects  of  divine  compassion,  but  the  unrighteous,  the  guilty,  and  the 
undeserving,  are  the  proper  subjects  for  the  infinite  mercy  of  God; 
in  a  word,  that  salvation  is  not  of  merit  but  of  grace.  This  truth  I 
say  is  most  important,  for  it  encourages  penitents  to  return  to  their 
Father;  but  it  is  very  apt  to  be  forgotten,  for  even  those  who  are 
saved  by  grace  too  often  fall  into  the  spirit  of  the  elder  brother,  and 
speak  as  if,  after  all,  their  salvation  depended  on  the  works  of  the  law. 

But,  my  dear  friends,  the  three  parables  recorded  in  this  chapter  are 
not  repetitions ;  they  all  declare  the  same  main  truth,  but  each  one 
reveals  a  different  phase  of  it.  The  three  parables  are  three  sides  of 
a  vast  pyramid  of  gospel  doctrine,  but  there  is  a  distinct  inscription 
upon  each.  Not  only  in  the  similitude,  but  also  in  the  teaching 
covered  by  the  similitude,  there  is  variety,  progress,  enlargement, 
discrimination.  We  have  only  need  to  read  attentively  to  discover 
that  in  this  trinity  of  parables,  we  have  at  once  unity  of  essential 
truth  and  distinctness  of  description.  Each  one  of  the  parables  is 
needful  to  the  other,  and  when  combined  they  present  us  with  a  far 
more  complete  exposition  of  their  doctrine  than  could  have  been 
conveyed  by  any  one  of  them.  Note  for  a  moment  the  first  of  the 
three  which  brings  before  us  a  shepherd  seeking  a  lost  sheep.    To  whom 

No.  970. 


26  METBOFOLTTAN  TABEBKACLE  PULPIT. 

does  this  refer?    Who  is  the  sheoherd  of  Israel?    Who  brings  again 
that  which  has  gone  astray?    Do  we  not  clearly  discern  the  ever 
glorious  and  ble^ed  Chief  Shepherd  of  the  sheep,  who  lays  down  his 
life  that  he  may  save  them  ?    Beyond  a  question,  we  see  in  the  first 
parable  the  work  of  onr  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  second  parable  is  most 
fitly  placed  where  it  is.     It,  I  doubt  not,  represents  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  working,  through  the  church,  for  the  lost  but  precious 
souls  of  men.    The  church  is  that  woman  who  sweeps  her  house  to 
find  the  lost  piece  of  money,  and  in  her  the  Spirit  works  his  purposes 
of  love.    Now  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  follows  the  work  of  Christ. 
As  here  we  first  see  the  shepberd  seeking  the  lost  sheep,  and4;hen  read 
of  the  woman  seeking  the  lost  piece  of  money,  so  the  great  Shepherd 
redeems,  and  then  the  Holy  Spirit  restores  the  soul.  You  will  perceive 
that  each  parable  is  thoroughly  understood  in  its  minute  details  when  so 
interpreted.    The  shepherd  seeks  a  sheep  which  has  wilfully  gone  astray, 
and  so  far  the  element  of  sin  is  present ;  the  lost  piece  of  money  does 
not  bring  up  that  idea,  nor  was  it  needful  that  it  should,  since  the  parable 
does  not  deal  with  the  pardon  of  sin  as  the  first  does.    The  sheep,  on  the 
other  hand,  though  stupid  is  not  altogether  senseless  and  dead,  but  the 
piece  of  money  is  altogether  unconscious  and  powerless,  and  therefore 
all  the  fitter  emblem  of  man  as  the  Holy  Ghost  begins  to  deal  with  him, 
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.    The  third  parable  evidently  represents  the 
divine  Father  in  his  abundant  love  receiving  the  lost  child  who  comes 
back  to  him.    The  third  parable  would  be  likely  to  be  misunderstood 
without  the  first  and  the  second.    We  have  sometimes  heard  it  said — 
here  is  the  prodigal  received  as  soon  as  he  comes  back,  no  mention  beinc^ 
made  of  a  Saviour  who  seeks  and  saves  him.    Is  it  possible  to  teach  aU 
truths  in  one  single  parable?     Does  not  the  first  one  speak  of  the 
shepherd  seeking  the  lost  sheep  ?    Why  need  repeat  what  had  been 
said  before?    It  has  also  been  said  that  the  prodigal  returned  of  his 
own  free  will^  for  there  is  no  hint  of  the  operation  of  a  superior 
power  upon  his  heart,  it  seems  as  if  he  himself  spontaneously  says, 
**I  will  arise,   and  go  unto  my  Father."      The  answer  is,  that  the 
Holy  Spirit's  work  had  been  clearly  described  in  the  second  parable,  and 
needed  not  to  be  introduced  again.    If  you  put  the  three  pictures  in  a 
line,  they  represent  the  whole  compass  of  salvation,  but  each  one  apart 
sets  forth  the  work  in  reference  to  one  or  other  of  the  divine  persons  of 
the  blessed  Trinity.    The  shepherd,  with  much  pain  and  self-sacrifice, 
seeks  the  reckless,  wandering  sheep ;  the  woman  diligently  searches  for 
the  insensible  but  lost  piece  of  money ;  the  father  receives  the  returning 
prodigal.    What  God  has  joined  together,  let  no  man  put  asunder.   The 
three  life-sketches  are  one,  and  one  truth  is  taught  in  the  whole  three, 
yet  each  one  is  distinct  from  the  other,  and  by  itself  instructive. 

May  we  be  taught  of  God  while  we  try  to  iliscover  the  mind  of  the 
Spirit  in  this  parable,  which,  as  we  believe,  represents  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  in  and  through  the  church.  The  church  is  evermore 
represented  as  a  woman,  either  the  chaste  bride  of  Christ,  or  the  shame- 
less courtesan  of  Babylon ;  as  for  good  a  woman  sweeps  the  house,  so 
for  evil  a  woman  takes  the  leaven  and  hides  it  in  the  meal  till  all  is 
leavened.  Towards  Christ  a  wife  and  towards  men  a  mother,  the  church 
kmost  fitly  set  forth  as  a  woman.    A  woman  with  a  house  under  her 


TUB  LOST  SILVER  PIBCB.  27 

control  is  the  full  idea  of  the  text,  her  husband  away  and  herself  i^ 
charge  of  the  treasure :  jnst  such  is  the  condition  of  the  church  since 
the  departure  of  the  Lord  Jesus  to  the  Father. 

To  bring  .each  part  of  the  text  under  inspection  we  shall  notice  man 
in  three  conditions — losty  sought,  found. 

I.  Firsts  the  parable  treats  of  man,  the  object  of  divine  mercy,  as  liOsnr. 

Notice,  first,  the  treasure  was  lost  in  the  dust.  The  woman  had  lost 
her  piece  of  silver,  and  in  order  to  find  it  she  had  to  sweep  for  it, 
which  proves  that  it  had  fallen  into  a  dusty  place,  fallen  to  the  earth, 
where  it  might  be  hidden  and  concealed  amid  rubbish  and  dirt.  Every 
man  of  Adam  bom  is  as  a  piece  of  silver  lost,  fallen,  dishononred^ 
and  some  are  buried  amid  foulness  and  dust.  If  we  should  drop  many 
pieces  of  money  they  would  fall  into  different  positions ;  one  of  them 
might  fell  into  actual  mire,  and  be  lost  there;  another  might  fall  upon 
a  carpet^  a  cloth,  or  a  clean,  well-polished  floor,  and  be  Ic  st  thei*e. 
If  yon  have  lost  your  money,  it  is  equally  lost  into  whatever  place  it 
may  have  fallen.  So  all  men  are  alike  lost,  but  they  have  not  all  fallen 
into  the  like  condition  of  apparent  defilement.  One  man  from  the 
surroundings  of  his  childhood  and  the  influences  of  education,  has 
never  indulged  in  the  coarser  and  more  brutalising  vices;  he  has  never 
been  a  blasphemer,  perhaps  never  openly  even  a  Sabbath-breaker,  yet 
he  may  be  lost  for  all  that  Another,  on  the  other  hand,  has  fallen  into 
great  excess  of  riot;  he  is  familiar  with  wantonness  and  chambering,  and 
all  manner  of  evil;  he  is  lost,  he  is  lost  with  an  emphasis:  but  the  more 
decorous  sinner  is  lost  also.  There  may  be  some  here  this  morning 
(and  we  wish  always  to  apply  the  truth  as  we  go  on),  who  are  lost  in 
the  very  worst  of  corruption :  I  would  to  God  that  they  would  take 
hope  and  learn  from  the  parable  before  us,  that  the  church  of  God  and 
the  Spirit  of  God  are  seeking  after  them,  and  they  may  be  among  the 
found  ones  yet.  Since,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  many  here  who 
have  not  dropped  into  such  unclean  places,  I  would  affectionately 
remind  them  that  they  are  nevertheless  lost,  and  they  need  as  much  to 
be  sought  for  by  the  Spirit  of  God  as  if  they  were  among  the  vilest  of 
the  vile.  To  save  the  moral  needs  divine  grace  as  certainly  as  to  save 
the  imrporal.  If  you  be  lost,  my  dear  hearer,  it  will  be  small  avail  to 
yon  that  you  perished  respectably,  and  were  accursed  in  decent  company : 
if  yon  lack  but  one  thing,  yet  if  the  deficiency  be  fatal,  it  will  be  but  a 
poor  consolation  that  you  had  only  one  lack.  If  one  leak  sent  the  vessel 
to  the  bottom;  it  was  no  comfort  to  the  crew  that  their  ship  only 
leaked  in  one  place.  One  disease  may  kill  a  man  ;  he  may  be  sound 
everywhere  else,  but  it  will  h^  a  sorry  comfort  to  him  to  know  that  he 
might  have  lived  long  had  but  that  one  organ  been  sound.  If,  dear 
hearer,  thou  shouldst  have  no  sin  whatever  save  only  an  evil  heart  of 
nnbeliet  if  all  thy  external  life  should  be  lovely  and  amiable,  yet  if 
that  one  fetal  sin  be  in  thee,  thou  canst  draw  small  consolation  from  all 
else  that  is  good  about  thee.  Thou  art  lost  by  nature,  and  thou  mndt 
be  found  by  grace,  whoever  thou  mayst  be. 

In  this  parable  that  which  was  lost  was  altogether  igitorant  of  iis 
hemg  lost.  The  silver  coin  was  not  a  living  thing,  and  therefore  had 
no  consciousness  of  its  being  lost  or  sought  afiier.  The  piece  of  inaney 
lost  was  qnite  as  content  to  be  on  the  floor  or  in  the  anst,  aa  it  dms 


28  M£TBQPOLITAH  TABKRNACTJB  PULPIT. 

to  be  io  the  pnree  of  its  owner  amongst  Tts  like.  It  knew  nothing 
sbfrnt  its  being  lost,  and  conld  not  know.  And  it  is  jnst  so  with  the 
sinner  who  is  spiritnailj  dead  in  sin,  he  is  nnconscions  of  his  state,  nor 
can  we  make  him  understand  the  danger  and  terror  of  his  condition. 
When  he  feels  that  he  is  lost,  there  is  already  some  work  of  grace  in  him. 
When  the  sinner  knows  that  he  is  lost,  he  is  no  longer  content  with 
his  condition,  bnt  begins  to  cry  out  for  mercy,  which  is  CTidence  that 
the  finding  work  has  already  begun.  The  nnconverted  sinner  will 
confess  that  he  is  lost  because  he  knows  the  statement  to  be  scriptural, 
and  therefore  out  of  compliment  to  6od*s  word  he  admits  it  to  be  true; 
but  he  has  no  idea  of  what  is  meant  by  it,  else  would  he  either  deny  it 
with  proud  indignation^  or  he  would  bestir  himself  to  pray  that  he  might 
be  restored  to  the  place  ^om  which  he  has  fallen,  and  be  numbered  with 
Christ's  precious  property.  0  my  hearers,  this  it  is  that  makes  the 
Spirit  of  God  so  needful  in  all  our  preachings,  and  every  other  soul- 
saving  exercise,  because  we  have  to  deal  with  insensible  souls.  The 
man  who  puts  the  fire-escape  against  the  window  of  a  burning  house, 
may  readily  enough  rescue  those  who  are  aware  of  their  danger,  and 
who  rush  to  the  &ont  and  help  him,  or  at  least  are  submissire  to  him 
in  his  work  of  delivering  them;  but  if  a  man  were  insane,  if  he  played 
with  the  flamcMS,  if  he  were  idiotic  and  thought  that  some  srand  illumin- 
ation were  going  on,  and  knew  nothing  of  the  danger  but  was  only 
"  glamoured  by  the  glare,"  then  would  it  be  hard  work  for  the  rescuer. 
Even  thus  it  is  with  sinners.  They  know  not^  though  they  profess  to 
know,  that  sin  is  hell,  that  to  be  an  alien  from  (xod  is  to  be  condemned 
already,  to  live  in  sin  is  to  be  dead  while  you  live.  The  insensibility 
of  the  piece  of  money  fisdrly  pictures  the  utter  indifierence  of  souls 
unquicKened  by  divine  grace. 

llie  silver  piece  was  lost  but  not  forgotten.  The  woman  knew  that  she 
had  ten  pieces  of  silver  originally;  she  counted  them  over  carefully,  for 
they  were  all  her  little  store,  and  she  found  only  nine,  but  she  well 
remembered  that  one  more  was  hers  and  ought  to  be  in  her  hand.  This 
is  our  hope  for  the  Lord's  lost  ones,  they  are  lost  but  not  forgotten,  the 
heart  of  the  Saviour  remembers  them,  and  prays  for  them.  0  soul, 
I  trust  you  are  one  whom  Jesus  calls  his  own,  if  so  he  remembers  the 
pangs  which  he  endured  in  redeeming  you,  and  he  recollects  the 
Father's  love  which  was  reflected  on  jrou  firom  old  eternity,  when  the 
Father  gave  you  into  the  hands  of  his  beloved  Son.  You  are  not 
forgotten  of  the  Holy  Spirit  who  seeks  you  for  the  Saviour.  This 
is  the  minister's  hope,  that  there  is  a  people  whom  the  Lord  re- 
members and  whom  he  never  will  forget,  though  they  forget  him. 
Strangers  to  him,  far-off,  ignorant,  callous,  careless,  dead,  yet  the  ever- 
lasting heart  in  heaven  thn)b8  towards  them  with  love;  and  the  mind 
of  the  Spirit,  working  on  earth,  is  directed  to  them.  These,  who  were 
numbered  and  reckoned  up  of  old  are  still  in  the  inventory  of  the 
divine  memory ;  and  though  lost  they  are  earnestly  rememb€a*ed  still. 
In  some  sense  this  is  true  of  every  sinner  here.  You  are  lost,  but 
that  yon  are  remembered  is  evident,  for  I  am  sent  to-day  to  preach  the 
gospel  of  Jesus  to  you.  Ood  has  thoughts  of  love  concerning  yon, 
and  bids  you  turn  unto  him  and  live.  Have  respect,  I  pray  you,  to  the 
word  of  ms  salvation. 


THE  LOST  aiLYSB  PISOB.  29 

Next,  the  pieoe  of  silver  was  bst  hut  sUU  elamed.  Obsenre  that  the 
woman  callea  the  money,  *^  my  piece  which  was  lost."  When  she  lost 
its  poBsession  she  did  not  lose  her  right  to  it ;  it  did  not  become  same- 
body  else's  when  it  slipped  oat  of  her  hand  and  fell  npon  the  floor. 
Those  for  whom  Christ  hath  died,  whom  he  hath  peculiarly  redeemed, 
are  not  Satan's  even  when  they  are  dead  in  sin.  They  may  come  under 
'  the  devil's  nsnrped  dominion,'bnt  the  monster  shall  be  chased  from  his 
throne.  Christ  has  received  them  of  old  of  the  Father,  and  he  has 
bought  them  with  his  precious  blood,  and  he  will  have  them ;  he  will 
chase  away  the  intruder  and  claim  his  own.  Thus  saith  the  Lord, 
"Your  covenant  with  death  is  disannulled,  and  your  agreement  with 
hell  shall  not  stand."  Ye  have  sold  yourselves  for  nought;  and  ye 
shall  be  redeemed  without  money.  Jesus  shall  have  his  own,  and  none 
shall  pluck  them  &om  his  hold;  he  will  defend  his  claim  against  all 
comers. 

Furtlier,  observe  that  the  lost  piece  of  money  was  not  onlv  remembered 
and  clakn^,  but  it  was  also  valued.  In  these  three  parables  the  value 
of  the  lost  article  steadily  rises.  This  is  not  very  clear  at  first  sight, 
because  it  may  be  said  that  a  sheep  is  of  more  value  than  a  piece 
of  money ;  but  notice  that  the  shepherd  only  lost  one  sheep  out  of  a 
hundred,  but  the  woman  lost  one  piece  out  often,  and  the  father  one  son 
out  of  two.  Now,  it  is  not  the  value  of  the  thing  in  itself  which  is  here 
set  forth,  for  the  soul  of  a  man,  as  al^olutely  valued  in  comparison  with 
Uie  infinite  Qod,  is  of  small  esteem;  but  because  of  his  love  it  is  of  great 
value  to  him.  The  one  piece  of  money  to  the  woman  was  a  tenth  part 
of  all  she  had,  and  it  was  very  valuable  in  her  esteem.  To  the  Lord  of 
love  a  lost  soul  is  very  precious:  it  is  not  because  of  its  intrinsic  value, 
but  it  has  a  relative  value  which  God  sets  at  a  high  rate.  The  Holy 
Spirit  values  souls,  and  therefore  the  church  prizes  them  too.  The 
church  sometimes  says  to  herself,  "  We  have  but  few  conversions,  few 
members ;  many  are  called,  but  few  chosen."  She  counts  over  her  few 
converts,  her  few  members,  and  one  soul  is  to  her  all  the  more  precious 
because  of  the  few  there  are  who  in  these  times  are  in  the  treasury  of 
Christ,  stamped  with  the  image  of  the  great  King,  and  made  of  the 
precious  genuine  silver  of  God's  own  grace.    0  dear  Mend,  you  think 

fourself  of  small  value,  you  who  are  conscious  that  you  have  sinned, 
at  the  church  does  not  think  you  of  small  value,  and  the  Holy  Spirit 
does  not  despise  you.  He  sets  a  high  price  upon  you,  and  so  do  his 
people.  We  value  your  souls,  we  only  wish  we  knew  how  to  save  them ; 
we  would  spare  no  expense  or  pains  if  we  might  but  be  the  means  of 
finding  you,  and  bringing  you  once  more  into  the  great  Owner's  hand. 
The  piece  of  money  was  lost,  but  it  was  not  lost  homkssly.  The 
woman  had  hopes  of  recovering  it,  and  therefore  she  did  not  despair, 
but  set  to  work  at  once.  It  is  a  dreadful  thing  to  think  of  those  souIb 
which  are  lost  hopelessly.  Their  state  reminds  me  of  a  paragr^rii 
I  have  cut  firom  this  week's  newspaper: — "The  fishing  smack  Veto, 
of  Grimsby,  S.  Cousins,  master,  arrived  in  port  firom  the  Dogger  Bank 
on  Saturday  night.  The  master  reports  that  on  the  previous  Wednesday, 
when  about  two  hundred  miles  from  Spurn,  he  sighted  to  the  lee- 
ward what  at  first  appeared  to  be  a  small  schooner  in  distress,  but  on 
bearing  down  to  her  found  her  to  be  a  full-sized  lifeboat,  upwards  of 


80  MKTBOPOLITAN  TABSBNACLK  rULPIT. 

twenty  feet  long,  and  Ml  of  water  up  to  her  corks.  There  was  no 
name  on  the  boat,  which  had  evidentlj  l)elonged  to  some  large  ship  cr 
steamer.  It  was  painted  white  both  inside  and  ont,  with  a  brown  streak 
loand  the  rim.  When  alongside,  on  closer  examination,  three  dead 
sailors  were  perceived  lying  aft,  hnddled  together,  and  a  fonrth  athwart 
in  the  bow«  with  his  head  hanging  over  the  rowlocks.  They  seemed 
from  their  dress  and  general  appearance  to  be  foreigners,  but  the  bodies 
had  been  frightfully  '  washed  about,'  and  were  in  u  state  of  decompo- 
sition, and  had  evidently  be^  dead  some  week^.  The  water-logged 
waif  drifted  on  with  its  ghastly  cargo,  and  the  horrible  sight  so  shocked 
the  crew  of  the  Veto  that  afterwards  they  were  almost  too  unnerved  to 
attend  to  their  trawling,  and  the  smack,  in  consequence,  returned  to 
port  with  a  comparatively  small  catch,  and  sooner  than  expected.'* 
Do  you  wonder  at  the  men  sickening  in  the  presence  of  this  mysteiy  of 
the  sea?  I  shudder  as  I  think  I  see  that  Cliaron-like  boat  floating 
on  and  on ;  mercy  need  not  follow  it,  she  can  confer  no  boon ;  love 
need  not  seek  it,  no  deed  of  hers  can  save.  My  soul  sees,  as  in  a 
vision,  souls  hopelessly  lost,  drifting  ou  the  waves  of  eternity,  beyond 
all  hopi'  or  help.  Alas !  Alas !  Millions  of  our  race  are  now  in  that 
condition.  Upon  them  has  passed  the  second  death,  and  powerless 
are  we  all  to  save  them.  Towards  them  even  the  gospel  has  no  aspect 
of  ho{H\  Our  jov  is  that  we  have  to  deal  to-day  with  lost  souls 
who  are  uot  yet  hopelessly  losL  They  are  dead  in  sin,  but  there 
IB  a  quickening  )H>wer  which  can  make  them  live.  0  mariner  of 
the  ^oa  of  life,  tisher  of  men  U(x>n  this  stormy  sea,  those  castaways 
whom  YOU  meet  with  aiv  a^*cessible  to  your  etiforts  of  compassion, 
they  can  l>e  rescued  fi\>m  the  pitiless  deeps:  your  mission  is  not  a 
hopeless  one.  1  ivjoioe  over  the  ungodly  man  here  to-day  that  he 
is  not  in  torment,  not  in  hell,  he  is  not  amoui:  those  whose  worm  dieth 
not  and  whose  fire  is  not  quenched.  I  congratulate  the  Christian  church 
too,  that  her  piece  of  money  haiis  uot  ^en  where  she  cannot  find  it.  I 
lejoice  that  the  fallen  around  us  are  not  past  hope;  yea,  though  they 
dwell  in  the  worst  dens  of  London,  though  they  be  thieves  and  narlots, 
they  are  not  beyond  the  reach  ol*  mercy.  Up.  0  church  of  Grod,  winle 
po^bilities  of  mercy  remain !  Gird  up  your  loins,  ye  soul-winners, 
and  resolve  by  the  grace  of  God  that  every  hour  of  hv>pe  shall  be  well 
employed  by  you. 

One  other  point  is  worthy  of  notice.  The  piece  of  silver  was  lost, 
bit  it  was  io^  m  the  housty  and  the  woman  knew  it  to  be  sa  If  she  had 
ket  it  in  the  street^  the  probabilities  are  she  would  not  have  looked 
for  it  again,  for  other  hands  might  have  closed  over  it.  If  she  had 
loit  it  in  a  river,  or  dropped  it  in  tb.e  sea,  she  might  very  fairly  have 
concluded  that  it  was  gone  fv^r  ever,  but  evidently  she  was  sure  that 
ike  had  lost  it  in  the  house.  Is  it  not  a  couaolatiou  to  know  that  those 
\  who  arv  losi»  are  still  in  the  house  *  Tlioy  aiv  still  under  the 
of  grftL^,  within  the  ^^here  of  the  chorvji^s  operations,  within. 
liie  habitation  of  which  she  is  the  mls:ivs&,  and  where  the  HoIt  Spirit 
kik  What  thank(ulue«s  thov  ou^V.t  to  be  in  your  minds  tnat  you 
not  lost  as  heathens,  nor  lost  amiol  Romi:>h  or  Mohammedan  super- 
bat  los:  wImmv  the  j^^pel  is  lai:hfully  and  plainly  pieachea  to 
jMi;  where  jou  are  lovingly  tolil^  tha:  whoioever  bclieveih  in  Christ* 


THE  LOST  SILVER  PIBOK.  31 

JesaB  is  not  condemned.    Lost,  but  lost  where  the  church's  business  is 
to  look  after  joa,  where  it  is  the  Spirit's  work  to  seek  and  to  find  you* 
This  is  the  condition  of  the  lost  soul,  depicted  as  a  lost  piece  of  silver 
II.  Secondly,  we  shall  notice  the  soul  under  another  condition,  we 
flhall  yiew  it  as  bought. 

By  whom  was  the  piece  of  silver  sought  ?  It  w&a  touync  oy  %Uf  owner 
peraanalfy.  Notice,  she  who  lost  the  money  lit  a  caudle  and  swept  the 
hoose,  and  sought  diligently  till  she  found  it.  So,  brethven,  I  have  said 
that  the  woman  represents  the  Holy  Spirit,  or  rather  the  church  in 
which  the  Holy  Spirit  dwells.  Now,  there  will  never  be  a  soul  found 
till  the  Holy  Spirit  seeks  aft^  it.  He  is  the  great  soul  finder.  The 
heart  will  oontmue  in  the  dark  until  he  comes  with  his  illuminating 
power.  He  is  the  owner,  he  possesses  it,  and  he  alone  can  effectually 
seek  after  it.  The  Ood  to  whom  the  soul  belongs  must  seek  the  souL 
But  he  does  it  by  his  church,  for  souls  belong  to  the  church  too;  they 
are  sons  and  daughters  of  the  chosen  mother,  they  are  her  citizens  and 
treasures.  For  this  reason  the  church  must  personally  seek  after  souls. 
She  cannot  delegate  her  work  to  anybody.  The  woman  did  not  pay  a 
servant  to  sweep  the  house,  but  she  swept  it  herself.  Her  eyes  were  much 
better  than  a  servant's  eyes,  for  the  servant's  eyes  would  only  look  after 
somebody  else's  money,  and  perhaps  would  not  see  it;  but  the  mistress 
would  look  aft^  her  own  money,  and  she  would  bo  certain  to  light 
upon  it  if  it  were  anywhere  within  sight.  When  the  church  of  God 
solemnly  feels,  ''It  is  our  work  to  look  after  sinners,  we  must  not 
delegate  it  even  to  the  minister,  or  to  the  City-missionary,  or  the  Bible- 
woman,  but  the  church  as  a  church  must  look  after  the  soids  of  sinners," 
then  I  believe  souls  will  be  found  and  saved.  When  the  church  recog- 
nises that  these  lost  souls  belong  to  her,  she  will  be  likely  to  find  them. 
It  will  be  a  happy  day  when  every  church  of  God  is  actively  at  work 
for  the  salvation  of  sinners.  It  has  been  the  curse  of  Christendom  that 
she  has  ventured  to  delegate  her  sacred  duties  to  men  called  priests, 
or  that  she  has  set  apart  certain  persons  to  be  called  the  religious,  who 
are  to  do  works  of  mercy  and  charity  and  of  evangelisation.  We  are, 
every  one  of  us  who  are  Christ's,  bound  to  do  our  own  share ;  nay,  we 
should  deem  it  a  privilege  of  which  we  will  not  be  deprived,  personally 
to  serve  Gx>d,  personally  to  sweep  the  house  and  search  after  the  lost 
spiritual  treasures.  The  church  herself,  in  the  power  of  the  indwelling 
£^)irit  of  God,  must  seek  lost  souls. 

Note  that  this  seeking  became  a  matter  of  chief  concern  with  the 
woman.  I  do  not  know  what  other  business  she  had  to  do,  but  I  do 
know  that  she  put  it  all  by  to  find  the  piece  of  money.  There  was  the 
0(»n  to  be  ground  for  the  morning  meal,  perhaps  that  was  done,  at  any 
rate,  if  not  so,  she  left  it  unprepared.  There  was  a  garment  to  be 
mended,  or  water  to  be  drawn,  or  the  fire  to  be  kindled,  or  the  friends 
and  neighbours  to  be  convers^  with — never  mind,  the  mistress  forgets 
eveiything  else,  she  has  lost  her  piece  of  money,  and  she  mnst  find  it  at 
once.  So  with  the  church  of  God,  her  chief  concern  should  be  to  seek 
the  perishing  sons  of  men.  To  bring  souls  to  know  Jesus,  and  to  be 
Mwea  in  him  with  a  great  salvation  should  be  the  church's  great 
longing  and  oonoorn.  She  has  other  things  to  do.  She  has  her  own 
edification  to  consider,  she  has  other  matters  to  be  attended  to  in  their 


32  METROFOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

place,  bat  this  first,  this  eyermore  and  always  first.  The  woman 
evidently  said,  "  The  money  is  lost,  I  mnst  find  that  first**  The  loss  or 
her  piece  of  silver  was  so  serions  a  matter  that  if  she  sat  down  to  her 
menaing,  her  hands  would  miss  their  nimbleness,  or  if  any  other  house- 
hold work  demanded  her  attention,  it  wonld  be  an  irksome  task  to  her,  for 
she  was  thinking  of  that  piece  of  coin.  If  her  friend  came  and  talked 
with  her,  she  would  say  to  herself,  '^  I  wish  she  were  gone,  for  I  want 
to  be  looking  after  my  lost  money.*'  I  wish  the  church  of  God  had 
such  an  engrossing  love  for  poor  sinners  that  she  would  feel  even^hing^ 
to  be  an  impertinence  which  hindered  her  from  soul-saving.  We  have 
every  now  and  then,  as  a  church,  a  little  to  do  with  politics,  and  a  little 
to  do  with  finance,  for  we  are  still  in  the  world,  but  I  love  to  see  in  all 
churches  everything  kept  in  the  background,  compared  with  soul* 
saving  work.  This  must  be  first  and  foremost.  Educate  the  people — 
yes,  certainly;  we  take  an  interest  in  everything  which  will  do  good  to 
our  fellow  citizens,  for  we  are  men  as  well  as  Christians;  but  first  and 
foremost  our  business  is  to  win  souls,  to  bring  men  to  Jesus,  to  hunt  up^ 
those  who  bear  heaven's  image,  though  lost  and  fallen.  This  is  what 
we  must  be  devoted  to,  this  is  the  main  and  chief  concern  of  believers, 
the  very  reason  for  the  existence  of  a  church ;  if  she  regard  it  not». 
she  forgets  her  highest  end. 

Now  note,  that  the  woman  having  thus  set  her  heart  to  find  her 
money,  ahs  used  the  most  fit  and  proper  means  to  accomplish  her  end» 
First,  she  lit  a  candle.  So  doth  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  church.  In 
Eastern  dwellings  it  would  be  necessary,  if  you  lost  a  piece  of  money 
and  wanted  to  find  it,  to  light  a  candle  at  any  time ;  for  in  our  Saviour's 
day  glass  was  not  used,  and  the  windows  of  houses  were  only  little 
slits  in  the  side  of  the  wall,  and  the  rooms  were  very  dark.  Almost  all 
the  Oriental  houses  are  very  dark  to  this  day,  and  if  anything  be  dropped 
as  small  as  a  piece  of  silver,  it  must  be  looked  for  with  a  candle  even 
at  high  noon.  Now,  the  sphere  in  which  the  church  moves  here  on 
earth  is  a  dim  twilight  of  mental  ignorance,  and  moral  darkness,  and  in 
order  to  find  a  lost  soul,  light  must  be  brought  to  bear  upon  it.  The 
Holy  Spirit  uses  the  light  of  the  gospel ;  he  convinces  men  of  sin,  of 
righteousness,  and  of  judgment  to  come.  The  woman  lit  a  candle,  and 
even  thus  the  Holy  Spirit  lights  up  some  chosen  man  whom  he  makes 
to  be  a  light  in  the  world.  He  calls  to  himself  whomsoever  he  wills, 
and  makes  him  a  lamp  to  shine  upon  the  people.  Such  a  man^ 
will  have  to  be  consumed  in  his  calling,  like  a  candle  he  will  be  burnt 
up  in  light-giving.  Earnest  zeal,  and  laborious  self-sacrifice,  will  eat 
him  up.  So  may  this  church,  and  every  church  of  God,  be  continuallj 
using  up  her  anointed  men  and  women,  who  shall  be  as  lights  in  the 
midst  of  a  crooked  and  perverse  generation,  to  find  out  lost  souls. 

But  she  was  not  content  with  her  candle,  she  fetched  her  broom,  she 
swept  the  house.  If  she  could  not  find  the  silver  as  things  were  in  the 
house,  she  brought  the  broom  to  bear  upon  the  accumulated  dust. 
Oh,  how  a  Christian  church,  when  it  is  moved  by  the  Holy  Spirit, 
cleanses  herself  and  purges  all  her  work!  "Perhaps,**  saith  she, 
^some  of  our  members  are  inconsistent,  and  so  men  are  hardened 
in  sin;  these  offenders  must  be  put  away.  The  tone  of  religion  is 
low — that  may  be  hindering  the  conversion  of  souls,  it    mnst  be 


THE  LOST  SILYEB  PIECS.  33 

Perhaps  oar  Btatements  of  truth,  and  our  ways  of  proclaiming 
it»  are  not  the  moat  likely  to  command  attention,  we  mnst  amend  them ; 
we  most  use  the  best  possible  methods,  we  must  in  fact  sweep  the  whole 
hoose.''  I  delight  to  see  an  earnest  honse-sweeping  by  confessicm 
of  sin  at  a  prayer  meeting,  or  by  a  searching  discourse,  a  house-sweeping 
wttea  ereiy  one  is  earnest  to  reform  himself,  and  to  get  nearer  to  Ood 
himself  by  a  reviyal  of  his  own  persona]  piety.  This  is  one  of  the 
means  by  which  the  church  is  enabled  to  find  the  hidden  ones.  Besides 
this»  all  the  neighbourhood  round  the  church  (for  the  house  is  the  sphere 
in  which  the  church  moyes),  must  be  ransacked,  stirred,  turned  oyer,  in  a 
word  **  swept.^  A  church  diat  is  really  in  earnest  after  souls  will  endea^ 
Tonr  to  penetrate  the  gloom  of  poyerty  and  stir  the  heaps  of  profligacy. 
'She  win  hunt  high  and  hunt  low  if  Dy  any  means  she  may  rescue  from 
destruction  the  precious  thing  upon  which  her  heart  is  set 

Carefully  note  that  this  seeking  after  the  lost  piece  of  silver  with 
fitting  instruments,  the  broom  and  the  candle,  was  attended  with  nosmaU 
stir.  She  swept  the  house — ^there  was  dust  for  her  ^es  ;  if  any  neigh- 
bours were  in  the  house  there  was  dust  for  them,  xon  cannot  sweepa 
house  without  causing  some  concision  and  temporary  discomfort.  We 
«xnetimeB  hear  persons  coniplain  of  certain  Christians  for  making  too 
much  ado  about  religion.  The  complaint  shows  that  something  is  being 
4one,  and  in  all  probfSbility  some  success  being  achieved.  Those  people  who 
haye  no  interest  in  the  lost  silver  are  annoyed  at  the  dust ;  it  is  getting 
4own  their  throats,  and  they  cough  at  it;  never  mind,  good  woman, 
sweep  again,  and  make  them  grumble  more.  Another  will  say,  ''  I  do 
not  approve  of  religious  excitement,  I  am  for  quiet  and  orderly  modes 
•of  procedure."  I  dare  say  that  this  good  woman's  neighbour,  when  she 
came  in  to  make  a  caU,  exclaimed  in  disgust,  '^  Why,  mistress,  there  is 
not  a  chair  to  sit  down  upon  in  comfort,  and  you  are  so  taken  up  about 
this  lost  money  that  you  scarce  give  me  an  answer.  Why,  you  are 
wasting  candle  at  a  great  rate,  and  seem  quite  in  a  fever."  *'  Well,"  the 
good  woman  would  answer,  "but  I  must  find  my  piece  of  silver,  and  in 
•order  to  seek  it  out  I  can  bear  a  little  dust  myself,  and  so  must  you  if 
ou  wish  to  stop  here  while  I  am  searching."    An  earnest  church  will 

sure  to  experience  a  degree  of  excitement  when  it  is  soul-hunting, 
4aid  very  cautious,  very  fastidious,  very  critical  people  will  find  fault. 
Never  mind  them,  my  brethren,  sweep  on  and  let  them  talk  on.  Never 
mind  making  a  dust  if  you  find  the  money.  If  souls  be  saved  irregu- 
larities and  singularities  are  as  the  small  dust  of  the  balance.  If  men 
be  brought  to  Jesus,  care  nothing  what  cavillers  say.  Sweep  on,  sweep 
•on,  even  though  men  exclaim,  "They  that  turn  the  world  upside  down 
are  come  hitte*  also."  Though  confusion  and  stir,  and  even  persecu- 
cution  be  the  present  result,  yet  if  the  finding  of  an  immortal  soul  be 
the  ultimate  effect^  you  will  be  well  repaid  for  it. 

It  is  to  be  remarked,  also,  that  in  the  seeking  of  this  piece  of  silver 
the  coin  was  sought  in  a  most  en^ossing  manner.  For  a  time 
lothing  was  thought  of  but  the  lost  silver.  Here  is  a  candle :  the  good 
woman  does  not  read  by  the  light  of  it,  nor  mend  her  garments ;  no, 
bat  the  candle-light  is  all  spent  on  that  piece  of  money.  All  its  light 
is  consecrated  to  the  search.  Here  is  a  broom:  there  is  other  work 
ibr  the  broom  to  do,  but  for  the  present  it  sweeps  for  the  silver  and  for 


c 


34  METROFOLITAK  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

nothing  else.  Here  are  two  bright  eyes  in  the  good  woman's 
head :  ay,  but  they  look  for  nothing  bnt  the  loat  money ;  she  does 
not  care  what  else  may  be  in  the  hoose  or  ont  of  it — her  money  she 
cares  for,  and  that  she  mast  find ;  and  here  she  is  with  candle,  broom, 
strength,  eyesight,  faculties  of  mind,  and  limbs  of  body,  all  employed 
in  searching  for  the  lost  treasure.  It  is  jast  so  when  the  Holy  Ghost 
works  in  a  church,  the  preacher,  like  a  candle,  yields  his  light,  but  it  is 
all  with  the  view  of  finding  out  the  sinner  and  letting  him  see  his  lost 
estate.  Whether  it  be  the  broom  of  the  law  or  the  light  of  the  gospel, 
all  is  meant  for  the  sinner.  All  the  Soly  Spirit's  wisdom  is  engagea  to 
find  the  sinner,  and  all  the  living  church's  talent  and  substance  and 
power  are  put  forth  if  by  any  means  the  sinner  may  be  saved.  It  is  a 
fair  picture,  may  I  see  it  daily.  How  earnestly  souls  are  soug^it  for 
when  the  Spirit  of  God  is  truly  in  his  church  ! 

One  other  thought  only.  This  woman  sought  for  her  piece  of  silver 
continuously — '*  till  she  found  it."  May  you  and  I,  as  parts  of  the 
church  of  God,  look  after  wandering  souls  till  we  find  them.  We  say 
they  discourage  us.  No  doubt  that  piece  of  silver  did  discourage  the 
woman  who  sought  it.  We  complain  that  men  do  not  appear  inclined 
to  religion.  Did  the  piece  of  money  lend  the  housewife  any  help  ? 
Was  it  any  assistance  to  her  ?  She  did  the  seeking,  she  did  it  alL 
And  the  Holy  Ghost  through  you,  my  brother,  seeks  the  salvation  of 
the  sinner,  not  expecting  the  sinner  to  help  him,  for  the  sinner  is  averse 
to  being  found.  What,  were  you  repulsed  the  other  day  by  one  whose 
spiritual  good  you  longed  for  ?  Go  again  !  Where  your  invitations 
laughed  at  ?  Invite  again !  Did  you  become  the  subject  of  ridicule 
through  your  earnest  entreaties?  Entreat  again  I  Those  are  not 
always  the  least  likely  to  be  saved  wiio  at  first  repel  our  efforts.  A 
harsh  reception  is  sometimes  only  an  intimation  that  the  heart  recog- 
nises the  power  of  the  truth,  though  it  does  not  desire  at  present 
to  yield  to  it.  Persevere,  brother,  till  yon  find  the  soul  you  seek.  You 
who  spend  so  much  effort  in  your  Sunday-school  class,  use  still  your 
candle,  enlighten  the  child's  mind  still,  sweep  the  house  till  you  find 
what  you  seek ;  never  give  up  the  child  till  it  is  brought  to  Ohrist. 
You,  in  your  senior  class,  dealing  with  that  young  man  or  young  woman, 
cease  not  from  your  private  prayers  and  from  your  personsd  admonitionsy 
till  that  heart  belongs  to  Jesus.  You  who  can  preach  in  the  streets,  or 
visit  the  lodging-houses,  or  go  from  door  to  door  with  tracts,  I  charge 
you  all,  for  you  can  all  do  something,  never  give  up  the  pursuit  of  sinnera 
until  they  are  safely  lodged  in  Jesus'  hands.  We  must  have  them  saved ! 
With  all  the  intense  perseverance  of  the  woman  who  turned  everything 
upside  down,  and  counted  all  things  but  loss  that  she  might  but  find 
h^  treasure,  so  may  we  also,  the  Spirit  of  God  working  in  us,  npset 
everything  of  rule  and  conventionality,  and  form  and  ^iBculty,  if  we 
may  but  by  any  means  save  some,  and  bring  out  of  the  dust  those  who 
bear  the  King's  image,  and  are  dear  to  the  King's  heart. 

III.  Time luui  fied,  alas  !  too  swiftly,  and  so  I  must  dose  with  the 
third  point,  which  is  the  piece  of  silver  found. 

Found  1  In  the  first  place,  this  was  (h»  woman's  ultimakim^  and 
nothing  short  of  it.  She  never  stopped  until  the  coin  was  found.  So 
it  is  the  Holy  Spirit's  design,  not  tnat  the  sinner  should  be  brought 


THE  L06T  BILYEB  PIBCE.  35 

'into  a  hoDefal  state,  but  that  he  Bhonld  be  actually  saved  :  and  this  is 
4he  chnrcn's  great  concern,  not  that  people  be  made  hearers,  not  that 
they  be  made  <ntiiodox  professors,  but  that  they  be  really  changed  and 
rented,  regenerated  and  bom  agido. 

The  woman  herself  found  the  piece  of  money.  It  did  not  turn  up  by 
accident,  nor  did  some  neighbour  step  in  and  find  it.  The  Spirit  of  God 
himself  finds  Burners,  and  the  church  of  Ood  herself  as  a  rule  is  the 
instrument  of  their  recovery.  Dear  brethren,  a  few  years  ago  there  was 
a  kind  of  slur  cast  upon  the  visible  church,  by  many  enthusiastic  but 
mistaken  persons,  who  dreamed  that  the  time  was  come  for  doing  away 
with  organised  effort,  for  irregular  agencies  outside  of  the  visible 
-church  were  to  do  all  the  work.  Certain  remarkable  men  sprang  up 
whose  ferocious  censures  almost  amounted  to  attacks  upon  the  recog- 
-nised  churches.  Their  efforts  were  apart  from  the  regular  ministry,  and 
in  some  cases  ostentatiously  in  opposition  to  it.  It  was  as  much  their 
aim  to  pnll  down  the  existing  church  as  to  bring  in  converts.  I  ask 
-any  man  who  has  fairly  watched  these  efforts,  what  they  have  come  to  ? 
I  never  condemned  them,  nor  will  I ;  but  I  do  venture  to  say  to-day  in  the 
light  of  their  history,  that  they  have  not  superseded  regular  church  work 
snd  never  wilL  The  masses  were  to  be  aroused,  but  where  are  the  boasted 
results?  What  has  become  ofmany  of  these  much- vaunted  works?  Those 
who  have  worked  in  connection  with  a  church  of  God  have  achieved  per- 
manent usefulness  ;  those  who  acted  as  separatist  agencies,  though  Uiej 
blazed  for  awhile  before  the  public  eye  and  filled  the  comers  of  the  news- 
papers with  spiritual  puffery,  are  now  either  altogether  or  almost 
extinct.  Where  are  the  victories  which  were  to  be  won  by  these  free- 
shooters  ?  Echo  answers.  Where  ?  We  have  to  fall  back  on  the  old 
disciplined  troops.  God  means  to  bless  the  church  still,  and  it  is 
through  the  church  that  he  will  continue  to  send  a  benediction  upon 
<the  sons  of  men.  I  am  glad  to  hear  of  anybody  preaching  the  gospel; 
if  Christ  is  preached  I  therein  do  rejoice,  yea,  and  will  rejoice.  I  re- 
member the  Master's  words,  '*  Forbid  them  not !  He  that  is  not  against 
OS  is  for  us."  Still  the  mass  of  conversions  will  come  through  the 
church,  and  by  her  regular  organised  efforts.  The  woma^  who  lights 
the  candle  and  sweeps  the  house,  to  whom  the  silver  belongs,  will  her- 
self find  it. 

Now  notice  when  she  had  found  it  what  she  did,  sJie  rejoired.  The 
greater  her  trouble  in  searching,  the  higher  her  joy  in  finding.  What 
joy  there  is  in  the  church  of  God  when  sinners  are  converted !  We 
have  our  high  holidays,  we  have  our  mirthful  days  downstairs  in  the 
lecture  haD,  when  we  hear  of  souls  turned  from  the  paths  of  the  des- 
^yer ;  and  in  the  vestries  behind,  your  pastors  and  elders  often 
experience  such  joy  as  only  heaven  can  equal,  when  we  have  heard 
the  stories  of  souls  emancipated  from  the  slavery  of  sin,  and  led  into 
the  perfect  liberty  which  Jesus  gives.     The  church  rejoices. 

Next,  she  calls  ?ier  friends  and  neighbovrs  to  share  her  joy.  I  am 
afraid  we  do  not  treat  our  friends  and  neighbours  with  quite  enough 
respect,  or  remember  to  invite  them  to  our  joys.  Who  are  they  ?  I  think 
the  angels  arc  here  meant;  not  only  the  angels  in  heaven,  but  those 
who  are  watching  here  below.  Note  well,  that  when  the  shepherd  took 
•home  the  sheep,  it  is  written,  "  There  shall  be  joy  in  heaven  over  one 


86  METROFOLITAN  TABERNACLB  FULFIT. 

sinner  that  repenteth  ;"  but  it  does  not  mention  heaven  here,  nor  speak 
of  the  ftitnre,  ont  it  is  written,  *'  There  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the 
angels  of  Ood."  Now,  the  chnrch  is  on  earth,  and  the  Holy  Spirit 
is  on  earth,  at  work  ;  when  there  is  a  soul  sayed,  the  angels  down 
below,  who  keep  watch  and  ward  around  the  faithful,  and  so  aiie  our 
friends  and  neighbours,  rejoice  with  us.  Know  ye  not  that  angels  are 
present  in  our  assemblies?  for  this  reason  the  apostle  tells  ns  that  the 
woman  hath  her  head  coyered  in  the  assembly.  JBTe  saith,  *'  Because  of 
the  angels,  for  they  loye  order  and  decorum.'*  The  angels  are  wherever 
the  saints  are,  beholding  our  orders  and  rejoicing  in  our  joy.  When  we 
see  conversions  we  may  bid  them  rejoice  too,  and  they  will  praise  God 
with  us.  I  do  not  suppose  the  rejoicing  ends  there ;  for  as  angels  are 
always  ascending  and  descending  upon  the  Son  of  Man,  they  soon  convey 
the  tidings  to  the  hosts  above,  and  heaven  rejoices  over  one  repenting 
sinner. 

The  joy  is  a  present  joy ;  it  is  a  joy  in  the  house,  in  the  church  in  her 
own  sphere  ;  it  is  the  joy  of  her  neighbours  who  are  round  about  her 
here  below.  All  other  joy  seems  swallowed  up  in  this :  as  every  other 
occupation  was  suspended  to  find  the  lost  silver,  so  every  other  joy  is 
hushed  when  the  precious  thing  is  found.  The  church  of  God  has  a 
thousand  joys — the  joy  of  her  saints  ascending  to  the  skies,  the  joy  of 
her  saints  ripening  for  glory,  the  joy  of  such  as  contend  with  sin  and 
overcome  it,  and  grow  in  grae«  and  receive  the  promise ;  but  the  chief 
joy  in  the  church,  which  swallows  all  others,  as  Aaron's  rod  swallowed 
up  the  other  rods,  is  the  joy  over  the  lost  soul  which,  ajfker  much  sweep- 
ing and  searching,  is  found  at  last. 

The  practical  lesson  to  the  unconverted  is  just  this.  Dear  friend,  see 
what  value  is  set  upon  you.  Yon  think  that  nobody  cares  for  you — ^why, 
heaven  and  earth  care  for  you !  You  say,  "  I  am  as  nothing,  a  cast- 
away, and  I  am  utterly  worthless."  No,  you  are  not  worthless  to  the 
blessed  Spirit,  nor  worthless  to  the  church  of  God — she  longs  for  you. 

See,  again,  hctff  false  thai  suspicion  of  yours  is  that  you  fcill  fiat  be 
welcome  if  you  come  to  Christ.  Welcome !  welcome !  why,  the  chnrch  is 
searching  for  you ;  the  Spirit  of  God  is  searching  for  you.  Do  not  talk 
of  welcome,  you  will  be  a  great  deal  more  than  welcome.  Oh,  how  giad 
will  Christ  be,  and  the  Spirit  be,  and  the  church  be,  to  receive  you ! 
Ah  !  but  you  complain  that  you  have  done  nothing  to  make  you  fit  for 
mercy.  Talk  not  so,  what  had  the  lost  piece  of  money  done  ?  What 
could  it  do?  It  was  lost  and  helpless.  They  who  sought  it  did  all; 
he  who  seeks  you  will  do  all  for  you.  0  poor  soul,  since  Christ  now 
bids  thee  come,  come !  If  his  Spirit  draws  thee,  yield  !  Since  the  pro- 
ifaise  now  speaks,  "  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason  together :  though  your 
sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow  ;  though  they  be  red 
like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool,"  accept  the  promise.  Believe  in 
Jesus.    God  bless  you  and  save  you,  for  Jesus'  sake.    Amen. 


Portions  op  Scrifkjrb  read  before  Sermon — Psalm  cxxxvL 

and  Luke  xv. 


p:^ti[0plilan:  Stafornack 


THE  OPEN  FOUNTAIN. 


%  ^crmon 


DeUTKSED  on  LOHD'B-DAT  MOENIKG,  JaNTTAET  22nd,   1871,  BT 

C.  H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


''In  thftt  day  there  shall  be  a  foantain  opened  to  the  house  of  David  and  to  the 
inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  for  sin  and  for  unclcanness." — Zechariah  xiiL  1. 

Ve  do  not  grudge  to  the  seed  of  Israel  after  the  flesh  the  first  appli- 
cation of  this  very  precious  promise.    There  will  be  a  day  when  those 
who  have  so  long  refused  to  acknowledge  Jesus  as  the  Messias  shall 
discern  the  marks  of  his  missioD,  and  shall  mourn  that  they  have 
pierced  him.    "When  the  tribes  of  Israel  shall  lament  their  sin  with  holy 
earnestness,  there  shall  be  no  mourning  to  exceed  it,  they  shall  weep 
even  as  in  the  mourning  of  Iladadrimmon  in  the  valley  of  Megiddo, 
when  the  wellbeloved  Josiah  was  slain.    Discovering  that  their  nation 
rejected  the  Son  of  God,  when  they  crucified  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  their 
deeply  religious  spirit  shall  be  filled  with  the  utmost  bitterness  of 
repentance,  and  each  man  and  each  woman  shall  cry  for  pardon  to  the 
Lord  of  mercy.    Then,  close  upon  the  heels  of  the  weeping  shall  come 
the  full  and  complete  forgiveness  ;  the  transgression  of  the  tribes  shall 
be  put  away  in  one  day;  they  shall  perceive  that  the  very  side  which 
they  pierced  has  yielded  a  fountain  to  cleanse  them  from  their  sin  ; 
joyfully  shall  they  behold  on  Calvary  the  brazen  serpent  lifted  up  for 
their  healing,  the  Paschal  Lamb  slain  for  their  redemption,  the  sin- 
offering  sacrificed  in  their  stead.    What  a  blessed  day  will  that  bo  when 
"all  Israel  shall  be  saved:  as  it  is  written.  There  shall  come  ont  of  Sion 
the  Deliverer,  and  shall  turn  away  ungodliness  from  Jacob."     0  thai, 
you  and  I  might  live  to  see  that  happy  era  when  oli  the  Jewish  race 
sball  behold  their  Messias ;   for  then  shall  the  fulness  of  the  *Gentiles 
be  gathered  in.   Our  history  is  wrapped  up  with  theirs.   "  Through  their 
fall  salvation  is  come  unto  the  Gentiles.    Now  if  the  fall  of  them  be 
Xo6.  971-72. 


»8  METEOPOLITAX  TABERNACLE  PULPEL 

the  riches  of  the  world,  and  the  diminishing  of  them  the  riches  of  the 
Gentiles;  how  much  more  their  fulness?" 

**  Wake,  harp  of  Zion,  wake  agun. 
Upon  thine  ancient  hill, 
On  Jordan's  lonij  deserted  plain. 
By  Kedron'd  lowly  rill. 

The  hymn  shall  yet  in  Zion  swell 

Tliat  sounds  Me^isiah's  praise, 
And  thy  loved  nanie,  Iramanuel ! 

As  once  in  ancient  dajs. 

For  Israel  yet  shall  own  her  King, 

For  her  salvation  waits. 
And  hill  and  dale  shall  sweetly  sing 

With  praise  in  all  her  gates/' 

Having  said  thus  much,  howeyer,  we  shall  now  take  our  text  as 
belonging  to  ourselves  in  common  with  Israel,  for  in  the  ^'ospel  no  pro- 
mise is  now  set  about  with  a  hedee,  and  reserved  for  any  race  peculiarly ; 
there  is  now  "neither  Jew  nor  (Jrc-'k,  there  is  neither  bond  nor  free, 
there  is  neither  male  nor  female :  for  ve  are  all  one  in  Christ  Jesus." 
This  promise  is  our  joy  at  this  hour.  0  that  I  might  be  able  so  to 
speak  of  it  that  many  anxious  hearts  might  now  see  its  meaning  and 
appropriate  its  blesscdnc-s ! 

In  order  to  explain  the  text  we  shall  dwell  upon  three  notes ;  if  these 
three  be  clearly  sounded  we  shall  understand  the  passage — a  fountain — 
qpewtd — still  open^ 

I.   A  FOUNTAIN. 

What  is  this  fountain  which  is  said  to  be  opened,  and  when  and  how 
was  it  opened  ?  It  is  a  fountain  opened  to  the  house  of  David,  and  the 
'  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness.  We  observe, 
therefore,  that  the  blessing  here  spoken  of  deals  with  the  greatest  evUs  to 
ichich  mankind  is  subject — sin  and  uncleanness.  We  have  all  fallen ;  we 
have  all  proved  our  fall  by  our  sinful  practice.  Sin  has  separated  us  from 
God  and  brought  upon  us  the  divine  wrath  ;  uncleanness,  which  is  a 
tendency  still  to  sin,  a  defilement  of  our  nature,  prevents  our  returning 
to  our  heavenly  Father,  and  entering  into  renewed  fellowship  with 
him.  This  great  evil  in  its  double  form  is,  according  to  the  text,  dis- 
tinctly recognised  by  God ;  it  is  not  winked  at,  it  is  not  treated  as  a 
trifle  that  may  remain,  and  yet  man  may  be  beloved  of  God  Mid  be 
happy ;  no,  but  the  evil  being  there,  preparation  is  made  for  its  remoYal. 
The  text  ^ays,  not  that  the  filthiness  is  concealed,  that  the  transgression 
is  excused,  but  that  there  is  a  fountain  opened  lor  the  effectual  removal 
of  sin  and  uncleanness.  In  the  gospel  God  never  trifles  with  human 
sin.  AVe  proclaim  full,  free,  immediate  forgiveness  to  the  very  chief 
of  sinners,  but  it  is  not  in  a  way  which  makes  men  think  that  sin 
is  trivial  in  God's  esteem,  for  there  is  cou])led  with  the  declaration  of 
pardem  a  description  of  the  way  in  which  God  by  the  sacrifice  of  his  Son 
renders  it  possible  for  him  to  be  merciful  without  being  unjust.  In  the 
substitution  of  Christ  Jesus  we  fee  justice  and  mercy  peacefully 
embracing,  and  conferring  double  honour  upon  each  other.  I  repeat  the 
word,  the'Tracleanness  is  not  concealed,  the  sin  is  not  winked  at,  bat 


THE  OPEN  FOUNTAIN.  89 

there  is  a  fountain  prepared  for  the  pnrging  away  of  the  defilement,  and 
it  is  opened  to  the  nouse  of  David,  for  the  preat  and  mighty,  and  to 
'j^jphabitants  of  Jerusalem — the  poor,  common  people  of  every  class, 
delivering  yo^^^  ^^^  yourselves  sinners,  God  has  provided  means  for 

The  text  recalisVyS&.s^PS- 
and  the  character  of  the  pVbMfig^^^^^^  mature  ^^^^^^ 
The  fountain  is  opened  for  sin,  that  refera/'ttL  F®^^  ^f  a^^^le  evil, 
to  sin  as  offending  God  and  deserving  punishment.  HP®.  E^^^^  of  sin, 
opened  in  the  atonement,  by  which  the  ofPence  rendered  to  Goft  fountain 
and  dignity  is  put  away.  What  if  we  have  sinned,  yet  the  Lord  KSs 
punished  that  sin  in  the  person  of  his  own  Son,  he  has  thus  fulfilled 
his  threatening,  and  proven  the  truth  of  his  word.  In  Jesus  Christ, 
tlierefore,  the  guilt  of  those  for  whom  he  was  a  substitute  is  put 
away  consistently  with  the  righteousness  of  the  great  Lawgiver. 
God  is  just  and  yet  the  justifier  of  him  that  believeth  in  Jesus. 
But  this  would  not  be  enough ;  there  is  a  second  mischief,  namely, 
that  our  nature  has  become  unclean  and  consequently  estranged  from 
(jrod.  Through  our  natural  corruption  and  the  effect  of  our  past  ski, 
we  ai-e  diseased  morally  and  spiritually,  our  mand  is  in  itself  biassed 
towards  evil  and  averse  from  good.  God  does  not  pardon  sin  and  leave 
the  sinner  as  he  was  in  other  respects,  but  wherever  forgiveness  of  the 
guilt  is  bestowed  a  renewal  of  the  nature  is  wrought;  the  fountain 
opened  for  pardon  is  also  opened  for  purification.  The  washing  which 
t^ikes  away  the  offence  before  heaven  removes  also  the  love  of  offending. 
Herein  is  double  joy,  for  does  not  every  true  penitent  feel  that  mere 
pardon  would  be  a  poor  boon  to  him  if  it  allowed  him  to  continue  in 
sin  ?  My  God,  deliver  me  from  sin  itself,  for  this  is  the  great  burden  of 
my  soul.  Oh,  could  I  have  the  past  forgiven,  and  yet  live  an  enemy  to 
my  God,  enslaved  by  evil  and  a  stranger  to  holiness — then  were  I  still 
accursed !  What  if  God  ceases  to  puniph  wickedness,  yet  sin  in  itself 
is  a  curse  ;  to  love  the  wrong  is  the  beginning  of  hell.  Blessed  be  the 
Lord,  when  he  opened  the  fountain  to  cleanse  his  sinful  people,  he  made 
it  "  of  sin  the  double  cure,"  that  it  might  at  the  same  time  cleanse  us 
from  its  guilt  and  power.  For  our  double  need  there  is,  according  to 
the  text,  one  only  supply;  no  mention  is  made  of  two  fount.iins,  neither 
arc  there  two  methods  for  the  putting  away  of  sin.  But  the  one  method 
is  divine,  God  himself  has  devised,  ordained,  and  prepared  it.  Wouldst 
thou  have  sin  forgiven  thee  ?  Wash,  for  there  is  a  fountain  opened. 
Wouldst  thou  have  sin  eradicated  from  thy  nature,  and  thy  heart  niado 
pure?  Wash,  for  heaven  declares  that  the  fountain  is  opened  for  this 
also.  Imagine  not  that  God  has  proposed  an  ineffectual  means  of  pur- 
gation. His  arrangements  are  never  failures.  Man  may  through  his 
poverty  provide  a  feast  which  is  so  bare  as  to  mock  the  hunger  of  those 
invited  ;  his  starveling  hospitality  may  be  an  insult  to  the  greatness  of 
human  necessity ;  but  it  is  never  so  with  God.  For  his  banquet  of 
mercy  oxen  and  fatliups  are  killed,  milk  and  wine  run  in  rivers,  fat 
things  full  (►f  marrow  are  heaped  up ;  no  stint  is  found  at  Jehovah's 
board.  When  God  appoints  a  supply  for  any  need,  we  may  be  assured 
that  it  is  a  real  and  sufficient  provision.  0  penitent  souls,  rest  assured 
that  in  Jesus'  sacrifice  there  is  an  effectual  provision  for  the  forgiveness 


40  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

of  sin,  and  an  infallible  means  for  the  pnrging  of  your  nature  from  its 
tendency  to  sin.    God  in  the  covenant  of  grace  provides  no  seeming:, 
superficial  semblance,  but  in  very  deed  he  satisfies  the  longingj^g^ 
0  men  and  women,  there  is  provided  for  your  sin  and  yon^  - 
that  which  exactly  meets  your  need.  ^.ovision  is  inexhaustible. 

Accordmg  to  the  verse  beforejjgrn  nor  a  reservoir,  but  a  fountain. 
There  i&^  fountain  openedi^'felibble  up,  and  is  as  full  after  fifty  years  as 
A  fountain  contjin^n  go  the  provision  and  the  mercy  of  God  for  the 
**  ^^S.fe&*  and  the  justification  of  our  souls  continually  flows  and  over- 
sows. There  is  a  supply  so  large  that  when  thousands  of  the  sons 
of  Adam  come  they  find  that  there  is  enough  for  their  demands,  and 
as  new  generations  continue  still  to  come  all  along  the  centuries,  they 
shall  find  that  the  supply  has  not  in  any  degree  been  diminished.  For 
the  sin  of  Adam  and  Abel  the  atonement  was  sufficient,  but  it  shall  be 
equally  so  for  the  last  repenting  sinner.  David  saw  the  cleansing  flood, 
and  washed  away  his  crimson  sins,  but  he  left  the  fountain  undefiled, 
and  it  is  as  effectual  for  you  and  for  me  as  it  was  for  him.  For  sinners 
in  the  last  days  the  fountain  is  as  fiill,  as  cleansing,  and  as  free,  as  for 
sinners  in  the  first  ages  of  the  world. 

Thus  I  have  testified  to  you  that  for  the  great  necessity  of  men  in 
this  double  form,  there  is  a  divinely  appointed  and  inexhaustible  supply, 
and  it  is  intended  for  high  and  low,  rich  and  ppor,  for  the  royal  and  the 
ragged,  the  prince  and  the  pauper. 

VVhen  was  this  fountain  opened  ?  When  was  this  divine  and  inex- 
haustible supply  revealed  to  men  ?  The  answer  may  be  given  thus. 
The  fountain  was  opened  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness  when  the  Lord  Jesus 
died.  God,  the  eye^lasting  Word,  was  made  flesh  and  dwelt  among  us, 
and  in  fulness  of  time  the  weight  of  human  sin  was  laid  on  him.  In 
order  to  put  that  sin  away  he  must  die,  for  death  was  the  penalty  for 
^ilt ;  up  to  the  cross  he  went  through  agonies  unspeakable,  and  at  the 
last  he  yielded  up  his  soul;  and  when  he  did  so  sin  was  put  away,  and  the 
fountain  for  the  cleansing  of  sin  was  effectually  opened.  When  the 
soldier  with  the  spear  pierced  his  side,  and  forthwith  there  came  forth 
blood  and  water,  then  was  it  proven  that  this  was  he  who  came  not  with 
water  only,  but  by  water  and  by  blood,  a  Saviour  who  takes  away  the 
offence  of  sin  as  touching  God,  and  the  defilement  of  sin  in  human  nature. 

Furthermore,  the  fountain  may  be  said  to  be  opened  to  each  one  of 
us  when  the  gospel  is  preached  to  us.  "  In  that  day  there  shall  be  a 
fountain  opened,"  means  secondarily,  that  whenever  the  gospel  of  Jesus 
Christ  is  fully  and  faithfully  preached,  then  the  cleansing  efficacy  of  the 
atonement  of  Jesus  which  aforetime  was  as  a  sealed  fountain,  is  opened 
to  those  who  hear.  And  best  of  all,  according  to  the  connection  of  the 
text,  this  fountain  is  opened  in  the  day  when  men  repent  of  sin.  Doth 
it  not  say  that  they  shall  mourn  each  family  apart,  and  their  wives  apart, 
and  in  that  day  shall  there  be  a  fountain  opened!  The  sinner  does  not 
find  a  Saviour  until  he  bewails  his  sin  ;  when  he  sees  his  own  filthiness 
then  it  is  that  the  way  to  have  that  filthiness  removed  is  made  clear  to 
him.  God  is  always  willing  to  forgive,  but  we  are  not  always  willing  to 
be  forgiven.  The  fountain  is  experimentally  opened  to  each  one  of  us 
when  we  spiritually  discern  it^  believe  in  it,  ana  are  made  partakers  of 


^  ',... 


THE  OPEX   FOUUTAIN.  41 

m 

its  cleansing  power.  Years  ago  a  Gerraan  prince  who  was  entertained 
by  the  French  Government,  was  taken  to  the  galleys  of  Tonlon,  where 
a  number  of  men  were  held  as  convicts  on  account  of  their  crimes.  The 
commandant  decreed  that  in  honour  of  the  princess  visit,  some  prisoner 
whom  he  might  choose  should  be  set  at  liberty.  The  prince  went  round 
amongst  the  prisoners,  and  talked  with  them,  they  all  knowing  that  he 
had  the  power  to  liberate  some  one  of  theuL  He  found  that  according 
to  their  talk  they  were  nearly  all  innocent,  and  had  been  condemned 
by  mistake,  or  by  flagrant  injustice.  He  passed  them  all  by,  and  spoke* 
with  one  who  talked  in  another  style.  He  was  guilty  upon  his  own 
confession.  "  I  certainly,"  said  he,  "  have  no  reason  to  complain  of  my 
hard  work  in  the  galleys,  for  if  I  had  my  due  I  should  have  been  put  to 
death  for  my  crimes."  He  went  on  to  acknowledf^e  with  much  humility 
the  former  evils  of  his  life,  and  the  justice  of  his  sentence.  The  prince 
pet  him  free,  afnd  said,  **  This  is  the  only  man  in  the  whole  of  this  place 
who  is  fit  to  be  pardoned;  he  has  a  sense  of  his  transgressions,  he  may 
be  trusted  in  society."  So  too,  the  pardoning  mercy  of  God  passes 
by  those  who  Fay  each  one  in  their  souls,  **  I  am  not  guilty,  I  have  not 
been  more  sinful  than  other  people,  I  see  nothing  very  remarkable  in 
my  case,  and  if  I  were  sent  to  hell  the  sentence  would  be  too  severe." 
Although  there  is  a  fountain  for  sin  and  uncleanness  by  Jeans  Christy 
it  is  not  opened  personally  to  your  experience,  you  cannot  see  it,  do  not 
appreciate  it,  and  will  not  participate  in  its  benefits  unless  you  know 
yourself  to  be  a  sinner ;  but  if  there  be  here  one  really  guilty,  one  who 
feels  his  sin  to  be  deserving  the  wrath  of  God,  then  this  daj  I  have 
authority  from  the  Most  High  to  say  to  him,  there  is  a  fountain  opened 
for  sin  and  uncleanness.  You  mourn  your  sin,  you  confess  your  guilt, 
you  wish  you  could  mourn  it  more,  you  feel  yourself  undeserving  and 
unworthy — then  you  are  the  man  to  whom  the  mercy  of  heaven  is 
this  day  freely  proclaimed.  Jesus  has  come  forth  on  purpose  to  bind  up 
the  broken-hearted,  to  proclaim  liberty  to  the  captives,  and  the  opening 
of  the  prison  to  them  that  are  bound.  The  time  for  the  actual  opening 
of  the  cleansing  fountain  to  us  is  the  time  when  the  heart  confesses  its 
guilt,  and  desires  pardon  of  the  Most  High.  Dear  friend,  has  this  time 
come  to  you  ?  I  pray  you  as  you  love  your  soul  consider  your  ways, 
acknowledge  your  transgressions,  and  rest  not  till  the  blood  of  atone- 
ment has  made  yon  clear  from  guilt.  Need  the  subject  be  pressed  upon 
you  ?  Surely  your  own  reason  should  lead  you  to  be  anxious  upon  a 
matter  so  vital  to  your  soul's  eternal  interests.  How  sad  it  will  be  if 
there  be  a  fountain  and  yet  you  die  unwashed !  If  there  be  a  Saviour, 
and  you  perish  for  ever,  what  wretchedness  it  will  be !     # 

II.  My  chief  business,  this  morning,  is  to  sound  forth  the  second 
note  of  my  text — it  is  a  fountain  open. 

The  means  by  which  sin  and  sinfulness  can  be  put  away  are  at  this 
moment  accessible  to  the  sons  of  men.  The  atonement  is  not  a  foun- 
tain hid  and  concealed,  and  closed  and  barred  and  bolted,  it  is  a  fountain 
open.  Tho  doctrine  I  have  to  teach  is  very  simple  and  plain ;  there 
is  no  room  here  for  oratory  and  elocution,  and  polished  periods ;  it  is 
the  plainest  gospel  doctrine  in  the  world,  and  yet  I  am  very,  very  happy 
to  have  to  speak  it  to  you,  for  I  do  trust  God  may  bless  it  to  many, 
that  they  may  find  the  pardon  of  their  sin,  and  the  removal  of  their 


42  METROPOLITAH  TABEBNACLE  PULPIT. 

uncleanness.  I  would  sooner  tell  you  the  good  news  from  hearen  in 
broken  accents  than  Bnythinp:  else  with  the  tongue  of  an  angel. 

The  fountain  which  God  has  provided  is  o[>en  at  this  day.  Kow 
what  is  meant  by  this  ?  It  means  partly  that  the  gospel  is  so  preached 
that  you  can  understand  it;  the  gospel  at  this  day  is  not  concealed  in 
Latin,  as  it  was  before  the  days  of  Luther,  it  is  not  wrapped  up  in  t}T)es 
and  shadows,  as  it  was  in  the  old  dispensation ;  the  gospel  is  preached 
in  many  places  in  this  country  as  plainly  as  words  could  deliver  it, 
so  plainly  that  he  that  runs  may  read  it.  I  will  tell  it  to  you 
again.  God  must  punish  sin,  but  he  has  laid  the  punishment  on 
Christ,  and  whosoever  believeth  in  Christ  Jesus  is  forgiven.  Why  do 
not  men  accept  the  Saviour  ?  Why  do  they  not  come  and  trust  him  ? 
for  when  they  trust  him  they  are  saved  at  once.  All !  my  hearers,  if 
any  of  you  do  not  wash  from  your  uncleanness  it  is  not  because  you  do 
not  know  how  ;  if  our  gospel  be  hid  it  is  not  our  fault,  it  is  hid  to  them 
that  are  lost,  in  whom  the  God  of  this  world  hath  blinded  their  eyes. 
God  is  our  witness,  we  have  never  sought  after  excellency  of  speech,  nor 
the  gaudiness  or  elegance  of  language,  but  as  of  simplicity,  we  have  set 
before  your  souls  this  feet  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  substitute  for  sinners, 
and  that  you  must  simply  trust  in  him  and  you  shall  be  saved.  At  your 
own  peril  be  it  if  you  reject  the  gospel ;  but  if  you  do  so,  at  least  bear  us 
this  witness,  that  we  have  set  forth  Christ  visibly  crucified  among  you, 
not  hanging  up  veils  of  human  speculation  of  our  own  spinning,  or 
curtains  embroidered  with  curious  devices  of  logic  and  theology,  or  of 
ceremony  and  ritual.    We  have  cried  aloud  in  plain  words — 

"  There  is  life  in  a  look  at  the  Crucified  One." 

We  have  bidden  you  look  to  Jesus,  and  have  told  you,  in  God's  name, 
that  as  you  look  to  the  Crucified  you  shall  find  eternal  life.  Blessed 
are  the  people  that  know  the  joyful  sound ;  more  blessed  still  if  they 
yield  obedience  thereto. 

In  the  next  place*  it  is  meant  that  the  provision  made  in  Jesus  is 
accessible  to  you  all,  and  there  is  no  barrier  on  account  of  uncircumcisioii  or 
natural  descent.  When  first  Peter  began  to  preach  the  gospel,  if  he  had 
heard  that  there  was  a  Gentile  in  the  congregation  I  am  afraid  he  would 
have  put  in  a  question  as  to  whether  a  Gentile  could  be  saved  ;  it  took 
some  time  to  bring  Peter's  mind  round  to  the  belief  that  to  the  Gentiles 
also  the  gospel  was  to  be  preached.  Paul  seemed  far  more  readily  to 
imbibe  that  idea ;  but  now  to  me,  a  Gentile  preaching  to  you  Gentiles, 
this  difficulty  does  not  arise,  but  how  thankful  we  ought  to  be  that  it 
does  not !  "  is  he  the  God  of  the  Jews  only  ?  Is  he  not  also  the  God  of 
the  Gentiles  ?  Yes,  of  the  Gentiles  also."  Our  Lord  Jesus,  by  his 
death,  has  rent  the  veil,  and  pulled  down  every  wall  of  separation,  so  that 
the  same  Messiah  who  was  sent  to  the  seed  of  Abraham  after  the  flesh  is 
sent  to  us  also  who  were  sinners  of  the  Crcntiles,  but  who  become  of  the 
seed  of  Abraham  when  we  believe  in  Christ,  for  Abraham  was  the 
"  father  of  the  faithful."  The  fountain  is  open  then  in  the  removal  of 
the  barrier  which  divided  the  natural  Israel  from  the  rest  of  mankind. 

So,  too,  at  this  day,  when  we  read  that  the  provision  made  for  the  re- 
moval of  sin  and  sinfulness  is  open,  we  learn  that  U  is  personally  approach- 
abh  by  us.    Certain  fanatics  in  our  day  will  have  it  that  grace  comes  to 


THE  OPEN  FOUKTAIir.  48 

!I8  throngh  priests  ;  there  is  the  fountain,  but  you  must  not  touch  a  drop 
of  the  purifying  stream  yourself;  that  venerable  gentleman  in  white,  or 
black,  or  blue,  or  scarlet,  or  violet,  as  the  day  of  the  month  or  the 
change  of  the  moon  may  be,  must  stand  at  the  fountain  head  and  catch 
the  water  as  it  flows,  and  then  after  he  has  practised  upon  it  sundry 
manipulations  you  may  drink  from  his  hand,  but  you  who  are  unordained 
must  not  go  to  the  fountain  for  yourselves.     Ah,  my  brethren,  but  we 
know  better  than  to  make  gods  of  men,  or  saviours  of  sinners  like  our- 
selves.    We  dispense  with  priests,  for  we  know  that  the  fountain  of 
salvation  is  open  for  us  to  come  personally,  and  directly,  and  without 
any  intervention.    There  is  one  Mediator  between  God  and  man,  the 
Man  Christ  Jesus,  but  no  other  mediator  is  there.    One  of  our  col- 
porteurs, some  years  ago  abroad,  was  selling  his  Testaments,  when  the 
core  of  a  parish  said  to  him,  "Your  books  say  a  very  great  deal  about 
pardon,  but  I  do  not  see  much  in  them  about  confession."    The  col- 
porteur was  about  to  reply,  wljen  a  public  notary,  who  was  present, 
taking  up  the  Testament,  said  to  the  priest,  "Ah,  my  dear  sir,  what 
you  say  is  very  true,  the  New  Testament  does  not  say  much  about 
confession  to  priests  ;  do  you  not  remember  that  Jesus  Christ  saved 
the  dying  thief  without  the  help  of  a  priest,  and  that  St.  Stephen,  when 
he  was  stoned  was  not  shriven  by  a  confessor,  but  entered  glory  without 
a  priest !"     "Ah,**  said  the  curt;,  "  but  the  rules  of  the  church  were  very 
different  in  those  days  from  what  they  are  now."    Full  surely  they  were! 
We  will  go  back  however  to  the  primitive  times,  and  as  the  dying  thief 
said,  "Lord,  remember  me,"  so  will  we  turn  our  eyes  to  that  once 
crucified  Saviour,  sitting  in  the  highest  heaven,  and  breathe  the  self- 
same prayer,  "  Lord,  remember  me :  "  and  as  Stephen  looked  up  directly 
into  heaven,  and  found  peace  even  amidst  that  stony  shower,  so  on  our 
dying  bed,  our  glance  shall  be  to  the  Christ  in  the  open  heaven  ;  and 
we  shall  find  rest  in  our  last  hours.    Blessed  be  God,  the  doctrine  of 
justification  by  fiiith  is  now  so  openly  declared  that  priestcraft  cannot 
hold  us  captives.    The  nations  no  longer  need  to  crouch  at  the  feet  of 
shaveling  impostors.    Now  that  there  is  a  fountain  open,  we  can  say, 
"  Begone,  ye  priests,  the  whole  herd  of  yon,  to  whichever  church  ye 
belong;  we  who  have  believed  are  truly  priests  every  one  of  us,  and 
ye  are  more  pretenders.     We  have  done  with  you  ;  a  plague  and  curse 
to  humdnity  have  ye  been  too  long,  and  the  gospel  ends  your  detestable 
trade. 

The  text  yet  further  signifies  that  the  fountain  is  iwt  hatred  by  any 
amount  of  sin  which  we  Jtave  already  committed.  If  there  be  a  foimtain 
opened  on  purpose  to  remove  filth,  that  man  must  be  insane  who  shall 
say  that  his  need  of  washing  is  a  barrier  to  prevent  his  using  it.  Shall 
I  stand  outside  the  bath  and  say,  **  I  am  prevented  from  bath  inn  because 
I  am  filthy  "  ?  every  one  detects  at  once  my  illogical  talk.  If  the  foun- 
tain is  open  for  sin,  then  sin  is  a  qualification  for  washing  in  it.  If 
Christ  be  a  Savionr  for  sinners,  then  no  man  may  say  that  on  the 
ground  of  sin  Jesus  cannot  bo  his  Saviour  ;  rather  might  he  say,  "  The 
more  truly  I  am  a  sinner  the  more  surely  is  Christ  Jesus  suited  to  me." 
The  exceedinT  heinousness  of  my  sin,  though  I  had  been  guilty  of 
adultery,  of  murder,  of  crimes  innumerable,  cannot  be  a  i)reventaiive 
to  my  being  washed  in  the  fount  of  atonement,  because  on  account  of 


44  BCETfiOFOLITAN  TABERNACLB  PULPIT. 

mj  sin  that  fonntain  is  provided,  on  purpose  to  put  it  away  that  clean- 
sing flood  was  poured  forth.    Yet  it  ever  is  of  tne  nature  of  sin,  when 
the  soul  begins  to  know  the  bitterness  of  it,  to  make  us  fear  that  sin  is  a 
disqualification  for  mercy,  and  a  reason  why  we  should  not  believe  in 
Christ  Jesus  the  great  propitiation  for  sin.    0  sinner,  do  not  believe 
that  sin  unfits  thee  for  a  Saviour,  but  believe  that  the  Redeemer  is 
come    on  purpose  to  save  such    as  thou  .art.      Some   little    time 
a^o  an  earnest  lady  seeking  the  good  of  others,  met  with  a  poor 
girl  some  twenty  years  of  age,  who  had  most  fearfully  fallen  and  become 
a  gross  sinner,  though  still  so  young.    She  talked  with  her  frequently, 
and  at  last  saw  in  her  tokens  of  repentance,  but  the  poor  girl's  com- 
plaint was,  "  I  can  never  be  restored,  I  am  so  bad,  nobody  would  ever 
take  notice  of  me."     "  Have  you  not  a  mother  ?  "    "  No,"  said  the 
girl,  "  she  died  years  ago."     "  Have  you  not  a  father  ?  "    **  Yes,  but  I 
have  not  heard  of  him  for  years."     "  Does  he  know  where  you  are  ? " 
"  No,  I  do  not  want  he  should."    **  Do  not  you  think  he  would  receive 
you  back  into  his  house  ?  "     **  No,  that  I  know  he  would  not,  I  could 
not  expect  him  to  do  so ;  if  I  were  in  his  place  I  would  not  receive  such  a 
one  as  I  am."    "  Have  you  ever  written  to  him  since  you  have  gone 
astray  ? "    "  No,  I  have  kept  out  of  the  way  of  everybody  that  knew 
me  ;  I  do  not  want  anybody  to  know  what  I  am."  "  Have  you  tried  your 
father  whether  he  will  receive  you  ?  "     "  No,  I  knew  it  was  no  good, 
pray  do  not  mention  it."    **  But,"  said  the  good  sister,  "  who  can  tell  ? 
I  think  I  will  try  and  see  if  your  father  will  receive  you  now  that 
you  are  truly  penitent  for  ttie  past."     *•  Oh,  yes,  I  hate  the  sin,  but  my 
father  would  not  receive  me,  it  is  of  no  use  to  ask  him."    "  Well,"  said 
the  visitor,  "  I  will  try;"  and  so  she  wrote  a  note  to  the  father,  giving 
him  tlie  daughter's  address,  telling  him  about  her  repentance,  and 
entreatine  that  she  might  be  forgiven.     What  do  you  suppose  was  the 
reply?     The  next  post  brought  the  penitent  girl  a  letter,   on  the 
envelope  of  which  was  written  in  large  letters,  "  Immediatk;"  and  when 
she  opened  it — well,  I  cannot  tell  you  all  her  father  said,  but  it  just 
came  to  this,  "  Come  and  welcome.  I  am  ready  to  forgive  you ;  I  have 
been  praying  night  and  day  that  you  might  be  restored  to  me."    Now, 
just  what  that  father  was  to  his  poor  lost  girl,  in  tenderness  and  readi- 
ness to  forgive,  God  is  to  sinners ;  if  there  be  any  unwillingness  it  is 
not  on  his  part,  it  is  all  in  their  hearts,  for  the  answer  to  every  prayer 
for  mercy  is,  God  is  ready,  nay,  he  waiteth  to  be  gracious,  his  heart 
yearneth  over  his  erring  ones.     "  How  shall  I  give  thee  up  7 "  saith  he; 
'^  How  shall  I  make  thee  as  Admah  ?  how  shall  I  set  thee  as  Zeboim  ?  mine 
heart  is  turned  within  me,  my  repentings  are  kindled  together.     I  will 
not  return  to  destroy  Ephraim :  for  I  am  God,  and  not  man."     Our 
guilt  therefore  is  no  legitimate  reason  why  we  should  not  avail  our- 
selves of  the  provisions  of  grace. 

Neither  is  there  any  effectual  barrier  in  the  cansideraUon  of  our  inward 
sin/ulfiess.  If  you  say,  *'  I  could  not  be  a  Christian,  I  have  such  a  bad 
disposition,  I  could  not  become  holy,  it  is  impossible."  This  is  true  so 
far  as  you  are  concerned,  but  things  impossible  with  men  are  possible 
with  God.  There  is  a  fountain  open  for  this  very  reason  that  tliis 
uncleanness  of  yours  might  be  put  away.  Christ's  blood  will  prove 
more  than  a  match  for  the  evil  of  your  hearti  his  Spirit  can  renew  you, 


THE  OPKN  FOUKTAnr.  4& 

moke  you  a  ne^  creature,  and  from  this  Abj  forward  the  things  you 
hated  you  shall  love,  and  the  evil  things  you  have  delighted  iu  shall 
become  detestable  to  you.  Is  it  not  written,  "Behold,  I  make  all 
things  new  "  ? 

The  fountain  of  cleansing  is  not  sealed  hy  any  demands  m  the  gospel 
requiring  you  to  prqfore  yourself  for  it  before  you  come.  The  fountain  is 
open,  and  if  yon  are  filthy,  you  are  welcome  to  come  to  it.  All  that  is 
asked  of  youis  that  yon  Delieve  in  Jesus  ;  this  he  gives  you,  it  is  his 
own  work  in  you.  Yon  must  also  repent  and  hate  the  sin  which  you 
have  committed ;  this  also  he  works  in  you,  causing  you  by  his  Spirit 
to  loathe  the  sin  which  aforetime  you  delighted  in.  Had  there  been  a 
sort  of  purgatorial  preparation,  had  there  been  a  kind  of  quarantine 
through  which  the  sinner  had  to  pass  before  he  could  be  renewed  and 
forgiven,  then  were  not  the  fountam  completely  open ;  but  between  you, 
0  sinner,  and  acceptation  before  God,  there  need  not  be  even  a  step  of 
delay ;  believe  now,  and  by  believing  you  shall  obtain  the  perfect  panion 
and  the  renewal  of  your  soul. 

Nor  is  there  any  other  real  barrier  to  shut  up  the  fountain  from  the 
Binner.  Some  will  say,  "  Perhaps  I  am  not  elected."  My  friend,  read 
the  text,  the  fountain  is  open ;  open  for  all  ranks,  "  the  house  of  David 
and  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem."  The  doctrine  of  election,  true  as  it 
is,  does  not  make  my  text  a  falsehood,  or  close  the  fount  of  grace  upon 
any  seeking  soul.  Can  you  think  of  any  other  doctrine?  Does  any 
other  truth  discourage  you  ?  Whatever  it  is  I  need  only  quote  the 
text  in  order  to  answer  your  suspicion :  The  fountain  is  open  for  sin 
and  for  uncleanness,  who  dares  say  it  is  shut?  If  any  theologian 
should  say  so,  methinks  I  would  push  him  into  the  fountain  to  make 
way  for  the  sinner  to  come.  There  cannot  be  anything  in  theology,  nor 
in  nature,  nor  in  heaven,  nor  earth,  nor  hell,  which  can  shut  what  God 
declares  to  be  open.  If  thou  wiliest  to  be  saved,  if  thou  coinest  to 
Christ,  believing  in  him,  there  is  nothing  to  shut  up  the  fountain 
of  life  or  prevent  thee  from  being  cleansed  and  healed.  If  there 
be  any  shutting  and  forbiddins:  it  is  thy  heart  that  is  closed,  and  thy 
pride  which  forbids.  No  diflBculties  remain  save  only  difficulties  of 
thine  own  creating,  there  is  none  with  God.  There  is  a  fountain  opened 
by  him  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness,  and  thou  hast  enough  of  both,  there- 
fore come  with  them  even  a$  thou  art.  **  I  believe  in  the  forgiveness  of 
sins ;"  dost  thou  ?  It  is  an  old  doctrine  of  the  Christian  church — dost 
thou  believe  it  ?  Methinlcs  I  hear  thee  say,  "  I  believe  in  the  forgiveness 
of  everybody's  sin  but  mine  own."  Brother,  I  believe  in  the  forgiveness 
of  thy  sins.  There  was  a  time  when  it  would  not  have  troubled  me  to 
believe  for  thee,  but  it  troubled  me  to  believe  for  myself;  now,  can  I 
believe  for  myself  and  for  thee  also.  If  thou  desirest  forgiveness,  take  it ; 
if  thou  desirest  a  new  heart  and  a  right  spirit,  Jesus  will  give  them 
to  thee ;  the  fountain  is  open,  and  none  shaJl  dare  to  deny  access  to 
the  anxious  heart.  Jesus  says,  *'  Him  that  cometh  unto  me,  I  will  in 
no  wise  cast  out."  Would  God  that  some  were  drawn  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  come  to-day  and  partake  of  the  mercy  which  is  so  richly 
provided  and  so  freely  presented. 

III.  We  have  a  rich  consolation  in  the  last  point.    The  fountain  is 

OPEN  BTILL. 


i$  MTTROPOUTAH  TABKRSICLB  FULPET. 

The  text  sajs  the  foantain  is  opened,  and  I  do  not  npon  the  closest 
inspection  discr>Ter  that  it  declares  that  it  was  afterwards  shut;  I  find 
no  intimation  that  the  <>peniD^  was  for  an  occasion  only ;  on  the  con- 
trary, the  opening  is  left  as  a  fact  accomplishedL  What  a  bles&ing  is 
this  to  every  child  of 'God  here;  the  fountain  is  still  open  for  sin  and 
uncleanness !  What  a  comfort  it  is  to  that  yonng  man  who  but  lately 
believed.  Some  little  time  after  conversion  there  usually  comes  a  period 
of  surprising  discoveries.  The  heart  has  believed  in  Jesus  and  found 
rest,  and  it  has  deluded  itself  into  the  idea  that  it  is  now  so  clean  de- 
livered from  sin  that  it  will  never  fall  into  it  any  more  ;  but  on  a  sudden 
it  is  tempted^  it  is  overtaken  in  a  fault,  and  then  the  devil  cries,  '*  You  ! 
Why,  you  are  not  saved,  you  are  not  a  believer,  see  where  you  are  now." 
Many  remind  me  of  a  little  girl  who  I  trust  was  converted  to  God ; 
she  in  her  simplicity  quoted  that  sweet  lictle  hymn  to  her  teacher, 
and  said,  '*  Teacher,  '  I  laid  my  sins  on  Jesus,'  and  now  I  love  him  so 
much  that  I  never  mean  to  do  any  more  sins  to  lay  on  him."  That  is 
just  what  we  thought  when  we  were  first  pardoned  ;  we  did  not  quite 
say  so,  but  we  thought  so.  "  All  the  past  ?  1  es,  that  is  all  on  him  ;  now 
for  the  love  we  bear  his  name  we  will  never  sin  again."  So  we  thought ; 
but,  alas  I  we  soon  found  that  we  were  in  the  body  stilL  When  sin  is 
seen  to  be  still  within  us,  how  sweetly  docs  the  text  ring  out,  like  a  silver 
bell,  glad  tidings  of  great  joy — there  is  a  fountain  opened !  You 
went  at  first  to  Jesus,  young  believer,  go  again.  The  fountain  is  not 
shut ;  you  have  washed  in  it  once,  it  is  not  closed  nor  dried  up,  wash 
again ;  the  same  Christ  you  wanted  when  you  first  believed  is  there  now 
as  ready  and  willing  as  ever.  His  blood  is  equally  efficacious,  go,  thou 
8ur|>rised  one,  and  wash  again : — 

"  This  fountain  from  guilt  not  only  makes  pure, 
And  gives,  soon  as  felt,  infallible  cure  ; 
But  if  guilt  removed  return,  and  remain, 
Its  power  may  be  proved  again  and  again." 

It  will  happen  as  we  grow  older  and  make  progress  in  the  Christian 
life,  that  we  shall  discover  every  day  some  fresh  degree  of  defilement 
acquired  by  our  pilgrimage  through  a  sinful  world.  Do  you  ever  go  to 
rest  a  single  night  without  feeling  that  you  have  been  in  miiy  places 
during  the  day,  and  that  there  is  fresh  dust  upon  the  garment,  new  soil 
upon  the  feet  ?  Ah  1  bethink  thee  every  night  there  is  a  fountain 
opened.  To-day's  sins  can  be  as  easily  put  away  as  yesterday's  sins ;  and 
to-day's  sinfulness,  which  I  feel  unconquerable  for  the  moment,  can  be 
conquered  still.  I  can  go  to  Christ  again  and  say,  "  Let  thy  blood  kill 
tliis  sin  of  mine,  and  soften  my  heart  into  tenderness  and  holiness  once 
more."    The  fountain  is  still  open,  and  no  man  can  shut  it. 

1  know  that  you  in  business,  coming  into  contact  with  the  world, 
must  sometimes  encounter  some  very  trying  circumstances.  When  per- 
haps you  thought  all  would  be  plain  sailing  you  meet  with  terrible  storms. 
Though  minded  to  live  in  |)eace,  you  fall  into  a  sort  of  wrestling  match 
with  ungodly  men ;  you  arc  obliged  to  stand  up  for  your  own,  and 
you  try  to  do  so  with  moderation  of  temper,  yet  your  spirit  becomes 
rutfled;  and  you  have  to  say  afterwards,  when  undergoing  self- 
examination,  "I  do  not  know  that  I  did  exactly  what  I  ought  to  have 
done ;  besides,  my  quiet  walk  with  Christ  has  been  broken  by  this 


THE  OPEN  FOUNTAIN.  47 

strife  with  the  sons  of  men  ;  woe  is  me  that  I  dwell  in  Mesech  and 
tabernacle  in  the  tents  of  Kedar."  Beloved,  there  is  a  fountain  open, 
go  again  bj  simple  faith  and  look  to  Jesus  ouce  again  and  yon  will 
find  fresh  pardon,  and  the  grace  which  restores  the  heart  to  its  repose 
in  Jesns.  Your  inner  life  will  be  again  re&eshed  as  you  wash  in  the 
life-restoring  fount  prepared  for  you. 

If  you  are  at  all  like  me  yqu  will  at  times  feel  your  inner  life  to  be 
sadly  declining.  I  am  ashamed  to  confess  it,  but  even  when  I  seek  to 
live  nearest  to  God,  I  feel  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief  struggling  within 
me.  There  may  come  times  when  you  will  anxiously  enquire,  **  Can 
I  be  a  child  of  God  at  all  ?  I  cannot  arouse  my  feelings  towards 
God;  my  passions  will  not  stir;  even  in  holy  duties  I  lack  the  living 
power ;  there  is  the  wood,  but  where  is  the  fire  for  the  burnt- 
offering  ?  I  would  fain  be  zealous,  earnest,  intense,  fervent,  but  I  am 
sluggish,  a  very  dolt  in  the  Master's  cause."  At  such  times  we  are 
apt  to  say,  ''  I  must  try  to  make  myself  somewhat  better  than  this 
by  some  means,  before  I  dare  again  to  hope  in  God ;  "  and  then  we 
go  off"  to  our  own  selves  and  our  own  works,  and  we  sink  in  the  deep 
mire  where  there  is  no  standing.  It  is  a  happy  thing  if  at  siSch 
moments  we  turn  again  to  Christ,  and  say,  "  0  my  Master,  unworthy 
as  I  am  to  be  thy  follower,  though  vilest  of  all  those  whose  names 
are  written  on  thy  roll,  yet  I  do  believe  in  thee  still.  To  thy  cross  I 
will  cling,  I  will  never  let  go  my  hope,  for  thou  hast  come  to  save  sin- 
ners even  such  as  I  am,  and  on  thee  I  will  continue  to  trust."  My 
dear  brethren,  yen  will  find  that  while  this  restores  your  peace,  it  at 
the  same  time  excites  you  to  seek  after  higher  degrees  of  holiness.  It 
is  the  idea  of  the  worldling  that  if  sin  be  pardoned  so  easily  men  will 
live  in  it,  but  it  is  not  so ;  to  the  spiritual  mind  the  great  love  dis- 
played in  the  pardon  of  sin  is  the  very  highest  motive  for  overcoming 
every  unhallowed  propensity.  A  sense  of  blood-bought  pardon  seals 
the  death-waiTant  of  the  most  favoured  sin.  Ever  shall  we  find  our 
safest  mode  of  battling  with  sin  to  be  a  new  resort  to  the  cross.  Happy 
is  it  for  us  that  the  blood  cUanselh  from  all  sin ;  that  is,  it  continues  to 
do  so  every  day.  I  should  die  in  despair  if  it  were  not  lor  this  truth, 
that  there  is  a  fountain  open  still. 

Some  of  us  may  have  a  long  time  to  live  possibly,  but  we  shall  never 
outlive  that  open  fountain.  Others  may  die  soon,  but,  dear  brother,  in 
the  last  moment  your  eye  may  glance  at  the  open  fountain,  and  if  the  sins 
of  all  your  life  should  rise  before  you,  if  in  grim  procession  your  trans- 
gressions should  pass  before  your  eyes  each  one  accusing  y<ju,  you  .lay  fly 
to  the  open  fountain  and  they  will  disappear ;  and  if  the  old  Adam  should 
rise  even  at  the  last,  and  some  strong;  coiTuption  should  seek  to  prevail, 
there  is  the  fountain  open  which  will  purge  away  the  corruption  of  the 
flesh,  and  work  in  you  the  new  nature  yet  more  mightily,  and  preserve 
you  to  the  Lord's  eternal  kingdom  and  ji:lory. 

I  desire  to  close  this  sermon,  all  too  poverty-stricken,  with  this 
thought.  See  here  what  our  work  is  as  a  church.  We  have  not  to 
provide  an  atonement  for  the  sinners  round  about  us,  but  we  have  to 
point  them  to  the  fountain  which  is  already  opened.  I  want  every  one 
of  you  church  members  to  be  always  telling  others  of  the  way  of 
salvation.     "  It  is  so  simple,"  you  say ;  well,  then  you  have  no  excuse 


48  METROrOLlTAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

if  you  do  not  tell  it.  Make  your  neighbours  know  the  way  of  salvation, 
din  it  into  their  ears,  constrain  them  to  know  it,  so  that  if  they  die  it 
shall  not  be  for  want  of  knowing  the  way  of  life. 

I  want  to  remind  you  as  a  church  of  one  most  important  fact.  Here 
is  our  preparation  for  the  season  of  revival  which  I  hope  God  is  about 
to  give  us.  The  fountain  open  for  the  sinner  is  also  open  for  the  child 
of  dod.  Let  us  all  wash  ajjain.  Have  you  grown  cold  ?  Come  and 
get  your  spiritual  life  revived.  Do  any  of  you  fear  that  you  are 
becoming  worldly  and  carnal?  Come  to  Jesus,  for  where  you  first 
found  lite  there  you  shall  find  it  more  abundantly.  Come  and  wash 
again.  I  desire  as  your  pastor  to  receive  another  baptism  in  the  sacred 
atoning  flood,  and  then  to  come  and  preach  to  you  in  its  heavenly 
power.  1  pray  God,  that  my  dear  brethren,  the  deacons  and  elders, 
may  each  one  individually  apart  confess  his  sin,  and  apart  receive  the 
washing.  And  then  I  want  every  member,  every  Sunday-school  teacher, 
and  every  worker,  to  prepare  to  serve  God  by  receiving  another  of  these 
blessed  cleansings.  In  the  old  tabernacle  there  was  a  laver,  and  the 
priests  washed  their  feet  and  their  hands  in  it,  which  had  to  be  filled 
up  every  now  and  then,  because  it  was  exhausted  or  foul;  now  we 
have  not  a  brazen  laver,  but  we  have  a  fountain  which  never  can  be 
dried,  and  never  becomes  defiled.  If  you  wash  your  feet  in  a  little  pool, 
the  water  is  muddy  directly,  but  if  you  wash  in  a  running  stream, 
as  I  have  often  done  when  climbing  the  Alps,  or  in  a  living  fountain, 
you  may  wash,  hundreds  of  you,  and  the  water  bears  all  defilement  away 
and  is  just  as  bright  as  if  it  had  never  been  touched  by  your  feet. 
So  there  is  here  for  all  the  church  members  a  blessed  flowing  fountain ; 
come  and  wash,  I  beseech  you,  even  now. 

I  pray  God  backsliders  may  come  hither,  that  those  who  have  gone 
farther  astray  than  in  heart,  and  have  wandered  into  outward  actions  of 
rebellion,  may  come  to  the  fountain  which  is  still  open,  and  be  cleansed 
anew.  What  sin  it  will  be  on  our  part  if  we  neglect  what  God  has 
provided !  Though  we  have  often  come  before,  let  us  come  ajrain.  I 
should  like  to  suggest  that  this  |illernoon  we  each  of  us  should  si)end 
a  season  alone,  and  pray  for  a  renewed  application  of  that  blood 
which  speaketh  better  things  than  that  of  Abel.  The  Mnster,  after 
the  last  Sapper,  took  a  towel  and  girded  himself,  and  went  round  with 
a  bason  and  washed  all  his  disciples*  feet,  and  when  he  had  done  it  said, 
•*  And  ye  are  clean  every  whit.**  That  is  what  I  want  him  to  do  to  all 
the  members  of  this  my  beloved  church  now.  You  cannot  serve  God 
while  you  are  defiled ;  you  need  fresh  cleansing  for  successful  service. 
0  may  he  take  the  towel  now  in  his  infinite  condescension,  and  visit 
each  one  and  wash  you  one  by  one.  Pastors,  deacons,  elders,  meiubers, 
may  we  all  avail  ourselves  of  the  open  fountain  at  this  hour.  0  that 
the  Holy  Spirit  might  give  to  each  one  of  us  that  cleansing  which 
shall  make  us  fit  for  service,  so  that  we  shall  be  useful  during  the 
coming  months  in  the  ingathering  of  his  poor  lost  ones,  to  his  praise 
and  glory.    May  God  grant  it,  for  his  name's  sake.     Amen. 


Portions  of  SaiiPTURE  read  before  Sermon — Zechariah  xii. 

and  xiii.  1. 


toplitmi  iJahrnnrk  fulpit. 


NEW  USES  FOE  OLD  TROPHIES. 


gl   ^^rmon: 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Evening,  November  20th,  1870,  by 

C.  H.  SPUKGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


*'EiDg  David's  spears  and  shields,  that  were  in  the  temple  of  the  Lord." — 2  Kinfifs  xi.  10. 

When  David  had  fought  with  an  adversary,  and  overcome  him,  he  took 
away  his  armonr  and  his  weapons,  and  as  other  victorioas  heroes  were 
wont  to  do,  he  bore  them  home  as  mementoes  of  his  prowess,  the 
trophies  of  the  battle.  These  were  placed  in  the  house  of  the  Lord. 
Perha^^s  David  at  the  same  time  dedicated  in  like  manner  the  shield 
and  the  sword  which  he  had  himself  used  in  battle.  After  Solomon 
had  built  the  temple,  these  trophies,  which  seem  to  have  been  very 
numerous,  were  hung  up  there.  So  they  adorned  the  walls.  So  they 
illustrated  the  valour  of  noble  sires.  So  they  served  to  kindle  emu- 
lation, I  doubt  not,  in  the  breasts  of  true-heailed  sons.  Thus  it  was 
while  generations  sprung  up  and  passed  away;  till  at  length  other  days 
dawned,  darker  scenes  transpired,  and  sadder  things  filled  up  the 
chronicles  of  the  nation.  You  will  all  of  you  remember  the  crisis  to 
which  my  text  refers.  Athaliah,  daughter  of  Ahab,  wife  of  Jehorum, 
king  of  Judah,  the  usurping  queen  of  Judah,  had  played  the  tyrant  for 
well-nigh  seven  years.  The  endurance  of  the  people  had  been  tried  to 
the  uttermost ;  a  just  recompense  was  in  store,  and  a  well-concerted 
plan  ready  for  execution.  The  time  had  come  when  she  should  be  put 
to  death,  and  the  young  prince  who  had  been  hidden  away  should  be 
proclaimed  king.  It  was  arranged  that  he  should  be  proclaimed  in  the 
temple  court,  yet  the  men  that  were  to  be  the  body-guard  were  not 
armed  with  weapons,  for  fear  an  alarm  might  be  given,  and  the  matter 
discovered  too  soon.  But  these  weapons  that  were  hung  up  of  old  in 
the  temple  were  taken  down,  and  the  Levites  and  other  friends  were 
armed  with  them.  When  Athaliah  came  in  and  saw  the  young  king 
surrounded  by  his  body-guard,  thus  strangely  equipped  with  the  old 
weapons  of  former  days  ready  to  protect  him,  she  rent  her  clothes,  and 
cried,  "Treason,  Treason  :"  but  her  doom  was  sealed,  escape  was  im- 
possible, she  was  slain.  To  such  good  account  there  and  then  was  the 
good  old  armour  turned.  This  simple  fact  appears  to  me  to  suggest  a 
strikiniT  moral. 


60  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

The  matters  I  shall  speak  to  you  about  to-night  will  lie  under  four 
heads.    We  will  give  them  to  you  as  they  occur  to  us. 

I.  And  the  first  is  this,  rr  is  well  for  us  to   hang  all  our 

TROPHIES  IN  THE  HOUSE   OP   THE   LORD. 

We,  too,  are  warriors.  Every  genuine  Christian  has  to  fight.  Every 
inch  of  the  way  between  here  and  heaven  we  shall  have  to  fight,  for  as 
hitherto  every  single  step  of  our  pilgrimage  has  been  one  prolonged 
conflict.  Sometimes  we  have  victories,  a  presage  of  that  final  victory, 
that  perfect  triumph  we  shall  enjoy  with  our  Great  Captain  for  ever. 

"  Oh !  I  have  seen  the  day 

When  with  a  single  word, 

God  helping'  mc  to  say, 

*  My  trust  is  in  the  Lord,' 
My  soul  has  quelled  a  thousand  foes. 
Fearless  of  all  that  could  oppose.** 

When  we  have  these  victories  it  behoves  us  to  be  especially  careful  that 
in  all  good  conscience  we  hang  up  the  trophies  thereof  in  the  house  of 
the  Lord.  The  reason  for  this  lies  here  :  it  is  to  the  Lord  that  we  owe 
any  success  we  have  ever  achieved.  We  have  been  defeated  when  we  have 
gone  in  our  own  strength ;  but  when  we  have  been  victorious  it  has  always 
been  because  the  strength  of  the  Lord  was  put  forth  for  our  deliverance. 
You  never  fought  with  a  sin,  with  a  temptation,  or  with  a  doubt,  and 
overthrew  it,  except  by  the  Spirit's  aid.  You  never  won  a  soul  for  Jesus, 
you  never  spoke  a  valiant  word  that  repelled  an  error,  you  never  did  an 
enterprising  deed  which  really  told  well  for  the  success  of  the  kingdom, 
but  God  was  in  it  all — virtually,  nay,  actually  enabling  you ;  and  he  did  it 
of  his  own  good  will.  What  is  it  but  a  simple  matter  of  justice  that  he 
who  wrought  the  wonder  should  have  the  honour  of  it  ?  It  would  have 
been  a  crying  shame  if  Miriam  had  sung  to  the  praise  of  Moses  and  Aaron 
at  the  Red  Sea.  They  were  but  the  outward  instruments  of  the  people's 
coming  out  of  Egypt.  As  she  took  her  timbrel,  she  rightly  said,  in  the 
hymn  that  Moses  had  given  her  for  the  occasion:  "  Let  us  sing  unto  Hie 
Lord,  for  he  hath  triumphed  gloriously."  So  in  every  struggle  that 
transpires  in  our  hearts,  in  every  combat  waged  in  the  world,  ascribe  the 
power  to  him  to  whom  it  belongs, "  The  right  hand  of  the  Lord  is  exalted; 
the  right  hand  of  the  Lord  doeth  valiantly."  As  before  the  fight  in  his 
name  we  set  up  our  banner,  so  after  the  fight  in  his  name  again  we  give 
the  conquering  banner  to  the  breeze.  "  All  glory  be  unto  him  that  won 
the  victory." 

This  will  save  us  from  pride  and  self-sufficiency.  Scarcely  can  God 
trust  us  with  a  victory,  lest  we  begin  fingering  it  with  our  own  hands,  as 
if  our  own  ingenuity,  our  own  wisdom,  or  our  own  strength  had  done 
marvels.  As  of  old,  Israel  sacrificed  to  her  net  when  a  great  draught 
of  fish  was  taken,  or  to  her  drag  when  a  great  harvest  had  been  threshed 
out,  so  are  we  too  apt  to  sacrifice  to  our  own  ability,  our  own  industry, 
our  own  superiority  in  one  respect  or  another,  and  think  that  there  is 
some  virtue  or  merit  in  us  to  which  the  Almighty  has  awarded  the  palm. 
Instead  of  looking  only  to  God  we  begin  to  look  in  some  degree  to  our- 
selves. You  cannot  do  otherwise  than  put  the  honour  somewhere.  If 
you  do  not  ascribe  it  to  God  the  temptation  will  be  too  strong  for  you, 
yoxL  will  be  sure  to  take  it  for  yourself ;  and  if  you  do  this  the  most 


NEW  UfllS  lOB  OLD  TB0PHIB8.  51 

fetal  consequences  will  follow,  for  they  that  walk  in  pride  God  will 
assuredly  abase.  No  matter  how  dear  you  are  to  him,  if  pride  be  harboured 
in  your  spirit  he  will  whip  it  out  of  you.    They  that  go  up  in  their  own 
estimation  must  come  down  again  by  his  discipline.    You  cannot  be 
exalted  in  self  without  being  by-and-by  brought  low  before  him.    God 
will  have  it  so;  it  is  always  the  rule,  '^  He  hath  put  down  the  mighty 
from  their  seat,  and  hath  exalted  them  of  low  degree."    He  goes  forth 
with  the  axe,  and  this  is  the  work  he  does  among  the  thick  trees — he  cuts 
down  the  high  tree  and  dries  up  the  green  tree,  but  he  exalts  the  low 
tree,  and  makes  the  dir  tree  to  flourish,  that  all  the  glory  may  be  unto 
himself  alone;  for,  saith  he,  I  the  Lord  have  spoken  and  have  done  it. 
Let  us  take  care,  however,  that  we  ascribe  the  glory  to  God,  and  do 
not  forget  to  honour  him.    We  have  received  so  many  mercies,  my 
brethren,  that  they  come  to  us  as  common  things.    We  receive  them, 
and  scarcely  know,  perhaps,  that  we  have  received  them.    According  to 
the  old  proverb  we  do  not  know  the  value  of  our  mercies  till  we  miss 
them ;  but  it  ought  not  to  be  so.     Must  we  be  defeated  in  order  to  let 
us  know  that  God  gives  us  victory  ?     Is  it  needful  that  you  and  I  should 
suffer  some  great  disaster  in  order  to  make  us  grateful  for  past  success? 
Will  you  never  prize  health  as  one  of  the  choicest  boons  of  heaven  till 
some  grievous  malady  has  sapped  your  strength,  and  made  all  the  enjoy- 
ments of  life  tasteless  or  even  nauseous  ?    Well,  if  it  be  needful,  it  is  a 
necessity  of  our  own  producing.    The  more  the  pity  that  we  should 
challenge  the  ills  we  complain  of,  and  incur  the  reverses  we  so  bitterly 
deplore.     0  that  we  may  never  slight  the  good  tilings  we  have,  or  trifle 
with  the  benefits  we  receive  from  the  hand  of  the  Lord  I     Especially,* 
my  dear  brethren,  let  us  bless  God  for  every  spiritual  success  achieved, 
and  take  care  to  make  a  record  of  it  on  the  tablet  of  our  grateful  heart. 
If  we  should  one  day  have  to  flee  before  the  enemy,  if  our  work  for  God 
should  one  day  seem  to  be  without  success,  we  may  look  back  with  much 
smiting  of  heart  upon  those  ungrateful  times  when  God  dealt  so  gener- 
ously with  us,  and  yet  we  did  not  take  the  trouble  to  sing  him  a  psalm 
or  ofter  up  a  vow,  or  do  any  act  of  homage  to  express  our  gratitude  to 
him.     Hang  up  Goliath's  sword;  do  not  put  it  by  to  rust.     Hang  up 
the  shields  and  the  spears  of  the  Philistines.    If  by  God's  help  you 
have  taken  them,  set  store  by  them,  and  make  the  world  see  what  the 
Lord  has  done  on  your  behalf,  whereof  you  are  glad.    Make  the  church 
to  join  your  grateful  song.  There  is  too  much  of  the  cold  silence  of  ingrati- 
tude amongst  us.    Too  seldom  do  we  chant  forth  our  Te  Deum  laudamus 
with  solemn,  lively  air.    Stir  the  hearts  of  others  because  your  own  heart 
heaves  with  deep  emotions  of  thankfulness  to  the  Most  High.    I  am 
persuaded,-  my  brethren,  that  it  is  only  in  this  way  that  we  can  secure 
for  ourselves  future  success.    David's  life  was  a  series  of  dilemmas  and 
deliverances.    With  what  sort  of  face,  think  you,  could  he  have  invoked 
rescue  from  fresh  perils,  had  he  failed  to  recognise  God's  help  in  past 
preservation  ?     If,  when  flushed  with  victory,  he  had  usurped  the  honour 
to  himself,  what  assistance  would  he  have  received  the  next  time  he  was 
flurried  with  impending  disaster  ?     Or,  had  he  not  taught  the  Israelites 
in  the  hour  of  triumph  to  sing,  ^*JVdn  nobis,  Bomtne" — "  Not  unto  us, 
0  Lord,  not  unto  us,  but  unto  thy  name  give  glory;"  how  could  he 
have  engaged  their  hearts  in  the  hour  of  trial  to  wail  forth  the  litany  of 


52  METROPOUTAK  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

supplication — "  The  Lord  hear  thee  in  the  day  of  trouble ;  the  name  of 
the  God  of  Jacob  defend  thee ;  send  thee  help  from  the  sanctuary,  and 
strengthen  thee  out  of  Zion."    Without  consistency  we  cannot  exert 
any  moral  influence  with  men,  or  obtain  any  spiritual  prevalence  with 
God.    May  not  many  of  our  barren  seasons  be  ascribed  to  the  fact  that 
we  did  not  thank  God  for  fruitful  ones?    If  the  preacher  has  been 
honoured  in  his  ministry  to  win  souls  to  Christ,  but  has  not  duly  blessed 
his  God  for  the  enabling  of  the  Holy  Ghost  granted  to  himself,  and  for 
the  witness  of  the  Holy  Ghost  given  to  the  people;  or,  worse  still,  if  he 
has  complimented  himself  on  his  own  talents,  and  the  use  he  makes  of 
them;  need  he  wonder  if,  when  next  he  goes  forth,  as  Samson  of  old,  and 
shakes  himself  as  aforetime,  he  finds  his  strength  has  departed  from  him  ? 
"Give  unto  the  Lord,  0  ye  mighty,  give  unto  the  Lord  glory  and 
strength.     Give  unto  the  Lord  the  glory  due  unto  his  name;"  else 
when  most  you  need  him,  you  may  find  his  strength  is  taken  from  you, 
and  your  honours  will  have  depai-ted  Uio.    Hanj;  up  the  shield,  hang 
up  the  spear,  let  Jehovah's  name  be  exalted.    Bring  forth  the  forgotten 
memorials  of  lovingkindness,  expose  them  to  public  view,  put  them 
before  your  own  mind's  eye  to-night,  gratefully  remember  them,  lovingly 
praise  him  and  magnify  his  name.     I  am  sure  we,  as  a  church  whom  God 
has  blessed  so  long,  ought  not  to  be  slow  to  hang  up  the  trophies  of  his 
lovingkindness  in  our  midst.     If  God  has  done  anything  for  you,  tell  it. 
If  he  has  delivered  you  out  of  trouble,  tell  it    If  he  has  fed  your  soul 
in  the  wilderness,  tell  it.     If  you  have  lately  been  converted,  tell  it.    If 
you  have  found  Christ  precious  to  you,  though  just  now  you  were  a  poor 
*lost  soul,  tell  it.    Hang  up  the  shields  and  spears.    Let  each  indi- 
vifiual  do  it,  let  the  whole  church  do  it;  and  often  by  our  enlarged 
endeavours  for  the  dear  Saviour's  sake,  by  our  consecrated  self-denials, 
let  us  show  that  we  do  feel  how  much  we  owe  to  the  infinite  power  of  the 
God  of  victory,  who  maketh  us  strong  in  the  day  of  battle.     That  is 
the  first  point.  If  we  have  any  victories,  let  all  the  trophies  be  dedicated 
to  the  Lord. 

II.  The  second  is  this  :   these  trophies  may  comb  in   useful 

AT  SUCH  TIMES  AS  W^E  CANNOT  FORESEE,    AND    UNDER    SUCH   CIRCUM- 
STANCES AS  WE   WOT  NOT  OF. 

Little  could  David  have  thought  when  he  gave  Abiathar  the  sword  of 
Goliath,  that  he  would  ever  go  to  the  priests  of  Gad  and  ask  them  to 
lend  him  a  sword,  and  that  they  should  say,  We  have  no  sword  here, 
save  the  sword  of  Goliath,  the  Philistine,  whom  thou  slewest  in  the 
Valley  of  Elah,  behold  it  is  wrapped  in  a  cloth  behind  the  ephod.  He 
gave  it  to  God,  but  he  did  not  think  that  he  would  ever  have  it  back 
again  with  a  priestly  blessing  on  it,  so  that  he  should  be  able  to  say, 
**  There  is  none  like  that :  give  it  me."  And  when,  in  after  years,  he 
hung  up  the  swords  and  shields  which  he  had  taken  away  from  Philistine 
heroes,  he  did  not  surmise  that  one  of  his  descendants,  of  the  seed  royal, 
would  find  the  need  to  employ  his  own,  his  grandsire's,  or,  further  back, 
from  himself — his  forefather's  trophies — in  order  to  establish  himself  on 
the  throne.  We  never  know,  my  brethren,  when  we  praise  God  for 
mercies,  but  what  the  very  praises  might  come  back  into  our  bosoms, 
and  the  offerings  we  make  to  God  in  the  way  of  thankfulness  may  be 
our  own  enrichment  in  the  days  to  come.    The  memorials  we  put  up  to 


NEW  USES  FOE  OLD  TROPHIES.  53 

record  God's  goodness,  may  be  to  us  in  afler  years  nmong  the  most 
nsefdl  things  in  all  our  treasury.  To  ourselves  and  others  theraenioriala 
of  the  victories  we  have  won  may  be  signally  profitable,  strangely 
opportune,  seemingly  indispensable. 

Let  me  try  to  show  this.  Years  ago  you  and  I  were  fighting  battles 
with  unbelief.  We  were  struggling  after  a  Saviour.  Our  sins  rose 
op  against  us  thick  and  furious.  The  fiery  darts  of  tlie  enemy  rained 
upon  us  like  hail.  That  conflict  we  never  shall  forget ;  we  bear  the 
Bears  of  it  to  this  very  day.  Glory  be  to  God  I  by  his  grace  we  won  the 
victory  and  overcame  through  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  We  looked  at 
Jesus  Christ  upon  the  cross,  and  in  that  moment  our  sins  fled  away. 
The  whole  host  of  them  was  defeated.  A  dying  Saviour  was  the  symljol 
of  victory.  What  then?  Let  us  use  the  mementoes  we  laid  up  before 
the  Lord  of  that  day — the  trophies  that  we  took  in  that  battle— for 
ourselves  and  for  others. 

For  ourselves.  If  ever  we  have  another  struggle  against  sin — perhaps 
we  shall  have  many — I  mean  such  alarming  assaults  as  involve  severe 
struggles — let  us  recollect  how  Jesus  met  with  us  the  first  tim#,  and 
**if,  when  we  were  enemies,  we  were  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death 
of  his  Son,  much  more,  being  reconciled,  we  shall  be  saved  by  his 
hfe."  He  saved  us  with  a  great  salvation  when  we  first  came  home  as 
prodigals  covered  with  rags,  will  he  not  help  us  now,  when  we  come 
to  him  as  his  own  children,  clothed  in  his  own  righteousness,  and  say, 
"Abba,  Father,"  being  already  accepted  in  the  Beloved? 

I  do  think  it  often  proves  a^great  blessing  to  a  man  that  he  had  a 
terrible  conflict,  a  desperate  encounter,  a  hard-fought  engagement  in 
passing  from  the  empire  of  Satan  into  the  kingdom  of  God's  dear  Son. 
Sooner  or  later  each  saved  man  will  have  his  hand-to-hand  fight  with 
the  prince  of  darkness  ;  and  as  a  general  rule,  it  is  a  great  mercy  to  have 
it  over  on  the  outset  of  one's  career,  and  be  able  afterwards  to  feel, 
"  Whatever  comes  upon  me,  I  never  can  suffer  as  I  suffered  when  I 
was  seeking  Christ.  Whatever  staggering  doubt,  or  hideous  blasphemy, 
or  ghastly  insinuations,  even  of  suicide  itself,  may  assail  mj  feeble 
heart,  they  cannot  outdo  the  horror  of  great  darkness  through  which 
my  spirit  passed  when  I  was  struggling  after  a  Saviour."  Now  I  do 
not  say  that  it  is  desirable  that  we  should  have  this  painful  ordeal,  much 
less  that  we  should  seek  it  as  an  evidence  of  regeneration,  but  when  we 
have  passed  through  it  victoriously,  we  may  so  use  it  that  it  may  be  a 
perpetual  armoury  to  us.  If  we  can  now  defy  all  doubts  and  feara  that 
come,  because  they  cannot  be  so  potent  as  those  which  already  in  the  name 
of  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour  we  have  overthrown,  shall  we  not  use  that 
for  ourselves  ?  and  can  we  not  equally  well  use  it  for  others?  Full  often 
have  I  found  it  good,  when  I  have  talked  with  a  young  convert  in  deep 
distress  about  his  sin,  to  tell  him  something  more  of  his  anxious  plight 
than  he  knew  how  to  express  ;  and  he  wondered  where  I  had  found  it, 
though  he  would  not  have  wondered  if  he  knew  where  I  had  been, 
and  how  much  deeper  in  the  mire  than  he ;  when  he  has  talked  about 
Bome  horrible  thought  that  he  has  had,  with  regard  to  the  impossibility 
of  his  own  salvation,  and  I  have  said,  *'  Why,  I  have  thought  that 
a  thousand  times,  and  yet  have  overcome  it  through  the  help  of  God's 
Spirit/'    I  know  that  a  man's  own  experience  is  one  of  the  very  best 


S4  METROFOUTAir  TABERHAOLB  PULPIT. 

weapons  he  can  nse  in  fio^hting  with  evil  in  other  men's  hearts.  Often 
their  misery  and  despondency,  aggravated,  as  it  commonly  is  by  a  feel- 
ing of  solitariness,  will  be  greatly  relieved  before  it  is  effectually  driven 
cat  when  they  find  that  a  brother  has  suffered  the  same,  and  yet  has 
been  able  to  overcome.  Do  I  show  him  how  precious  the  Saviour  is  to 
my  soul  ?  he  glorifies  God  in  me.  Right  soon  will  he  look  into  the 
same  dear  face  and  be  lightened ;  and  then  he  will  magnify  the  Lord 
with  me,  and  we  shall  exalt  his  name  together.  Thus  good  it  is, 
you  see,  to  take  the  old  shields  and  spears  away  from  the  enemies  and 
to  use  them  again  against  new  foes  of  the  house  of  David. 

Since  that  time,  dear  brethren,  when  we  had  the  first  struggle,  we 
have  had  to  fight  with  many  evil  passions  and  propensities.     Perhaps 
we  have  had  one  besetting  sin.     We  were  a  long  time  before  we  came 
up  to  beard  that.     TVe  avoided  it,  and  refrained  from  rising  up  against 
it,  until  at  length  we  ]>erceived  that  it  must  be  killed  or  it.  would  kill 
us.     It  was  very  like  pulling  out  our  eyes,  bnt  we  saw  it  must  be  done ; 
we  stood  foot  to   foot  with   it.    A   sharp  time  it  was,  for   the   sin 
threafened  to  prevail  against  us;  if  we  threw  it  down  it  seemed  to  rise 
again,  like  the  giant  of  old,  strengthened  by  its  fall.     Did  you  ever  have 
a  i>crsonal,  mental,  moral  conflict  with  some  great  dragon  of  besetting 
sin?     If  so  be  you  have  been  enabled  to  smite  it  valiantly,  and  slay 
it  utterly,  I  know  you  have  gained  trophies  to  hang  up  in  the  house 
of  God.      To  do  so  will  be  of  no  small  advantage  to  yourselves, 
because  vou  can  take  them  down  and  use  them  in  future ;  and  vou  will 
find  they  are  footholds  of  your  strengtl^  to  fight  with  the  next  sin  that 
comes  upon  you.     The  strength  which  God  has  educated  and  fostered 
in  the  last  struggle  will  greatly  assist  you  in  the  next.     The  man  who 
gives  way  to  one  sin  will  very  readily  give  way  to  another,  but  a  man  who 
through  God's  grace  has  won  a  very  high  vautacre  ground  by  mastering 
one  sin,  will  be  very  likely  to  win  another.     The  spoils  taken  from  the 
last  Philistine  will  help  us  to  go  forth  and  win  more,  and  in  the  name 
of  God  we  shall  get  the  victory.     Many  a  man  has  had  a  hard  struggle 
at  first.    He  has  been  drawn  to  Christ,  proved  the  grace  of  accef)tance, 
and  taken  the  vows  of  allegiance,  and  henceforth  it  behoves  him  to  do])art 
from  iniquity,  and  not  turn  again  to  folly.  Perhaps  he  has  bet?:  ad  I  cted 
to  swearing,  and  he  has  to  get  rid  of  that,  wicked  habit  at  any  cost,  l  'erhaps 
he  has  been  accustomed  to  frequent  the  public  house,  to  sit  in  the  seat  of 
the  scornful,  and  enliven  his  companions  with  jest  and  song,  he  has 
forthwith  to  relinquish  that  place,  and  take  leave  of  that  company  for 
ever.     Then  perhaps  there  has  been  some  other  vice  which  he  has 
cherished  in  secret,  and  clung  to  with  the  more  tenacity  because  it  so 
tenaciously  clung  to  him ;  of  that  evil  he  has  purged  himself,  and  from 
that  bondage  he  has  escaped.    Is  it  not  possible  that  there  yet  remains 
one  transgression  which  lurks  in  the  breast  of  such  a  one?      Very 
likely  at  this  time  he  has  a  passionate  temper.     Down  with  it,  my 
brother.    You  slew  the  lion,  and  yon  slew  the  bear,  and  this  nncir- 
cumcised  Philistine  shall  be  as  one  of  them.      Do   not  be  afraid  to 
grapple  with  it.     Do  not  say,  **  I  have  a  quick  temper,  and  I  c^mnot 
help  it."  There  is  no  need  for  it    God's  grace  can  drive  it  out  even  as 
"  e  rest.     Beard  it  in  the  name  of  the  Most  High,  and  use  the  hophm 
yoxk  jstole  from  past  success — nay,  fairly  won  them  from  the  foes 


KEW  USES  FOB  OLD  TROPHHS.  66 

jon  have  vanquished — ^ui^  those  with  which  to  combat  sins  that  now 
assail  you. 

To  change  the  figure,  it  is  the  lot  of  some  of  us  to  be  called  to  with- 
stand great  errors.     We   have   been  sorely  harassed  at  times  with 
doubts  and  misgivings  about  some  established  truth.     I  suppose  no 
man  is  a  firm  believer  who  has  not  once  been  a  doubter.     He  knows 
no  faith  who  never  had  a  fear ;  for  candid  enquiry  must  go  before 
absolute  credence.     How  can  any  one  know  the  proofs  and  vouchers  of 
his  faith  unless  he  has  taken  pains  to  dig  into  the  volume  of  evidence 
that  lies  at  its  base  ?    Now  it  is  a  fine,  a  noble  thing,  when  you  have  had 
a  conflict  in  your  own  soul  with  some  plausible  heresy,  some  seductive 
perversion  of  the  truth,  and  have  put  it  to  flight  with  the  sword  of  the 
Spirit,  which  is  the  word  of  God ;  it  is  a  noble  feat,  I  say,  to  capture 
the  arms  of  your  assailant  and  to  use  the  very  weapons  of  the  adversary 
against  him.    You  have  detected  his  sophistry,  you  have  found  out  his 
devices,  and  now  for  the  future  you  will  not  be  so  readily  carried  away 
with  every  wind  of  doctrine.    This  time  you  are  too  old  to  be  taken 
with  his  chaflT.    You  were  deceived  once,  but  by  God's  grace  you  are  not 
willing  any  longer  to  lend  a  ready  ear  to  the  fair  speech  which  casts  a 
mist  over  plain  facts,  but  you  henceforth  resolve  to  prove  the  spirits 
whether  they  be  of  God.  So  from  the  spoils  of  past  conflicts  you  are  made 
strong  to  win  present  victories.    Texts  of  Scripture  are  sometimes  used 
by  the  adversaries  of  the  gospel,  and  turned  against  us.    I  know  some 
ministers  who,  when  they  meet  with  a  passage  that  they  cannot  im- 
mediately reconcile  with  the  orthodox  faith,  alter  the  reading,  or  put  a 
fresh  sense  on  the  words,  or  twist  it  and  turn  it  to  suit  their  purpose. 
It  is  a  bad  plan,  my  brethren;  the  texts  of  Scripture  are  to  be  taken  as 
they  stand,  and  you  may  rest  assured  they  will  always  defend,  never 
overturn,  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints.    When  I  have  seen  a 
text  sometimes  in  the  hand  of  the  enemy  made  use  of  against  the 
deity  of  Christ,  or  against  the  doctrine  of  election,  or  against  some 
other  important  and  vital  doctrine,  I  have  not  felt  at  all  inclined  to 
give  up  the  text  or  think  lightly  of  it.    I  rather  admire  those  Americana 
iu  the  South,  who  when  they  had  lost  some  guns,  were  asked  by  the 
commanding  officer  whether  they  had  not  spiked  the  guns  before  they 
gave  them  up  to  the  foe  ?    "  Spiked  them  1  no,"  said  they,  "  we  did 
not  like  to  spoil  such  beautiful  guns ;  we  will  take  them  again  to- 
moiTOW."    And  so  they  did.     I  would  not  have  a  text  touched.    Grand 
old  text !  we  honour  thee  even  while  we  cannot  keep  the  field,  or  ward 
thee  from  the  aggression  of  the  invader.     But  shall  we  spoil  it,  or  give 
it  up  as  lost  ?    Never,  we  will  take  it  out  of  the  hand  of  the  enemy, 
use  it  for  the  defence  of  the  gospel,  and  show  that  it  does  not  mean 
what  they  think,  or  answer  the  ends  to  which  they  would  apply  it. 
Are  we  baffled  in   attack,   or   do   we  lose  ground  in  an  argument, 
it  is  for  us  by  more  diligent  study,   and   closer  research,  to  take 
the  guns,  the  good  old  guns,  and  use  those  which  the  enemy  used 
against  ourselves — to  turn  them  round  and  use  them  against   him. 
Depend  upon  it  the  great  temple  of  truth  is  not  like  a  house  divided 
against  itself.    Nothing  equivocal  or  prevaricating  hath  come  forth  at 
any  time  from  the  mouth  of  the  Lord.     As  for  our  understanding,  it  is 
always  weak,  and  as  for  our  tactics  in  upholding  the  right^lhej  w^  o^tv 


56  METEOPOLTTAN  TABEENACLB  PULPIT. 

at  fault.  But  the  word  of  God  is  steadfast ;  it  does  not  change  with  the 
times  or  yield  to  suit  any  man's  purpose.  The  weapons  of  our  warfare 
me  |]^ood,  it  is  the  hands  that  wield  them  that  are  so  unskilful.  Thus 
I  might  continue  to  show  that  in  all  the  battles  we  fight,  the 
trophies  which  we  win  should  be  stored ;  for  they  may  come  in  for 
future  use  at  some  time  or  other.  There  is  no  experience  of  a  Christian 
that  will  not  have  some  ultimate  service  to  render  him.  He  may  say  to 
him  pelf,   "  What  can  be  the  good  of  this  feeling,  what  can   be  the 

Sractical  advantage  of  that  agony  of  mind  through  which  I  passed  ?" 
ly  brother,  yon  know  not  what  may  be  the  history  of  your  life,  it  is 
unfinished  yet;  if  you  did  know  you  would  see  that  in  this  present  trial 
there  is  a  preparation  for  some  future  emergency,  which  will  enable 
you  to  come  out  of  it  in  triumph.  The  shields  and  spears  of  David  are 
hung  up  for  future  action. 

III.  In  the  third  place,  our  text  may  mean  that  David  bung  up 
the  spears  and  shields  which  he  was  accustomed  to  use  himself;  and 
if  so,  we  shall  remark  that  ancient  weapoxs  arb  good  for  present 

USE. 

I  should  like  to  show  you  this  by  taking  you  on  to  a  battle-field.  I  did 
take  you  there  just  now,  but  you  did  not  recognise  it,  perhaps,  as  a 
battle-ground.  \Ve  will  go  to  it.  It  is  not  Sadowa  or  Sedan,  it  is  a  grander 
arena  far — the  old  seventy-seventh.  Turn  to  the  seventy-seventh 
Psalm,  and  you  have  a  battle-field  there.  Should  you  ever  have  to  fight 
the  same  battle,  by  looking  through  this  Psalm,  you  will  see  David's 
shields  and  spenrs,  and  you  will  soon  learn  how  to  screen  yourself  with 
the  one,  and  how  to  do  exploits  with  the  other.  Here  is  David  fighting 
with  despondency — an  old  enemy  of  mine.  I  daresay  some  of  you 
are  afflicted  with  it.  But  observe  how  he  fought  with  it.  The  first 
wea])on  he  drew  out  of  the  scabbard  was  the  weapon  of  all-prayer. 
And  how  grandly  he  used  it  I  "I  cried  unto  God  with  my  voice,  even 
unto  God  with  my  voice."  Satan  trembles  when  he  hears  the  sound  of 
prayer.  They  ai'e  the  conquering  legions  that  know  how  to  pray.  Des- 
pondency soon  flies  when  a  man  knows  how  to  ply  this  all-conquering 
and  ever-UFcful  weapon  of  petition  to  the  Most  High. 

Then  note  how  he  used  this  weapon  continually.  "  My  hand  was 
stretched  out  all  night,"  saith  he,  according  to  the  marginal  reading  of 
the  second  verse.  If  the  first  prayer  did  not  help  him,  he  prayed 
again.;  if  an  hour's  prayer  did  not  bring  him  peace,  he  would  pray  two 
hours;  and  all  night  long  he  kept  at  it.  You  will  get  a  like  result  too, 
my  brother,  if  you  exercise  a  like  perseverance,  you  must  get  a  like 
result  if  you  know  how  to  linger  at  the  mercy-seat. 

When  he  had  used  the  weapon  of  prayer,  what  did  he  do  next  ?  He 
took  out  another  spear.  It  was  that  of  remembering  God.  He 
had  long  enough  pored  in  thought  over  himself  and  his  present  sinfulness 
and  weakness,  and  now  he  remembered  God's  mercy,  God's  faithfulness, 
God's  lovingkindness,  God's  power,  God's  covenant,  God  in  the  person 
of  Christ.  Oh !  this  is  indeed  to  prepare  a  salvo  against  the  enemy, 
and  to  fortify  one's  own  position  with  fresh  succours.  Be  can  win  the 
battle  that  knows  how  to  use  this  ai*tillery  of  remembering  God. 

Going  on  with  tJie  strategy  of  war,  what  next  ?  Why,  in  the  fifth 
verse  wc  read  how  he  maintained  his  courage  and  his  constancy — ^'  I 


HEW  UBBB  FOR  OL^  tp^otfRllSS,  57 

congidered  ^^  '^^^  ^^  ^^^•"  ^®  enquired  of  hoary  fathers,  and  looked 
i^^u  ^^n  the  inspired  traditions,  if  I  may  be  allowed  the  expression, 
of  the  early  church.  He  turned  to  see  whether  God  ever  did  forsake 
any  of  his  people,  rightly  judging  that  if  he  never  did  he  never  would, 
and  firmly  resolving  that  till  he  could  find  a  clear  case  of  God's  unfaith- 
fulness he  would  not  yield  an  inch  of  soil,  nor  give  up  a  stone  of  any 
fortress,  but  would  hold  on  and  fight  the  battle  out.  That  inward 
musing  helped  him  much.  The  enemy  began  to  weary,  while  he  recruited 
his  strength. 

Bat  now  he  used  another  weapon.  He  looked  to  his  own  experience 
— see  the  sixth  verse.  "  I  called  to  remembrance  my  song  in  the  night." 
Past  experience  acknowleged  gratefully,  and  taken  as  the  index  of  what 
the  future  will  be — this  is  another  of  David's  shields  and  spears.  And 
then  he  seemed  to  put  a  whole  path  of  spears  before  the  enemy,  and  hold 
up  an  entire  wall  of  shields  when  he  came  to  close  quarters  with  him,  and 
said,  '*  Will  the  Lord  cast  off  for  ever  ?  Will  he  be  favourable  no  more? 
Is  his  mercy  clean  gone  for  ever  ?  Doth  his  promise  fail  for  evermore  ? 
Hath  God  forgotten  to  be  gracious  ?  Hath  he  in  anger  shut  up  his  tender 
mercies?  "  On !  this  is  how  to  win  the  battle.  The  next  time,  dear  friend, 
you  find  yourself  downcast  in  trouble,  do  not  run  away  because  Giant 
Despair  is  so  strong.  Though  pressed  by  danjjer  and  beset  by  foes, 
feed  not  this  frenzv  of  the  soul  with  gloomy  black  forebodings.  Armed 
with  David's  shields  and  spears,  attack  him  ;  show  a  bold  front,  and  you 
shall  yet  resist  the  devil  and  find  that  he  flees  from  you,  and  you  shall 
come  back  from  the  conflict  with  louder  notes  of  victory  than  you  had 
dreamed  before. 

There  are  some  persons  here,  however,  who  are  not  yet  far  enough 
advanced  to  understand  this  battle  of  the  seventv-peventh.  I  will  take  them 
to  another  battle,  the  battle  of  the  fifty-first.  That  is  the  sinner's  battle; 
we  shall  see  David's  shields  and  spears  there.  A  tremendous  battle  it  was 
with  sin,  with  a  guilty  conscience,  with  despairing  thoughts.  Some  of 
you,  perhaps,  are  fighting  such  a  battle  to-night.  I  rather  hope  you 
are.  I  was  preaching  the  other  day,  I  think  it  was  last  Tuesday  evening, 
at  Acton.  I  went  my  way  after  service  hopeful,  prayerful  that  some 
fruits  might  be  reaped  from  my  labours.  Not  long  after  I  received  a 
letter  from  the  minister  to  this  effect :  "  My  dear  friend,  I  could  not 
help  writing  to  tell  you  that  last  Tuesday  night  when  I  was  in  bed 
ana  asleep,  there  was  a  knock  at  my  door,  and  I  came  down  and  found 
a  railway  porter  wanting  to  see  me.  "0  sir,"  said  he,  "I  cannot  sleep; 
I  was  obliged  to  come  and  knock  you  up  though  it  is  late.  I  heard  the 
sermon  at  your  chapel  to-night,  and  I  want  to  know  what  I  must  do 
to  be  saved?  It  is  time  for  me  to  seek  the  Lord,  and  I  shall  never 
get  rest  till  I  find  him."  Oh !  it  is  good  for  us  to  be  knocked  up  at 
night  to  answer  any  one  that  comes  on  such  an  errand  as  that.  Would 
God  it  were  every  night  in  the  year,  if  it  were  to  hear  a  sinner  saying, 
**  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  " 

Now,  if  one  here  present  be  in  such  a  condition  as  that,  just  let  him 
follow  me  to  this  battle-field,  and  see  how  David  fought.  His  shields  and 
spears  in  such  case  consisted  first  in  an  appeal  to  God's  mercy.  Do  not 
appeal  to  justice,  sinner.  Tfiat  is  against  you  ?  appeal  to  mercy.  "  Have 
mercy  upon  me,  0  God,  according  to  thy  lovingkindness  !"     Prayer 


'*  ian!Bu»<«.iTAH  TABEBHAOLE  PULPIT. 

he  brings  before  God,  bnt  it  is  prayer  tippea  _,«f|,  ^  jj  i^ 
the  mercy  in  God.  Go,  sinner,  and  plead  with  God  anu  a^x.^ 
your  sins  with  hope  in  his  mercy.  When  he  had  done  that  he  then 
turns  to  confession :  "  I  acknowledge  my  transgression,  and  my  sin 
is  ever  before  me."  No  weapon  to  drive  away  gnilty  fears  like 
making  a  clean  breast  of  your  sins.  Tell  your  Father  you  have 
offended;  do  not  plead  any  extenuations  or  mitigations.  Confess  that 
you  deserve  his  wrath.  Put  yourself  before  the  throne  of  God's  clemency. 
Confess  that  if  it  were  turned  to  a  throne  of  vengeance  you  deserve  it 
well.  Prayers,  tears,  pleas  for  mercy,  and  full  confession — these  are 
weapons  to  conquer  with. 

But  note  the  master  weapon  !  See  where  the  battle  began  to  turn 
into  victory.  It  is  here  when  he  cries  in  the  seventh  verse,  "  Purge 
me  with  hyssop,  and  I  shall  be  clean;  wash  me,  and  I  shall  be  whiter 
than  snow."  You  know  that  hyssop  was  a  little  bunch,  a  brush  used 
to  dip  into  the  blood — a  basin  full  of  blood,  and  then  with  this  brush 
of  hyssop  the  priest  sprinkled  the  guilty  man,  the  unclean  man,  and  he 
was  counted  clean.  So  the  master  argument  in  this  verse  is  blood.  Oh ! 
how  this  destroys  our  sins,  how  this  scatters  all  our  doubts  and  fears 
— the  almighty  weapon  of  the  cross,  the  divine  weapon  of  the  atone- 
ment. Let  sins  come  on,  and  let  them  be  more  than  the  hairs  of  my 
head,  loftier  than  mountains  and  deeper  than  the  unfathomed  ocean,  let 
them  come  on — God's  flaming  wrath  behind  them,  hell  itself  coming  to 
devour  me;  yet  if  I  can  but  take  the  cross  and  hold  it  up  before  me, 
if  I  can  plead  the  precious  blood  I  shall  be  safe,  for  I  shall  be  saved  and 
prove  a  conqueror,  notwithstanding  all.  Beloved,  then,  see  that  in  all 
your  fights  you  use  the  old,  old  weapons  of  David  himself — his  shields 
and  spears— by  these  same  weapons  shall  you  also  win  the  day. 

IV.  And  now,  lastly,  let  me  suggest  to  you  a  fourth  version  of  the 
text.  Did  not  David  HERsm  prefigure  him  that  was  to  comb- 
David's  Son  and  David's  Lord? 

Jesus  Christ,  our  King,  has  hung  up  many  shields  and  spears  in 
the  house  of  the  Lord.  I  shall  not  occupy  many  minutes,  but  I 
invite  every  believer's  heart  to  look  at  the  great  temple  that  Christ 
hiis  buihled,  and  see  how  he  has  hung  it  round  with  trophies  of  his 
Victory.  Sin — Christ  has  borne  it  in  himself,  endured  its  penalty 
and  overcome  it ;  he  has  hung  up  the  handwriting  of  ordinances  that 
was  against  ns  as  a  trophy  in  the  house  of  the  Lord.  He  has 
nailed  it  to  the  cross.  Satan — our  great  foe — he  met  him  foot  to 
foot  in  the  wilderness  and  discomfited  him — met  him  in  the  garden — 
overcame  him  on  the  cross.  Now  hell,  too,  is  vanquished — Christ  is 
Lord.  The  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air  is  but  his  serf.  The  King  of 
kings  hath  led  captivity  captive,  and  all  the  crowns  of  this  prince  of  the 
power  of  the  air  are  hung  up  as  trophies.    Broken  are  their  spears :  their 


NEW  UBES  FOB  OLD  TBOPHIBS.  89 

shields  all  battered  and  rilelj  cast  away,  hang  np  as  memorials  of  what 
Christ  has  done.  Death,  too,  the  last  enemy,  Christ  hath  taken  spoils 
from  him  when  he  rose  again  himself  from  his  prison  honse,  and  ascended 
on  high,  leading  captivity  captive.  And  the  enmity  of  the  hnman  heart,  my 
brethren.  Oh  !  how  many  of  these  enmities  has  Christ  hung  np  in  the 
hall,  for  he  has  conquered  that  enmity  and  made  the  hater  into  a  lover. 
My  heart,  your  heart,  I  hope  that  all  our  hearts,  too,  are  trophies  of  what 
Christ's  love  can  do.  There  are  some  great  sinners  at  this  day  who  are 
wonderful  tokens  of  the  power  of  love.  When  we  look  round  the  temple 
and  see  the  shields  and  spears  hung  up,  we  say,  "  Who  did  those  shields 
and  spears  belong  to  ?  "  One  says,  "  Why,  that  is  the  shield  and  spear  of 
John  Newton,  the  old  blasphemer  !"  Glory  be  to  God,  Christ  conquered 
him.  Whose  shield  and  spears  are  those  ?  Why,  that  is  the  shield  and 
spear  of  John  Bunyan,  the  blasphemer  on  the  village  green.  Gods  mercy 
conquered  him.  Yes,  there  will  be  a  pillar  for  many  of  us,  and  I  do  not 
know  which  will  bring  Christ  most  honour,  for  he  had  much  ado  to  bring 
ns  down.  I  wonder  whether  there  will  be  a  place  for  you,  you  old  sailor? 
These  many  years  you  have  been  living  without  God  and  without  Christ. 
You  have  been  a  frequenter  of  every  place  of  sin,  every  filthy  haunt  in 
London.  I  do  trust  God's  grace  will  meet  with  you.  The  poor  harlot, 
Mary,  the  woman  that  was  a  sinner — there  hangs  her  shield  and  spear. 
She  was  a  hard  fighter,  a  very  Amazon,  but  Christ  conquered  her,  hung 
up  her  shield  and  spear,  and  there  it  shall  hang  for  ever,  to  the  praise 
of  the  glory  of  his  grace,  who  vanquished  even  her,  and  made  her  his 
willing  servant,  nay,  his  beloved  friend.  What  will  heaven  be  when  all 
of  ns  shall  be  trophies  of  his  power  to  save,  and  when  our  bodies  shall 
be  there  as  well  as  our  souls  I  "  0  death,  where  is  thy  sting?  0  grave, 
where  is  thy  victory?" — when  not  only  souls,  butbodies  shall  be  in  heaven 
too,  all  trophies  of  what  Christ  has  done  when  he  plucked  his  people 
from  the  jaws  of  the  grave  and  delivered  them  from  the  grasp  of  the 
sepulchre. 

I  came  just  now,  before  I  entered  here,  from  a  sight  which  did  my 
Tery  soul  good.  One  of  our  dear  and  well-beloved  sisters,  lies  very  sick, 
I  think  she  is  dying — in  all  human  probability  a  few  hours  will  see  her 
in  another  world.  I  looked  at  her  as  one  of  the  trophies  of  Christ's 
power  to  save.  I  would  not  have  missed  the  visit  for  I  know  not  what. 
She  was  not  only  calm,  but  joyous ;  nay,  triumphant,  expecting  the  time 
of  her  departure  and  longing  for  it,  speaking  of  everlasting  faithfulness, 
of  sur«  promises,  and  of  the  presence  of  Christ  as  a  reality,  which  she 
enjoyed  even  now,  before  the  veil  of  flesh  is  rent  that  hides  his  blessed 
face  from  ours.  I  said  to  her,  "  How  long  is  it  since  the  cloud  has 
broken  away  from  you  ?"  She  said,  "  I  have  had  a  good  deal  of  peace 
of  mind,  but  never  such  joy  as  I  have  now.  Now  that  I  am  going 
hence  I  shall  soon  see  his  face  without  a  veil  between."   The  victories  of 


60  METBOFOLTTiLN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

dying  spirits  substantiate  the  gospel.  When  Christian  people  have  no 
motive  to  overrate  their  assurance,  and  certainly  no  inducement  to 
play  the  hypocrite,  when  they  have  nothing  in  their  present  sensations 
to  inspire  counige,  raise  enthusiasm,  or  buoy  them  up  with  sappositious 
comfort— for  heart  and  flesh  fail — there  is  much  to  admire  in  their 
constancy,  much  to  animate  us  in  their  faith : 

''Our  dying  friends  are  pioneers  to  smoothe 
Our  rugged  path  to  death,  to  break  those  ban 
Of  terror  and  abhorrence  Nature  throws 
*Cro8s  our  obstructed  way,  and  thus  to  make 
Welcome,  as  safe,  our  port  from  every  storm  .^ 

When  you  can  see  the  eye,  soon  to  be  closed,  sparkling  with  ocstacy,  and 
hear  the  voice  feeble  because  the  throat  is  choking,  as  bravcy  ana  braver 
still  than  ever  it  has  been  before,  and  when  you  mark  the  look  of  deep  com- 
posure, nay,  of  heavenly  expectancy,  upon  the  pale,  pale  face— olv!  this 
makes  our  soul,  my  brethren,  to  feel  that  we  have  a  faith  that  i^  worth 
prizing,  a  Christ  that  is  worth  trusting.  These  are  trophies;  and  these 
death-bed  trophies  are  hung  up  in  that  part  of  the  temple  where  we  can 
see  them. 

Let  us  take  care  that  we  have  good  confidence,  always  walking  hf  faith, 
be  the  path  of  our  pili^rimage  rough  or  smooth,  and  ever  maintaining 
the  fight  of  faith,  however  fierce  our  temptations  or  fiery  our  trials.  So 
when  we  come  to  die  we  may  hang  up  our  trophies  too,  saying  to  death 
and  hell  that  we  bid  them  defiance,  for  Christ  is  with  us  to  the  last, 
making  our  darkest  moments  to  be  bright  with  the  light  of  his  presence. 
God  grant  that  all  of  us  may  be  trophies  of  Christ,  .and  hung  up  thus 
as  memorials  for  ever.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Psalm  IxxviL 


NEW  WORK  BY  C.  H.  SPURGEON.— Second  Edition,  price  2b.  6d. 

« FEATHERS    FOR   ARROWS;"    Or,  Illustrations   for    Prcar:hcrs 

and  Teachers,  from  my  Note  Book. 

"Ilicy  and  pointed.  Dosismcd  to  AJ/,  and  mnnrcllously  calculated  to  aooomptiAh  the  pTirpi^*. 
"Wo  furiicar  to  mako  a  Kingle  quotation;  but  urge  our  rvadur*  to  procure  the  book." — The 
IVatrhman. 

"  A  new  Bupply  of  llhu5tration«  remarkable  for  ftt>shne,*s  and  force,  racincsA  and  robustncsn.  To 
men  who  lack  iiiuiinnatiou  the  book  will  prove  a  Btimulud  of  iu>  coinuiuu  kind,  paitly  by  supplying 
material,  but  chiefly  by  rusgi'stinf;  the  nuinifold  wnys  in  which  tho  events  of  doily  life  may  Umstrata 
and  eufurce  the  teaching  of  the  Bible.''  —General  Baptist  Magazine. 


THE  POWBE  OF  CHEI8T  ILLUSTRATED  BY  THE 

EESUKEECTION. 


^  Sermon 

Deliyersd  on  Lobd'8-day  Morning,  January  29th,  1871,  by 

C.  H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THB  METROPOLITAN  TABBRNACTiE,  NEWINGTON. 


^  For  our  conyersation  is  in  heaven ;  from  vrhence  also  we  look  for  the  Sflvionr,  the 
Lord  Jeens  Christ :  who  shall  change  our  vile  body,  that  it  may  be  fashioned  like  unto 
his  glorious  body,  according  to  the  working  whereby  he  is  able  even  to  subdue  all 
things  nnto  himself.*' — Philippians  iii.  20,  21. 

I  8H0XJIJ)  mislead  you  if  I  called  these  verses  my  text,  for  I  intend  only 
to  lay  stress  npon  the  closing  expression,  and  I  read  the  two  verses 
because  they  are  needfiil  for  its  explanation.  It  would  recjuire  seyeral 
discourses  to  expound  the  whole  of  so  rich  a  passage  as  this. 

Beloved,  how  intimately  is  the  whole  of  our  life  interwoven  with  the 
life  of  Christ !  His  first  coming  has  been  to  us  salvation,  and  we  are 
delivered  from  the  wrath  of  God  through  him.  We  live  still  because  he 
lives,  and  never  is  our  life  more  joyous  than  when  we  look  most  steadily 
to  him.  The  completion  of  our  salvation  in  the  deliverance  of  onr  body 
from  the  bondage  of  corruption,  in  the  raising  of  our  dust  to  a  glorious 
immortality,  that  also  is  wrapped  up  with  the  personal  resurrection  and 
quickening  power  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  As  his  first  advent  has 
been  our  salvation  from  sin,  so  his  second  advent  shall  be  our  salvation 
from  the  grave.  He  is  in  heaven,  but,  as  the  apostle  saith,  "  We  look 
for  the  Siaviour,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ:  who  shall  change  our  vile 
body,  that  it  may  be  fashioned  like  unto  his  glorious  body."  We  have 
nothing,  we  are  nothing,  apart  from  him.  The  past,  the  present,  and 
the  future  are  only  bright  as  he  shines  upon  them.  Every  consolation, 
€very  hope,  every  enjoyment  we  possess,  we  have  received  and  still 
retam  because  of  our  connection  with  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Apart 
from  him  we  are  naked,  and  poor,  and  miserable.  I  desire  to  impress 
upon  your  minds,  and  especially  upon  my  own,  the  need  of  our  abiding 
in  him.  As  zealous  labourers  for  the  glory  of  God  I  am  peculiarly 
anxious  that  you  may  maintain  daily  communion  with  Jesus,  for  as  it 
is  with  our  covenant  blessings,  so  is  it  with  our  work  of  faith  and  labour 
of  love,  everything  depends  upon  him.  All  our  fruit  is  found  in  Jesus. 
Bemember  his  own  words,  "  Without  me  ye  can  do  nothing."     Our 

No.  973. 


62  HETBOPOUTAN  TABEHNAOLE  PULPIT. 

power  to  work  comes  wholly  from  his  power.  If  we  work  eflFecfcually  it 
must  always  be  according  to  the  effectual  working  of  his  power  in  us 
and  through  us.  Brethren,  I  pray  that  our  eyes  may  be  steadfastly  turned 
to  our  Master  at  this  season  when  our  special  seryices  are  about  to 
commence.  Confessing  our  dependence  upon  him,  and  resorting  to 
him  in  renewed  confidence,  we  shall  proceed  to  our  labour  with  re- 
doubled strength.  May  we  rememoer  where  our  great  strength 
lieth,  and  look  to  him  and  him  alone,  away  from  our  own  weakness 
and  our  own  strength  too — finding  all  in  him  in  our  work  for  others 
as  we  have  found  all  in  him  in  the  matter  of  the  salvation  of  our  own 
souls.  When  the  multitudes  were  fed,  the  disciples  distributed  the  bread, 
but  the  central  source  of  that  divine  commissariat  was  the  Master's  own 
hand.  He  blessed,  he  brake,  he  gave  to  the  disciples,  and  then  the 
disciples  to  the  multitude.  Significant  also  was  one  of  the  last  scenes 
of  our  Lord's  intercourse  with  his  disciples  before  he  was  taken  up.  They 
had  been  fishing  all  the  night,  but  they  had  taken  nothing ;  it  was  only 
when  he  came  that  they  cast  the  net  on  the  right  side  of  the  ship,  and 
then  the  net  was  filled  with  a  great  multitude  of  fishes.  Ever  must  it  be 
80 ;  where  he  is  souls  are  taken  by  the  men-fishers,  but  nowhere  else. 
Not  the  preaching  of  his  servants  alone,  not  the  gospel  of  itself  alone, 
but  his  presence  with  his  servants  is  the  secret  of  success.  '^  The  Lord 
working  with  them,"  his  co-operating  presence  in  the  gospel,  this  is  it 
which  makes  it  "  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation."  Lift  up  your  eyes 
then,  my  brethren,  confederate  with  us  for  the  spread  of  the  Redeemer's 
kingdom,  to  the  Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus,  who  is  the  Captain  of  our 
salvation,  through  whom  and  by  whom  all  things  shall  be  wrought  to 
the  honour  of  God,  but  without  whom  the  most  ardent  desires,  and 
the  most  energetic  efforts  must  most  certainly  fail.  I  have  selected 
this  text  with  no  less  a  design  than  this — that  every  eye  may  by  it  be 
turned  to  the  omnipotent  Saviour  before  we  enter  upon  the  hallowed 
engagements  which  await  us. 

In  the  text  notice,  first  of  all,  the  marvel  to  he  wrought  by  our  Lord  at 
his  coming ;  and  then  gather  ^m  it,  in  the  second  place,  helps  to  the 
consideration  of  the  power  which  is  now  at  this  time  proceeding  from  him 
and  treasured  in  him ;  and  then,  thirdly,  contemplate  the  work  which  we 
desire  to  see  accomplished,  and  which  we  believe  will  be  accomplished  on 
the  ground  of  the  power  resident  in  our  Lord. 

I.  First,  we  have  to  ask  you  to  oonsideb  believingly  the  mabvbl 

WHICH  IS  TO  be  wrought  BY  OUR  LORD  AT  HIS  COMING. 

When  he  shall  come  a  second  time  he  will  change  our  vile  body  and 
fashion  it  like  unto  his  glorious  body.  What  a  marvellous  change ! 
How  great  the  transformation !  How  high  the  ascent !  Our  body  in  its 
present  state  is  called  in  our  translation  a  "  vile  body,"  but  if  we  translate 
the  Greek  more  literally  it  is  much  more  expressive,  for  there  we  find  this 
corporeal  frame  called  "  the  body  of  our  humiliation."  Not  **this  humble 
body,"  that  is  hardly  the  meaning,  but  the  body  in  which  our  humilia- 
tion is  manifested  and  enclosed.  This  body  of  our  humiliation  our  Lord 
will  transform  until  it  is  like  unto  his  own.  Here  read  not  alone  ''  his 
glorious  body,"  for  that  is  not  the  most  literal  translation,  but  **  the  body 
of  his  glory;"  the  body  in  which  he  enjoys  and  reveals  his  glory.  Our 
Saviour  had  a  body  here  in  humiliation ;  that  body  was  like  ours  in  all 


THE  POWEB  OF  CHRIST  ILLUBTRATED  BY  THE  BESURaECTION.         C3 

respects  except  that  it  conld  see  no  corruption,  for  it  was  undefiled  with 
sin ;  that  body  in  which  onr  Lord  wept,  atid  sweat  great  drops  of  blood, 
and  yielded  np  his  spirit,  was  the  body  of  his  humiliation.  He  rose 
again  from  the  dead,  and  he  rose  in  the  same  body  which  ascended  up 
into  heaven,  but  he  concealed  its  glory  to  a  very  great  extent,  else  had 
he  been  too  bright  to  be  seen  of  mortal  eyes.  Only  when  he  passed  the 
cloud,  and  was  received  out  of  sight,  did  the  full  glory  of  his  body  shine 
forth  to  ravish  the  eyes  of  angels  and  of  glorified  spirits.  Then  was 
it  that  his  countenance  became  as  the  sun  shining  in  its  strength. 
Now,  beloved,  whatever  the  body  of  Jesus  may  be  in  his  glory,  our 
present  body  which  is  now  in  its  humiliation  is  to  be  conformed  unto  it; 
Jesus  is  the  standard  of  man  in  glory.  '*  We  shall  be  like  him,  for  we 
shall  see  him  as  he  is."  Here  we  dwell  in  this  body  of  our  humiliation, 
but  it  shall  undergo  a  change,  '*in  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye, 
^  the  last  trump :  for  the  trumpet  shall  sound,  and  the  dead  shall  be 
raised  incorruptible,  and  we  shall  be  changed."  Then  shall  we  come 
into  our  glory,  and  our  body  being  made  suitable  to  the  glory  state, 
shall  be  fifly  called  the  body  of  glory.  We  need  not  curiously  pry  into 
the  details  of  the  change,  nor  attempt  to  define  all  the  differences  between 
the  two  estates  of  our  body;  for  "  it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be," 
and  we  may  be  content  to  leave  much  to  be  made  known  to  us  hereafter. 
Yet  though  we  see  through  a  glass  darkly,  we  nevertheless  do  see  some- 
thing, and  would  not  shut  our  eyes  to  that  little.  We  know  not  yet 
as  we  are  known,  but  we  do  know  in  part,  and  that  part  knowledge  ia 
precious.  The  gates  have  been  ajar  at  times,  and  men  have  looked 
awhile,  and  beheld  and  wondered.  Three  times,  at  least,  human  eyes 
have  seen  something  of  the  body  of  glory.  The  face  of  Moses,  when 
he  came  down  from  the  mount,  shone  so  that  those  who  gathered 
around  him  could  not  look  thereon,  and  he  had  to  cover  it  with  a  veil. 
In  that  lustrous  face  of  the  man  who  had  been  forty  days  in  high  com- 
munion with  God,  you  behold  some  gleams  of  the  brightness  of  glorified 
manhood.  Our  Lord  made  a  yet  clearer  manifestation  of  the  glorious  body 
when  he  was  transfigured  in  the  presence  of  the  three  disciples.  When 
his  garments  became  bright  and  glistering,  whiter  than  any  fuller  could 
make  them,  and  he  himself  was  all  aglow  with  glory,  his  disciples  saw  and 
marvelled.  The  face  of  Stephen  is  a  third  window  as  it  were  through 
which  we  may  look  at  the  glory  to  be  revealed,  for  even  his  enemies  as 
they  gazed  upon  the  martyr  in  his  confession  of  Christ,  saw  his  face  as 
it  haa  been  the  face  of  an  angel.  Those  three  transient  gleams  of  the 
morning  light  may  serve  as  tokens  to  us  to  help  us  to  form  some  faint 
idea  of  what  the  body  of  the  gloiy  of  Christ  and  the  body  of  our  own 
glory  will  be. 

T'uming  to  that  marvellous  passage  in  the  Corinthians,  wherein  the 
veil  seems  to  be  more  uplifted  than  it  ever  had  been  before  or  since, 
we  learn  a  few  particulars  worthy  to  be  rehearsed.  The  body  while 
here  below,  is  corruptible,  subject  to  decay;  it  gradually  becomes  weak 
throQgh  old  age,  at  last  it  yields  to  the  blows  of  death,  falls  into  the 
|;ronnd,  and  becomes  the  food  of  worms.  But  the  new  body  shall  be 
mcormptible,  it  shall  not  be  subject  to  any  process  of  disease,  decay,  or 
decline,  and  it  shall  never,  through  the  lapse  of  ages,  yield  to  the  force 
of  deatk    For  the  immortal  spirit  it  shall  be  the  immortal  companion. 


64  XXTBOPQLITAN  TABEBNAGLE  PULPIT. 

There  are  no  graves  in  heaven,  no  knell  ever  saddened  the  New  Jem- 
salem.  The  body  here  is  weak,  the  apostle  says ''  it  is  sown  in  weakness ;" 
it  is  subject  to  all  sorts  of  infirmities  in  life,  and  jn  death  loses  all 
strength.  It  is  weak  to  perform  our  own  will,  weaker  still  to  perform 
the  heavenly  will;  it  is  weak  to  do  and  weak  to  safer :  but  it  is  to  be 
**  raised  in  power,  all  infirmity  being  completely  removed."  How  far 
this  power  will  be  physical  and  how  &r  spuitual  we  need  not  speculate; 
where  the  material  ends  and  the  spiritual  begins  we  need  not  define  ; 
we  shall  be  as  the  angels,  and  we  have  found  no  difficulty  in  believing 
that  these  pure  spirits  **  excel  in  strength,"  nor  in  understanding 
Peter  when  he  says  that  angels  are  ''greater  in  power  and  might" 
Our  body  shall  be  **  raised  in  power." 

Here,  too,  the  body  is  a  natural  or  soulish  body — a  body  fit  for  the  soul, 
for  the  lowest  faculties  of  our  mental  nature ;  but  according  to  the  apostle 
in  the  Corinthians,  it  is  to  be  raised  a  spiritual  body,  adapted  to  the 
noblest  portion  of  our  nature,  suitable  to  be  the  dwelling-place  and  the 
instrument  of  our  new-bom  grace-given  life.  This  body  at  present  is  no 
assistance  to  the  spirit  of  prayer  or  praise;  it  rather  hinders  than  helps 
us  in  spiritual  exercises.  Often  the  spirit  traly  is  willing,  but  the  flesh 
is  weak.  We  sleep  when  we  ought  to  watch,  and  faint  when  we  should 
pursue.  Even  its  joys  as  well  as  its  sorrows  tend  to  distract  devotion : 
but  when  this  body  shall  be  transformed,  it  shall  be  a  body  suitable 
for  the  highest  aspirations  of  our  perfected  and  glorified  humanity — 
a  spiritual  body  like  unto  the  body  of  the  glory  of  Christ.  Here 
the  body  is  sinful,  its  members  have  been  instruments  of  unrighteous- 
ness. It  is  true  that  our  body  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost; 
but,  alas!  there  are  traces  about  it  of  the  time  when  it  was  a  den 
of  thieves.  The  spots  and  wrinkles  of  sin  are  not  yet  removed.  Its 
materialism  is  not  yet  so  refined  as  to  be  an  assistance  to  the  spirit ;  it 
gravitates  downwards,  and  it  has  a  bias  from  the  right  line ;  but  it 
awaits  the  last  change,  and  then  it  shall  be  perfectly  sinless,  as  alfiJ:)a8ter 
white  and  pure,  upon  which  stain  of  sin  did  never  come ;  like  the 
newly  driven  snow,  immaculately  chaste.  "  As  we  have  borne  the  image 
of  the  earthy,  we  shall  also  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly." 

Being  sinless,  the  body  when  it  shall  be  raised  again  shall  be  painless. 
Who  shall  count  the  number  of  our  pains  while  in  this  present  house 
of  clay  ?  Truly  we  that  are  in  this  tabernacle  do  groan.  Does 
it  not  sometimes  appear  to  the  children  of  sickness  as  if  this  body 
were  fashioned  with  a  view  to  suflfering ;  as  if  all  its  nerves,  sinews, 
veins,  pulses,  vessels,  and  valves,  were  parts  of  a  curious  instra- 
ment  upon  which  every  note  of  the  entire  gamut  of  pain  might 
be  produced?  Patience,  ye  who  linger  in  this  shattered  tenement, 
a  house  not  made  with  hands  awaits  you.  Up  yonder  no  sorrow 
and  sighing  are  met  with;  the  chastising  rod  shall  fall  no  longer 
when  the  faultiness  is  altogether  remov^  As  the  new  ^ody  will 
be  without  pain,  so  will  it  be  superior  to  weariness.  T:^^^  ^^"^^ 
body  will  not  yield  to  faintness,  nor  fail  through  languor.  -v  ^  \\,  not 
implied  that  the  spiritual  body  does  not  ne^  to  sleep,  \^^^ 

read  that  they  serve  God  day  and  night  in  his  temple  ?     In  ^^      v^  ^ 
iodies  of  the  saints,  like  the  body  of  Christ,  will  be  perfect ;  i        ^X^C^ 
thing  lacking  and  nothing  faulty.    If  saints  die  in  the  ^^i*^o^ 


64  XXTBOPQLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

There  are  no  graves  in  heaven,  no  knell  ever  saddened  the  Nevv  Jem- 
salem.  The  body  here  is  weak,  the  apostle  says  '*  it  is  sown  in  weakness ;" 
it  is  subject  to  all  sorts  of  infirmities  in  life,  and  jn  death  loses  all 
strength.  It  is  weak  to  perform  our  own  will,  weaker  still  to  perform 
the  heavenly  will;  it  is  weak  to  do  and  weak  to  safer :  but  it  is  to  be 
**  raised  in  power,  all  infirmity  being  completely  removed."  How  far 
this  power  will  be  physical  and  how  &r  spuitual  we  need  not  speculate; 
where  the  material  ends  and  the  spiritual  begins  we  need  not  define  ; 
we  shall  be  as  the  angels,  and  we  have  found  no  difficulty  in  believing 
that  these  pure  spirits  '*  excel  in  strength,"  nor  in  understanding 
Peter  when  he  says  that  angels  are  ''greater  in  power  and  might" 
Our  body  shall  be  "raised  in  power." 

Here,  too,  the  body  is  a  natural  or  soulish  body — a  body  fit  for  the  soul, 
for  the  lowest  faculties  of  our  mental  nature ;  but  according  to  the  apostle 
in  the  Corinthians,  it  is  to  be  raised  a  spiritual  body,  adapted  to  the 
noblest  portion  of  our  nature,  suitable  to  be  the  dwelling-place  and  the 
instrument  of  our  new-bom  grace-given  life.  This  body  at  present  is  no 
assistance  to  the  spirit  of  prayer  or  praise;  it  rather  hinders  than  helps 
us  in  spiritual  exercises.  Often  the  spirit  tmly  is  willing,  but  the  flesh 
is  weak.  We  sleep  when  we  ought  to  watch,  and  faint  when  we  should 
pursue.  Even  its  joys  as  well  as  its  sorrows  tend  to  distract  devotion : 
but  when  this  body  shall  be  transformed,  it  shall  be  a  body  suitable 
for  the  highest  aspirations  of  our  perfected  and  glorified  humanity — 
a  spiritual  body  like  unto  the  body  of  the  glory  of  Christ.  Here 
the  body  is  sinful,  its  members  have  been  instruments  of  unrighteous- 
ness. It  is  true  that  our  body  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost; 
but,  alas!  there  are  traces  about  it  of  the  time  when  it  was  a  den 
of  thieves.  The  spots  and  wrinkles  of  sin  are  not  yet  removed.  Its 
materialism  is  not  yet  so  refined  as  to  be  an  assistance  to  the  spirit ;  it 
gravitates  downwards,  and  it  has  a  bias  from  the  right  line ;  but  it 
awaits  the  last  change,  and  then  it  shall  be  perfectly  sinless,  as  alabaster 
white  and  pure,  upon  which  stain  of  sin  did  never  come ;  like  the 
newly  driven  snow,  immaculately  chaste.  "  As  we  have  borne  the  image 
of  the  earthy,  we  shall  also  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly." 

Being  sinless,  the  body  when  it  shall  be  raised  again  shall  be  painless. 
Who  shall  count  the  number  of  our  pains  while  in  this  present  house 
of  clay  ?  Truly  we  that  are  in  this  tabernacle  do  groan.  Does 
it  not  sometimes  appear  to  the  children  of  sickness  as  if  this  body 
were  fashioned  with  a  view  to  suffering ;  as  if  all  its  nerves,  sinews, 
veins,  pulses,  vessels,  and  valves,  were  parts  of  a  curious  instra- 
ment  upon  which  every  note  of  the  entire  gamut  of  pain  might 
be  produced?  Patience,  ye  who  linger  in  this  shatterea  tenement, 
a  house  not  made  with  hands  awaits  you.  Up  yonder  no  sorrow 
and  sighing  are  met  with;  the  chastising  rod  shall  fall  no  longer 
when  the  faultiness  is  altogether  removed.  As  the  new  body  will 
be  without  pain,  so  will  it  be  superior  to  weariness.  The  glory- 
body  will  not  yield  to  faintness,  nor  fail  through  languor.  Is  it  not 
implied  that  the  spiritual  body  does  not  need  to  sleep,  when  we 
read  that  they  serve  Ood  day  and  night  in  his  temple  ?  In  a  word,  the 
bodies  of  the  saiats,  like  the  body  of  Christ,  will  be  perfect ;  there  shall 
thing  lacking  and  nothing  faulty.    If  saints  die  in  the  feebleness 


THE  POWER  OF  CHRIST  ILLUSTRATED  BY  THE  RESURRECTION.         65 

of  age  they  shall  not  rise  thus  ;  or  if  they  have  lost  a  sense  or  a  limb 
or  are  halt  or  maimed,  they  shall  not  be  so  in  heaven,  for  as  to  body 
and  Bonl  "  they  are  without  fault  before  the  throne  of  God."  *'  We 
shall  be  like  him,"  is  true  of  all  the  saints,  and  hence  none  will  be 
otherwise  than  fair,  and  beautiftil,  and  perfect  The  righteous  shall  be 
like  Ohrist,  of  whom  it  is  still  true  that  net  a  bone  of  him  shall  be 
broken,  so  not  a  part  of  our  body  after  its  change  shall  be  bruised, 
battered,  or  otherwise  than  perfect. 

Put  all  together,  brethren,  and  what  a  stretch  it  is  from  this  vile 
body  to  the  glorious  body  which  shall  be !  yet  when  Christ  comes  this 
miracle  of  miracles  shall  be  wrought  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye.  Heap 
up  epithets  descriptive  of  the  vileness  of  this  body,  think  of  it  in  all  its 
weakness,  infirmify,  sin,  and  liability  to  death ;  then  admire  our  Lord's 
body  in  all  its  holiness,  happiness,  purity,  perfection,  and  immortality ; 
and  know  assuredly  that,  at  Christ's  coming,  this  change  shall  take 
place  upon  every  one  of  the  elect  of  God.  All  believers  shall  undergo 
this  marvellous  transformation  in  a  moment.  Behold  and  wonder  I 
Imagine  that  the  change  should  occur  to  you  now.  What  a  display  of 
power  I  My  imagination  is  not  able  to  give  you  a  picture  of  the  trans- 
formation ;  but  those  who  will  be  alive  and  remain  at  the  coming  of 
the  Son  of  God  will  undergo  it,  and  so  enter  gloiy  without  death. 
^For  this  corruptible  must  put  on  incorruption,  and  this  mortal 
must  put  on  immortality,"  ana  therefore  the  bodies  of  living  believers 
shall  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  pass  from  the  one  state  into  the  other  ^ 
they  shall  be  transformed  from  the  vile  to  the  glorious,  from  the  state 
of  humiliation  into  the  state  of  glory,  ])j  the  power  of  the  coming 
Saviour. 

The  miracle  is  amazing,  if  you  view  it  as  occurring  to  those  who  shall 
be  alive  when  Christ  comes.  Reflect,  however,  that  a  very  large  number 
of  the  saints  when  the  Lord  shall  appear  a  second  time  will  already  be  in 
their  graves.  Some  of  these  will  nave  been  buried  long  enough  to  have 
become  corrupt.  If  you  could  remove  the  mould  and  break  open  the 
coffin-lid,  what  would  you  find  but  foulness  and  putrefaction?  But 
those  mouldering  relics  are  the  body  of  the  saint's  humiliation,  and 
that  verybody  is  to  be  transformed  into  the  likeness  of  Christ's  glorious 
body.  Admire  the  miracle  as  you  survey  the  mighty  change !  Look 
down  into  the  loathsome  tomb,  and,  if  you  can  endure  it,  gaze  upon 
the  putrid  mass;  this,  even  this,  is  to  be  transformed  into  Christ's 
lUceness.  What  a  work  is  this !  And  what  a  Saviour  is  he  who  shall 
achieve  it !  Go  a  little  further.  Many  of  those  whom  Christ  will  thus 
raise  will  have  been  buried  so  long  that  all  trace  of  them  will  have 
disappeared  ;  they  will  have  melted  back  into  the  common  dust  of 
earth,  so  that  if  their  bones  were  searched  for  not  a  vestige  of  them 
could  be  found,  nor  could  the  keenest  searcher  after  human  remains 
detect  a  single  particle.  They  have  slept  in  quiet  through  long 
ages  in  their  lonely  graves,  till  they  have  become  absorbed  into  the  soil 
as  part  and  parcel  of.  mother  earth.  No,  there  is  not  a  bone,  nor  a 
piece  of  a  bone  left ;  their  bodies  are  as  much  one  with  earth  as  the 
drop  of  rain  which  fell  upon  the  wave  is  one  with  the  sea :  yet  shall  they 
be  raised.  The  trumpet  call  shall  fetch  them  back  from  the  dust  with 
which  they  have  mingled,  and  dust  to  dust,  bone  to  bone,  tYi<&  ^xi^Wco:) 


SG  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

shall  be  rebailded  and  then  refiEishioned.  -Does  jour  wonder  grow  ? 
does  not  yonr  faith  accept  with  joy  the  marvel,  and  yet  feel  it  to  be  a 
maryel  none  the  less  ? 

Son  of  man,  I  will  lead  thee  into  an  inner  chamber  more  full  of 
wonder  yet  There  are  many  thousands  of  Ood*s  people  to  whom  a 
qniet  slumber  in  the  grave  was  deni^;  they  were  cut  on  by  martyrdom, 
were  sawn  asunder,  or  cast  to  the  dogs.  Tens  of  thousands  of  the 
precioQs  bodies  of  the  saints  have  perished  by  fire,  their  limbs  have 
been  blown  in  clouds  of  smoke  to  the  four  winds  of  heaven,  and  even 
the  handful  of  ashes  which  remained  at  the  foot  of  the  stake  their 
relentless  persecutors  have  thrown  into  rivers  to  be  carried  to  the 
ocean,  and  divided  to  every  shore.  Some  of  the  children  of  the 
resurrection  were  devoured  by  wild  beasts  in  the  Roman  amphitheatres^ 
or  left  a  prey  to  kites  and  ravens  on  the  gibbet.  In  all  sorts  of  ways 
have  the  saints'  bodies  been  hacked  and  newn,  and,  as  a  consqaence, 
the  particles  of  those  bodies  have  no  doubt  been  absorbed  into  varions 
vegetable  growths,  and  having  been  eaten  by  animals  have  mingled  with 
the  flesh  of  beasts ;  but  what  of  that  ?  "  What  of  that  ?  "  say  you,  how 
can  these  bodies  be  refashioned  ?  By  what  possibility  can  the  selfsame 
bodies  be  raised  again  ?  I  answer  it  needs  a  miracle  to  make  any  of 
these  dry  bones  live,  and  a  miracle  being  granted,  impossibUitv 
vanishes.  He  who  formed  each  atom  from  nothing  can  gather  each 
particle  again  from  confusion.  The  omniscient  Lord  of  providence 
tracks  each  molecule  of  matter,  and  knows  its  position  and  history 
as  a  shepherd  knows  his  sheep ;  and  if  it  be  needful  to  constitute 
the  identity  of  the  body,  to  ;*egather  every  atom,  he  can  do  it.  It 
may  not,  however,  be  needful  at  all,  and  I  do  not  assert  that  it  will 
be,  for  there  may  be  a  true  identity  without  sameness  of  material; 
even  as  this  my  body  is  the  same  as  that  in  which  I  lived  twenty  years 
ago,  and  yet  in  all  probability  there  is  not  a  grain  of  the  same  matter  in 
it.  God  is  able  then  to  cause  that  the  same  body  which  on  earth  we 
wear  in  our  humiliation,  which  we  call  a  vile  body,  shall  be  fashioned 
like  unto  Christ's  body.  No  difliculties,  however  stern,  that  can  be  sug- 
gested from  science  or  physical  law,  shall  for  a  single  instant  stand  in 
the  way  of  the  accomplishment  of  this  transformation  by  Christ  the 
King.  What  marvels  rise  before  me !  indeed,  it  needs  faith,  and  we 
thank -God  we  have  it.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  has  for  ever  settled 
in  our  minds,  beyond  all  controversy,  the  resurrection  of  all  who  are  in 
him ;  *'  For  if  we  believe  that  Jesus  died  and  rose  again,  even  so  them 
also  which  sleep  in  Jesus  will  God  bring  with  him."  Still  it  is  a  marvel 
of  marvels,  a  miracle  which  needs  the  fulness  of  the  deity.  Of  whom 
but  God,  very  God  of  very  God,  could  it  be  said  that  he  shall  change  our 
bodies,  and  make  them  like  unto  his  glorious  body  ?  ^ 

I  know  how  feebly  I  have  spoken  upon  this  sublime  subject,  but  I  am 
not  altogether  regretful  of  that,  for  I  do  not  wish  to  fix  your  thoughts 
on  my  words  for  a  single  moment ;  I  only  desire  your  minds  to  grasp 
and  grapple  with  the  great  thought  of  the  power  of  Christ,  by  which  he 
shall  raise  and  change  the  bodies  of  the  saints. 

II.  We  will  now  pass  on.  Here  is  the  point  we  aim  at.  Consider,  in 
the  second  place,  that  this  power  which  is  to  raise  the  dead  m 

RESIDENT  IN  ChBIBT  AT  THIS  MOMENT. 


THE  FOWEB  OF  GHBIST  ILLUBiaATED  BY  THE  SSSUBBEGTION.         67 

So  saith  the  text^ ''  according  to  the  working  whereby  he  is  able  to 
subdue  all  things  onto  himself."  It  is  not  some  new  power  which 
Christ  will  take  to  himself  in  the  latter  days  and  then  for  the  first  time 
display,  but  the  power  which  will  arouse  the  dead  is  the  same  power 
which  is  in  him  at  this  moment,  which  is  going  forth  from  him  at  this 
instant  in' the  midst  of  his  church  and  among  tiie  sons  of  men.  I  call 
joor  attention  to  this,  and  invite  yon  to  follow  the  track  of  the  text. 

First  notice  that  all  the  power  by  which  the  last  transformation  will  be 
wrought  is  ascribed  to  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  now  as  the  Saviour.  '*  We 
look  for  the  Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus."  When  Christ  raises  the  dead  it  will 
be  as  a  Saviour,  and  it  is  precisely  in  that  capacity  that  we  need  the  exercise 
of  his  power  at  this  moment.  Fix  this,  my  brethren,  in  your  hearts ;  we 
are  seeking  the  salvation  of  men,  and  we  are  not  seeking  a  hopeless  thing, 
for  Jesus  Christ  is  able  as  a  Saviour,  to  subdue  all  things,  to  himself;  so 
the  text  expressly  tells  us.  It  doth  not  merely  say  that  as  a  raiser  of  the 
dead  he  is  able  to  subdue  aU  things,  but  as  the  Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  His  titles  are  expressly  given,  he  is  set  forth  to  us  as  the 
Lord,  the  Saviour,  the  Anointed,  and 'in  that  capacity  is  said  to  be 
able  to  subdue  all  things  to  himself.  Happy  tidings  for  us !  My 
brethren,  how  large  may  our  prayers  be  for  the  conversion  of  the  sons 
of  men,  how  great  our  expectations,  how  confident  our  efforts !  Nothing 
is  too  hard  for  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  nothing  in  the  way  of  saving 
work  is  beyond  his  power.  If  as  a  Saviour  he  wakes  the  dead  in  the 
years  to  come,  he  can  quicken  the  spiritually  dead  even  now.  These 
crowds  of  dead  souls  around  us  in  this  area  and  in  these  galleries, 
he  can  awaken  by  his  quickening  voice  and  living  Spirit.  The  resur- 
rection is  to  be  according  to  the  working  of  his  mighty  power,  and  that 
same  energy  is  in  operation  now.  In  its  Mness  the  power  dwells  in  him, 
let  us  stir  him  up,  let  us  cry  unto  him  mightily,  and  give  him  no  rest  till 
he  put  forth  that  sel&ame  power  now.  Thmk  not,  my  brethren,  that  this 
would  be  extraordinary  and  unusual.  Your  own  conversion,  if  you  have 
truly  been  raised  from  your  spiritual  death,  was  by  the  same  power 
that  we  desire  to  see  exerted  upon  others.  Your  own  regeneration 
was  indeed  as  remarkable  an  instance  of  divine  power  as  the  resur- 
rection itself  shall  be.  Ay,  and  I  venture  to  say  it,  your  spiritual  life 
this  very  day  or  any  day  you  choose  to  mention,  is  in  itself  a  display 
of  the  same  working  wmch  shall  transform  this  vile  body  into  its 
glorious  condition.  The  power  of  the  resurrection  is  being  put  forth 
to-day,  it  is  pulsing  through  the  quickened  portion  of  this  audience,  it 
is  heaving  with  life  each  b^om  that  beats  with  love  to  God,  it  is  pre- 
serving the  life-courses  in  the  souls  of  all  the  spiritual,  so  that  they  go 
not  back  to  their  former  death  in  sin.  The  power  which  will  work  the 
resurrection  will  be  wonderM,  but  it  will  be  no  new  thing.  It  is  every- 
where to  be  beheld  in  operation  in  the  church  of  God  at  this  very  moment 
by  those  who  have  eyes  to  see  it ;  and  herein  I  join  with  the  apostle  in 
his  prayer  "  that  the  God  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Clirist,  the  Father  of  glory, 
may  give  unto  you  the  spirit  of  wisdom  and  revelation  in  the  knowledge 
of  him :  the  eyes  of  your  understanding  being  enlightened  ;  that  ye 
may  know  what  is  the  hope  of  his  calling,  and  what  the  riches  of  the 
glory  of  his  inheritance  in  the  saints,  and  what  is  the  exceeding  great- 
ness of  his  power  to  us- ward  who  believe,  according  to  the  workiug  of 


68  METROPOLITAK  TABERNAGLB  FULFIT. 

his  mighty  power,  which  he  wrought  in  Christ,  when  he  raised  him 
from  the  dead,  and  set  him  at  his  own  right  hand  in  the  heavenly  places^ 
far  above  all  principality,  and  power,  and  might,  and  dominion,  and  every 
name  that  is  named,  not  only  in  this  world,  bnt  also  in  that,  which  is  to 
come :  and  hath  put  all  things  under  his  feet,  and  gave  him  to  be  the 
head  over  all  things  to  the  church,  which  is  his  body,  the  fulness  of  him 
:  ttiat  filleth  all  in  all.'' 

Note  next  that  the  terms  of  our  text  imply  that  oppontim  may  Im 
expected  to  this  power^  but  that  all  resistance  will  be  overcome.  That 
word  *^  subdue"  supposes  a  force  to  be  conquered  and  brought  into  sab- 
jeetion.  '*  He  is  aole  even  to  subdue  all  things  unto  himself."  Herein 
is  a  great  wonder  I  There  will  be  no  opposition  to  the  resurrection.  Hie 
trumpet  sound  shall  bring  the  dead  from  their  graves,  and  no  particle  shall 
disobey  the  summons  ;  but  to  spiritual  resurrection  there  is  resistance — 
resistance  which  only  omnipotence  can  vanquish.  In  the  conversion  of 
sinners  natural  depravity  is  an  opposing  forces  for  men  are  set  upon  their 
sins,  and  love  not  the  things  of  Ood,  neither  will  they  hearken  to  the 
voice  of  mercy.  My  brethren,  to  remove  all  our  fears  concerning  our 
Lord's  ability  to  save,  the  word  is  here  used,  "  He  is  able,"  not  omy  to 
raise  all  things  from  the  dead,  but  *'  to  subdue  all  things  to  himsell'^ 
Here  again  I  would  bid  you  take  the  encouragement  the  text  presents 
you.  If  there  be  opposition  to  the  gospel,  he  is  able  to  subdue  it.  If 
in  one  man  there  is  a  prejudice,  if  in  another  man  the  heart  is  dark^ied 
with  error,  if  one  man  hates  the  very  name  of  Jesus,  if  another  is  so 
wedded  to  his  sins  that  he  cannot  part  from  them,  if  opposition  has 
assumed  in  some  a  very  determined  cnaracter,  does  not  the  text  meet 
every  ease  ?  '*  He  is  able  to  subdue  all  things,*'  to  conquer  them,  to 
break  down  the  barriers  that  interpose  to  prevent  the  display  of  his  power, 
and  to  make  those  very  barriers  the  means  of  setting  forth  that  power 
the  more  gloriously.  "  He  is  able  even  to  subdue  dl  things."  O  take 
this  to  the  mercy-seat,  ^ou  who  will  be  seeking  the  souls  of  men  this 
month  I  Take  it  to  him  and  plead  this  word  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in 
simple,  childlike  faith.  When  there  is  a  difficulty  you  cannot  overcome,, 
take  it  to  him,  for  he  is  "  able  to  subdue." 

Note  next,  that  the  language  of  our  text  includes  all  supposable  casesi. 
He  is  able  to  "  subdue  all  things  unto  himself,"  not  here  and  there  one, 
but  **  all  things."  Brethren,  there  \s  no  man  in  this  world  so  fidlen, 
debased,  depraved,  and  wilfully  wicked,  that  Jesus  cannot  save  him — 
not  even  among  those  who  live  beyond  the  reach  of  ordinary  ministry* 
He  can  bring  the  heathen  to  the  gospel,  or  the  gospel  to  them.  The 
wheels  of  providence  can  be  so  arranged  that  salvation  shall  be  brought 
to  the  outcasts ;  even  war,  famine,  and  plague,  may  become  messengers 
for  Christ,  for  he,  too,  rides  upon  the  wings  of  the  wind.  There  lived 
some  few  years  ago  in  Perugia,  in  Italy,  a  man  of  the  loosest  morals 
and  the  worst  conceivable  ^sposition.  He  had  given  up  all  religion, 
he  loathed  God,  and  had  arrived  at  such  a  desperate  state  of  mind  that 
he  had  conceived  an  affection  for  the  devil,  and  endeavoured  to  worship 
the  evil  one.  Imagining  Satan  to  be  the  image  and  embodiment  of  all 
rebellion,  free-thinking,  and  lawlessness,  he  deified  him  in  his  own  mind^ 
and  desired  nothing  better  than  to  be  a  devil  himself.  On  one  occasion,. 
when  a  Protestant  missionary  had  been  in  Perugia  preaching,  a  priest 


THB  FOWEB  OF  CHBISr  ILLUSTBATSD  BY  THE  BESUBBBOTION.        69 

^happened  to  saj  in  this  man's  hearing,  ihat  there  were  Protestants  in 
Peragia,  the  city  was  being  defiled  by  heretics.  ''  And  who  do  you  think 
Protestants  are  ? ''  said  he.  **  They  are  men  who  have  renonnced 
illfarist  and  worship  the  devil."  A  gross  and  outrageous  lie  was  this, 
but  it  answered  far  other  ends  than  its  author  meant.  The  man  hearing 
this,  thon^ht,  **  Oh,  then,  I  will  go  and  meet  with  them,  for  I  am  much 
of  their  nund;  "  and  away  he  went  to  the  Protestant  meeting,  in  the 
hope  of  finding  an  assembly  who  propagated  lawlessness  and  worshipped 
the  deylL  He  there  heard  the  gospel,  and  was  saved.  Behold  in  this 
and  in  ten  thousand  cases  equally  remarkable,  the  ability  of  our  King 
to  snbdne  all  things  unto  himself.  How  can  any  man  whom  God  ordains 
to  save  escape  from  that  eternal  love  which  is  as  omnipresent  as  the 
deity  itself?  ''He  is  able  to  subdue  all  things  to  himself."  If  his 
sword  cannot  reach  the  far  o£f  ones  his  arrows  can,  and  even  at  this 
hour  they  are  sharp  in  his  enemy's  hearts.  No  boastful  Goliath  can 
stand  before  our  David ;  though  the  weapon  which  he  uses  to-day  be  but 
a  stone  from  the  brook,  yet  shall  tJie  Philistine  be  subdued,  if  there 
dionld  be  in  this  place  a  !Ueist,  an  Atheist^  a  Romanist,  or  even  a  lover  of 
the  devil,  if  he  be  but  a  man,  mercy  yet  can  come  to  him.  Jesus  Christ 
is  able  to  subdue  him  unto  himselx  None  have  gone  too  far,  and 
none  are  too  hardened.  While  the  Christ  lives  in  heaven  we  need 
never  despair  of  any  that  are  still  in  this  mortal  life — *^  He  is  able  to 
sobdue  all  things  unto  hunself." 

Yon  will  observe,  in  the  text  that  nolhing  is  said  concerning  the  unfit- 
ness of  the  means.  My  fears  often  are  lest  souls  should  not  be  saved 
hj  our  instrumentalitv  because  of  faultiness  in  us;  we  fear  lest  we 
should  not  be  prayerfol  enough  or  energetic  or  earnest  enough;  or  that 
it  should  be  said,  ''  He  could  not  do  many  mighty  works  there  because 
of  their  unbelief."  But  the  text  seems  to  obliterate  man  altogether — 
^ffeiB  able  to  subdue  all  things  unto  himself" — that  is  to  say,  Jesus 
does  it,  Jesus  can  do  it,  will  do  it  all.  By  the  feeblest  means  he  can 
work  mightily,  can  take  hold  of  us,  unfit  as  we  are  for  service,  and  make 
us  fit,  can  grasp  us  in  our  folly  and  teach  us  wisdom,  take  us  in  our 
weakness  and  make  us  strong.  My  brethren,  if  we  had  to  find  resources 
for  ourselves,  and  to  rely  upon  ourselves,  our  enterprise  might  well  be 
renounced,  but  since  he  is  able,  we  will  cast  the  burden  of  this  work  on 
him,  and  go  to  him  in  believing  prayer,  asking  him  to  work  mightily 
through  ns  to  the  praise  of  his  glory,  for  ''  He  is  able  even  to  subdue 
aU  things  unto  himself.^ 

Note  that  the  ability  is  said  in  the  text  to  be  present  with  the  Saviour 
now,  I  have  already  pointed  that  one  to  you,  but  I  refer  to  it  again.  The 
resurrection  is  a  matter  of  the  future,  but  the  working  which  shall  accom- 
plish the  resurrection  is  a  matter  of  the  present.  "According  to  the 
working  whereby  he  is  able  even  to  subdue  all  things  unto  himself,"  Jesus 
is  as  strong  now  as  he  ever  will  be,  for  he  changes  not.  At  this  moment 
he  is  as  able  to  convert  souls  as  at  the  period  of  the  brightest  revival, 
or  at  Pentecost  itself.  There  are  no  ebbs  and  flows  with  Christ's  power. 
Omnipotence  is  in  the  hand  that  once  was  pierced,  permanently 
abiding  there.  Oh,  if  we  could  but  rouse  it ;  if  we  could  but  bring  the 
Captain  of  the  host  to  the  field  again,  to  fight  for  his  church,  to  work 
by  his  servants!    What  marvels  should  we  see,  for  he  is  able.    We  are 


70  METROPOLITAH  TABBBNAGLB  FOLPIT. 

not  straitened  in  him,  we  are  straitened  in  ourselyeB  if  straitened 
at  all. 

Once  more,  for  yonr  comfort  be  it  remembered  that  the  feet  of  there 
having  been,  as  it  were,  a  considerable  time  in  which  few  have  been 
converted  to  Christ,  is  no  proof  that  his  power  is  slackening  ;  for  it  is 
well  known  to  yon  that  very  few  have  as  yet  been  raised  from  the  dead, 
only  here  and  there  one  like  Lazarus  and  the  young  man  at  the  gates  of 
Nain,  but  you  do  not  therefore  doubt  the  Lord's  power  to  raise  the 
dead.    Though  he  tarrieth  we  do  not  mistrust  his  power  to  fulfil  his 
promise  in  due  time.    Now  the  power  which  is  restrained,  as  it  were,  so 
that  it  does  not  work  the  resurrection  yet,  is  the  same  which  may  haye 
been  restrained  in  the  Christian  church  for  awhile,  but  which  will  be  as 
surely  put  forth  ere  long  in  conversion  as  it  will  be  in  the  end  of  time 
to  accomplish  the  resurrection.    Let  us  cry  unto  our  Lord,  for  he  has 
but  to  will  it  and  thousands  of  sinners  will  be  saved  ;  let  us  lift  up 
our  hearts  to  him  who  has  but  to  speak  the  word  and  whole  nations 
shall  be  bom  unto  him.    The  resurrection  will  not  be  a  work  occu- 
pying centuries,  it  will  be  accomplished  at  once;  and  so  it  may  be  in 
this  house  of  prayer,  and  throughout  London,  and  throughout  the 
world,  Christ  will  do  a  great  and  speedy  %vork  to  the  amazement  of  all 
beholders.    He  will  send  forth  the  rod  of  his  strength  out  of  Zion,  and 
rule  in  the  midst  of  his  enemies.    He  will  unmask  his  batteries,  he  will 
spring  his  mines,  he  will  advance  his  outworks,  he  will  subdue  the  city 
of  his  adversaries,  and  ride  victoriously  through  the  Bozrah  of  his  foes. 
Who  shall  stay  his  hand?     Who  shall  say  unto  him,  ^'What  doest 
thou  ? " 

I  wish  we  had  time  to  work  out  the  parallel  which  our  text  suggests, 
between  the  resurrection  and  the  subduing  of  all  things.  The  resur> 
rection  will  be  worked  by  the  divine  power,  and  the  subduing  of  sinners 
is  a  precisely  similar  instance  of  salvation.  '  All  men  are  dead  in  sin, 
but  he  can  raise  them.  Many  of  them  are  corrupt  with  vice,  but  he 
can  transform  them.  Some  of  them  are,  as  it  were,  lost  to  all  hope, 
like  the  dead  body  scattered  to  the  winds,  desperate  cases  for  whom 
even  pity  seems  to  waste  her  sighs;  but  he  who  raises  the  dead  of  all 
sorts,  with  a  word  can  raise  sinners  of  all  sorts  by  the  selfsame  power. 
And  as  the  dead  when  raised  are  made  like  to  Christ,  so  the  vricked 
when  converted  are  made  like  to  Jesus  too.  Brilliant  examples  of 
virtue  shall  be  found  in  those  who  were  terrible  instances  of  vice ;  the 
most  depraved  and  dissolute  shall  become  the  most  devout  and  earnest 
From  the  vile  body  to  the  glory-body  what  a  leap,  and  from  the  sinner 
damnable  in  lust  to  the  saint  bright  with  the  radiance  of  sanctity, 
what  a  space!  The  leap  seems  very  far,  but  omnipotence  can  bridge 
the  chasm.  The  Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  able  to  do  it;  he  is 
able  to  do  it  in  ten  thousand  thousand  cases,  able  to  do  it  at  this  yery 
moment.  My  anxious  desire  is  to  engrave  this  one  thought  upon  your 
hearts,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  yea,  to  write  it  on  the  palms  of  those 
hands  with  which  you  are  about  to  serve  the  Lord,  leam  it  and  forget 
it  not — almighty  power  lies  with  Jesus  to  achieve  the  purpose  upon 
which  our  heart  is  set,  namely,  the  conversion  of  many  unto 
himself. 

III.  I  said  I  would  ask  you  to  consider,  in  the  third  place,  ths  wobk 


THE  POWSB  OF  OHBIST  ILLUSTRATED  BY  THE  BESUBBECTION.        71 

'WHICH  WE  DESiBB  TO  SEE  AOCOMFUSHED.    I  Will  not  detain  jon  how- 
-ever,  with  that  consideration  further  than  this. 

Brethren,  we  long  to  see  the  Sayionr  snbdning  sonls  unlo  himself. 
Not  to  our  way  of  thinking,  not  to  oar  chnrch,  not  to  the  honour  of  onr 
powers  of  persuasion,  but  *'  vnto  himself  J*  *'  He  is  able  even  to  subdue 
all  things  unto  himself."  0  sinner,  how  I  wish  thou  wert  subdued  to 
JesuB,  to  kiss  those  dear  feet  that  were  nailed  for  thee,  to  love  in  life 
him  who  loyed  thee  to  the  death.  Ah  I  soul,  it  were  a  blessed  subjection 
fcft  thee.  Never  subject  of  earthlj  monarch  so  happy  in  his  king  as 
thou  wouldst  be.  Ood  is  our  witness,  we  who  preach  the  gospel,  we  do 
not  want  to  subdue  you  to  ourselves,  as  though  we  would  rule  you  and 
be  lords  over  your  spirits.  It  is  to  Jesus,  to  Jesus  only  that  we  would 
Mve  you  subdued*  0  that  you  desired  this  subjection,  it  would  be 
Uberfy,  and  peace,  and  joy  to  you ! 

Notice  that  this  subjection  is  eminently  to  be  desired,  since  it  con- 
sists in  transformation.  Oatoh  the  thought  of  the  text.  He  transforms 
the  vile  body  into  his  glorious  body,  and  this  is  a  part  of  the  subjection 
of  all  things  unto  himself.  But  do  you  call  that  subjection  ?  Is  it 
not  a  subjection  to  be  longed  after  with  an  insatiable  desire,  to  be  so 
subdued  to  Christ  that  I,  a  poor,  vile  sinner,  may  become  like  him, 
holy,  harmless,  undefiled  ?  This  is  the  subjection  that  we  wish  for  you, 
O  imconverted  ones.  We  trust  we  have  felt  it  ourselves,  we  pray  you 
may  feel  it  too.  He  is  able  to  give  it  to  you.  Ask  it  of  him  at  once. 
Now  breathe  the  prayer,  now  believe  that  the  Saviour  can  work  the 
transformation  even  in  you,  in  vou  at  this  veiy  moment  And,  0  miy 
brethren  in  the  faith,  have  faith  for  sinners  now.  While  they  are  plead- 
ing plead  for  them  that  this  subjection  which  is  an  uplifting,  this  con- 
quering which  is  a  liberating,  may  be  accomplished  in  them. 

For,  remember  again,  that  to  be  subjected  to  Christ  is,  according  to 
our  text,  to  be  fitt^  for  heaven.  He  will  change  our  vile  body  and 
make  it  like  the  body  of  his  gloiy.  The  body  of  the  glory  is  a  body 
fitted  for  glory,  a  body  which  participates  in  glory.  The  Lord  Jesus 
€an  make  you,  sinner,  though  now  fitted  for  heU,  fitted  for  heaven, 
.fitted  for  gloiy,  and  breathe  into  jou  now  an  anticipation  of  that  glory, 
in  the  joy  and  peace  of  mind  which  his  pardon  will  bring  to  you.  It 
must  be  a  very  sad  thing  to  be  a  soldier  under  any  circumstances;  to 
liave  to  cut  and  hack  and  kill  and  subdue,  even  in  a  righteous  cause,  is 
cruel  work ;  but  to  be  a  soldier  of  King  Jesus  is  an  honour  and  a  joy. 
The  service  of  Jesus  is  a  grand  service.  Brethren,  we  have  been 
•earnestly  seeking  to  capture  some  hearts  that  are  here  present,  to 
Cloture  them  for  Jesus.  It  has  been  a  long  and  weary  siege  up  till  this 
hour.  We  have  summoned  them  to  surrender,  and  opened  fire  upon  them 
with  the  gospel,  but  as  yet  in  vain.  I  have  striven  to  throw  a  few  live 
shells  into  the  very  heart  of  their  city,  in  the  form  of  warning  and  threat- 
ening and  exhortation.  I  know  there  have  been  explosions  in  the 
hearts  of  some  of  you,  which  have  done  your  sins  some  damage,  killed 
some  of  the  little  ones  that  would  have  ^own  up  to  greater  iniquity. 
You  have  been  carefully  blockaded  b^  providence  and  grace.  Your  hearts 
have  found  no  provision  for  joy  in  sin,  no  helps  to  peace  in  unrighteous- 
ness. How  I  wish  I  could  starve  yoU  out  until  you  would  yield  to 
my  Lord,  the  Crown  Prince,  who  again  to-day  demands  that  you  yield 


72  METBOPOLITAN  TABERNACLB  PULPIT. 

to  him.  It  is  dreadful  to  compel  a  city  to  open  its  gates  nnwillingly  to 
let  an  enemy  come  in  ;  for  however  gentle  be  the  enemy  his  face  is  an 
nnwelcome  sight  to  the  yanonished.  Bnt  oh !  how  I  wish  I  could  burst 
open  the  gates  of  a  sinner's  heart  to-day,  for  the  Prince  Emmanuel  to 
come  in.  He  who  is  at  your  gates  is  not  an  alien  monarch,  he  is  your 
rightful  prince,  he  is  your  friend  and  lover.  It  will  not  be  a  strange 
face  that  you  will  see,  when  Jesus  comes  to  reign  in  you.  When  the 
King  in  his  beauty  wins  your  soul,  you  will  think  yourselves  a  thousand 
fools  that  you  did  not  receive  him  before.  Instead  of  fearing  that  he 
will  ransack  your  soul,  you  will  open  all  its  doors  and  invite  him  to 
search  each  room.  You  will  cry,  '^Take  all,  thou  blessed  monarch,  it 
shall  be  most  mine  when  it  is  thine.  Take  all,  and  reign  and  rule." 
I  propound  terms  of  capitulation  to  you,  0  sinner.  They  are  but 
these :  yield  up  yourself  to  Christ,  give  up  your  works  and  ways,  both 
good  and  bad,  and  trust  in  him  to  save  you,  and  be  his  servant  hence- 
forth and  for  ever.  While  I  thus  invite  you,  I  trust  he  will  speak 
through  me  to  you  and  win  you  to  himself.  I  shall  not  plead  in  vain, 
the  word  shall  not  fall  to  the  ground.  I  fall  back  upon  the  delightful 
consolation  of  our  text,  '^  He  is  able  to  subdue  all  things  unto  himself!" 
May  he  prove  his  power  this  morning.    Amen  and  Amen. 


Portions  of  Soeipture  read  before  Sermon — Philippians  iii. 


Messrs.  Fassmore  Aim  Alabaster,  18,  Paternoster  Row,  beg  to  inform  the 
sermon  readers  that  the  second  volume  of  Mr.  Spdrobok's  great  Work  upox 
THE  PjftALMS  is  receiving  the  most  favourable  notice  of  the  reviewers.  The  firrt 
edition  of  Vol.  I.  is  nearly  exhausted,  and  a  second  edition  will  be  issued.  The  large 
volumes,  unusually  crowded  with  matter,  are  published  at  Ss.  each,  a  price  far  below 
tibe  usual  charge  for  such  books.  The  following  extract  is  from  the  Baptist 
Magazine : — 

**  It  seemn  to  ns  that  Mr.  Spni^^n  has  net  himself  not  only  to  the  devout  and  scholarly  ex- 
position of  the  Psalms,  but  also  to  the  rendering  of  his  work  positively  ftMcinating  bv  its  many 

charms In  the  possession  of  this  book  the  young  will  find  themselves  at  college,  wita 

the  learned  and  the  gt)od  of  all  ages  for  their  tutors;  and  maturer  Christians  will  have  the  largest 
spiritual  knowledge  increased,  and  its  richest  experiences  strengthoied." 


^uj^lilan;  ifab^made 


COMPASSION  FOR  SOULS. 


DmjyERED  ON  Lokd'8-day  Morning,  February  5th,  1871,  by 

C.  H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THl?  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


*^  She  went,  and  sat  her  down  over  against  him  a  good  way  off,  as  it  were  a  bow- 
shot ;  for  she  naid,  Lot  me  not  see  the  death  of  tho  child.  And  she  sat  over  against 
hin»,  and  lift  up  her  voice,  and  wept." — Genesis  xxi.  16. 

Briefly  let  us  rehearse  the  circumstances.  The  child  Isaac  was,  ac- 
cording to  God's  word,  to  be  the  heir  of  Abraham.  Ishmael,  the  elder 
son  of  Abraham,  by  the  bondwoman  Hagar,  resided  at  home  with  his 
fether  till  he  was  about  eighteen  years  of  a2:e ;  but  when  he  began  to  mock 
and  scoff  at  the  younger  child  whom  God  had  ordained  to  be  the  heir, 
it  became  needful  that  he  and  his  mother  should  be  sent  away  from 
Abraham's  encampment.  It  might  have  seemed  unkind  and  heartless 
to  have  sent  them  forth,  but  God  having  arranged  to  provide  for  them 
sent  a  divine  command  which  at  once  rendered  their  expulsion  neces- 
sary, and  certified  its  success.  We  may  rest  assured  that  whatever  God 
commands  he  will  be  quite  certain  to  justify.  He  knew  it  would  be  no 
cruelty  to  Hagar  or  Ishmael  to  be  driven  into  independence,  and  he 
gave  a  promise  which  secured  them  everything  which  they  desired. 
**  Also  of  the  son  of  the  bondwoman  will  I  make  a  great  nation  ;*'  and 
again,  "  I  have  blessed  him,  and  will  make  him  fruitful,  and  will  mul- 
tiply him  exceedingly ;  twelve  princes  shall  he  beget,  and  I  will  make 
him  a  great  nation."  Had  they  both  been  able  to  go  forth  from 
Abraham's  tent  in  faith  they  might  have  trodden  the  desert  with  a  joyous 
footstep,  fully  assured  that  he  who  bade  them  go,  and  he  who  promised 
that  he  would  bless  them,  would  be  certain  to  provide  all  things  needful 
for  them.  Early  in  the  morning  they  were  sent  forth  on  their  journey, 
>vith  as  much  provision  as  they  could  carry,  and  probably  they  intended  to 
make  their  way  to  Eg}'pt,  from  which  Hagar  had  come.  They  may  have 
lost  their  way;  at  any  rate,  they  are  spoken  of  as  wandering.  Their  store 
of  food  became  exhausted,  the  water  in  the  skin  bottle  was  all  spent;  both 
of  them  felt  the  fatigue  of  the  wilderness,  and  the  heat  of  the  pitiless  sand ; 
they  were  both  faint  and  weary,  and  the  younger  utterly  failed.  As  long 
as  the  mother  could  sustain  the  tottering,  fainting  footsteps  of  her  boy, 
she  did  so ;  when  she  could  do  so  no  longer,  he  swooned  with  weakness, 
and  she  laid  him  down  beneath  the  slight  shade  of  the  desert  tamarisk^ 
No.  974. 


74  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

that  he  might  be  as  far  as  possible  screened  from  the  excessive  heat 
of  the  sun.  Looking  into  his  face  and  seeing  the  pallor  of  coming 
death  gathering  npon  it,  knowing  her  inability  to  do  anything  what- 
ever to  revive  him,  or  even  to  preserve  his  life,  she  could  not  bear  to 
sit  and  gaze  upon  his  face,  but  withdrew  just  far  enough  to  be  able 
still  to  watch  with  all  a  mother's  care.  She  sat  down  in  the  brokenness 
of  her  spirit,  her  tears  gushed  forth  in  torrents,  and  heartrending  cries 
of  agony  startled  the  rocks  around.  It  was  needful  that  the  high  spirit 
of  the  mother  and  her  son  should  be  broken  down  before  they  received 
prosperity:  the  mother  had  been  on  a  former  occasion  graciously 
humbled  by  being  placed  in  much  the  same  condition,  but  she  had 
probably  relapsed  into  a  haughty  spirit,  and  had  encouraged  her  boy  in 
his  insolence  to  Sarah's  son,  and  therefore  she  must  be  chastened  yet 
again ;  and  it  was  equally  needful  that  the  hifrh-spirited  lad  should  for 
a  little  bear  the  yoke  in  his  youth,  and  that  he  wno  wouJd  grow  up  to 
be  the  wild  man,  the  father  of  the  unconquerable  Arab,  should  feel  the 
power  of  God  ere  he  received  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  given  to  him 
in  answer  to  Abraham's  prayer.  If  I  read  the  text  aright,  while  the 
mother  was  thus  weeping,  the  child,  almost  lost  to  all  around,  was  never- 
theless conscious  enough  of  his  own  helpless  condition,  and  sufficiently 
mindful  of  his  father's  God  to  cry  in  his  soul  to  heaven  for  help ;  and 
the  Lord  heard  not  so  much  the  mother's  weeping  (for  the  feebleness  of 
her  faith,  which  ought  to  have  been  stronger  in  memory  of  a  former 
deliverance,  hindered  her  prayer),  but  the  silent,  unuttered  prayers  of 
the  fainting  lad  went  up  into  the  ears  of  Elohim,  and  the  angel  of  Elohim 
appeared,  and  pointed  to  the  well.  The  child  received  the  needed  draught 
of  water,  was  soon  restored,  and  in  him  and  his  posterity  the  promise  of 
God  received  and  continues  to  receive  a  large  fulfilment.  I  am  not 
about  to  speak  upon  that  narrative  except  as  it  serves  me  with  an 
illustration  for  the  subject  which  I  would  now  press  upon  you. 

Behold  the  compassion  of  a  mother  for  her  child  expiring  with  thirst, 
and  remember  that  such  a  compassion  ought  all  Christians  to  feel 
towards  souls  that  are  perishing  for  lack  of  Christ,  perishing  eternally, 
perishing  without  hope  of  salvation.  If  the  mother  lifted  up  her  voice 
and  wept,  so  also  should  we;  and  if  the  contemplation  of  her  dying 
child  was  all  too  painful  for  her,  so  may  the  contemplation  of  the 
wrath  to  come,  which  is  to  pass  upon  every  soul  that  dies  impenitent, 
become  too  painful  for  us,  but  yet  at  the  same  time  it  should  stimulate 
us  to  earnest  prayer  and  ardent  effort  for  the  salvation  of  our  fellow 
men. 

I  Hliall  speak,  this  morning,  upon  impassion  for  souls,  fJie  reasons 
which  justify  it,  the  sujhi  it  dre-ads,  tlie  temptation  it  must  fight  against^ 
the  paths  it  should  pursue,  the  encouragement  it  may  receive. 

I.  Compassion  for  souls — the  reasons  which  justify  it,  nay, 

COMPEL  IT. 

It  scarce  needs  that  I  do  more  than  jehearse  in  bare  outline  the 
reasons  why  we  should  tenderly  compassionate  the  perishing  sons  of 
men.  For  first,  observe,  tlie  dreadful  nature  of  the  calamity  ichich  toUl 
overwhelm  them.  Calamities  occurring  to  our  fellow  men  naturally 
awaken  in  us  a  feeling  of  commiseration;  but  what  calamity  under 
heaven  can  be  equal  to  the  ruin  of  a  soul  ?     What  misery  can  bo  equal 


COMPASSION  FOR  SOULS.  75 

to  that  of  a  man  cast  away  from  God,  and  subject  to  his  wrath  world 
without  end  ?     To-day  your  hearts  are  moved  as  you  hear  the  harrowing 
details  of  war.    They  have  been  dreadful  indeed ;  houses  burnt,  happy 
families  driven  as  vagabonds  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  domestic  circles 
and  quiet  households  broken  up,  men  wounded,  mangled,  massacred  by 
thousands,  and  starved,  I  was  about  to  say,  by  millions;  but  the  miseries 
of  war,  if  they  were  confined  to  this  world  alone,  were  nothing  compared 
with  the  enormous  catastrophe  of  tens  of  thousands  of  spirits  accursed 
by  sin,  and  driven  by  justice  into  the  place  where  their  worm  dieth  not, 
and  their  fire  is  not  quenched.    The  edge  of  the  sword  grows  blunt  at 
last,  the  flame  of  war  dies  out  for  want  of  fuel,  but,  lo !  I  see  before  me  a 
sword  which  is  never  quiet,  a  fire  unquenchable.    Alas  !  that  the  souls  of 
men  should  fall  beneath  the  infinite  ire  of  justice.    All  your  hearts  have 
been  moved  of  late  with  the  thought  of  famine,  iamine  in  a  great  city.  The 
dogs  of  war,  and  this  the  fiercest  mastiff  of  them  all,  have  laid  hold  upon 
the  fair  throat  of  the  beautiful  city  which  thought  to  sit  as  a  lady  for  ever 
and  see  no  sorrow ;  you  are  hastening  with  your  gifts,  if  possible  to  remove 
her  urgent  want  and  to  avert  her  starvation ;  but  what  is  a  famine  of  bread 
compared  with  that  famine  of  the  soul  which  our  Lord  describes  when 
he  represents  it  as  pleading  in  vain  for  a  drop  of  water  to  cool  its 
ton^e  tormented  in  the  flame  ?     To  be  without  bread  for  the  body  is 
terrible,  but  to  be  without  the  bread  of  life  eternal,  none  of  us  can  tell 
the  weight  of  horror  which  lies  there !  When  Robert  Hall  in  one  of  the 
grand  flights  of  his  eloquence  pictured  the  funeral  of  a  lost  soul,  he 
made  the  sun  to  veil  his  light,  and  the  moon  her  brightness ;   he 
covered  the  ocean  with  mourning  and  the  heavens  with  sackcloth,  and 
declared  that  if  the  whole  fabric  of  nature  could  become  animated  and 
vocal,  it  would  not  be  possible  for  her  to  utter  a  groan  too  deep,  or  a 
cry  too  piercing  to  express  the  magnitude  and  extent  of  the  catastrophe. 
Time  is  not  long  enough  for  the  sore  lamentation  which  should  attend 
the  obsequies  of  a  lost  sonl.     Eternity  must  be  charged  with  that 
boundless  woe,  and  must  utter  it  in  weeping  and  wailing  and  gnashing 
of  teeth.     Not  the  toncues  of  prophets,  nor  of  seraphs,  could  set  forth 
all  the  sorrow  of  what  it  is  to  be  condemned  from  the  mouth  of  mercy, 
damned  by  the  Saviour  who  died  to  save,  pronounced  accursed   by 
rejected  love.    The  evil  is  so  immense  that  imagination  finds  no  place, 
and  understanding  utterly  fails.     Brethren,  if  our  bowels  do  not  yearn 
for  men  who  are  daily  hastening  towards  destruction,  are  we  men  at  all  ? 
I  could  abundantly  justify  compassion  for  perishing  men,  even  on 
the  ground  of  natural  feelings.    A  mother  who  did  not,  like  Hagar, 
weep  for  her  dying  child — call  her  not  "  mother,"  call  her  *'  monster." 
A  man  who  passes  through  the  scenes  of  misery  which  even  this  city 
presents  in  its  more  squalid  quarters,  and  yet  is  never  disturbed  by 
them,  I  venture  to  say  he  is  unworthy  of  the  name  of  man.    Even 
the  common  sorrows  of  our  race  may  well   suffuse  our  eyes  with 
tears,  but  the  eternal   sorrow,  the  infinite  lake  of  misery — he  who 
grieves  not  for  this,  write  him  down  a  demon,  though  he  wear  the  image 
and  semblance  of  a  man.    Do  not  think  the  less  of  this  argument  be- 
cause I  base  it  upon  feelings  common  to  all  of  woman  bom,  for  re- 
member that  grace  does  not  destroy  our  manhood  when  it  elevates  it 
to  a  higher  conditipn. 


76  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLB  PULPIT. 

In  this  instance  tvhat  nature  stigge^ts  gra$e  enforces.  The  more  we 
become  what  we  shall  be,  the  more  will  compassion  rale  our  hearts.  The 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  the  pattern  and  mirror  of  perfect  manhood, 
what  said  he  concemiDg  the  sins  and  the  woes  of  Jerusalem  ?  He 
knew  Jerusalem  must  perish ;  did  he  buiy  his  pity  beneath  the  fact  of 
the  diyine  decree,  and  steel  his  heart  by  the  thought  of  the  sovereignty 
or  the  justice  that  would  be  resplendent  in  the  city's  destruction  ?  Nay, 
not  he,  but  with  eyes  gushing  like  founts,  he  cried,  "  0  Jerusalem, 
Jerusalem,  how  often  would  I  have  gathered  thy  children  together  as  a 
hen  gathereth  her  chickens  under  her  wings !  and  ye  would  not."  If 
you  would  be  like  Jesus,  you  must  be  tender  and  very  pitiful.  Ye  would 
De  as  unlike  him  as  possible  if  ye  could  sit  down  in  grim  content,  and, 
with  a  Stoic's  philosophy,  turn  all  the  flesh  within  you  into  stone.  If 
it  be  natural,  then,  and  above  all,  if  it  be  natural  to  the  higher  grace- 
given  nature,  I  beseech  you,  let  your  hearts  be  moved  with  pity,  do  not 
endure  to  see  the  spiritual  death  of  mankind.  Be  in  agony  as  often  as 
you  contemplate  the  ruin  of  any  soul  of  the  seed  of  Adam. 

Brethren,  tlw  whole  rim  and  current,  and  tenour  and  spirit  of  the 
gospel  influences  us  to  compassion.  Ye  are  debtors,  for  what  were  ye 
if  compassion  had  not  come  to  your  rescue  ?  Divine  compassion,  all 
undeserved  and  free,  has  redeemed  you  from  your  vain  conversation. 
Surely  those  who  receive  mercy  shordd  show  mercy ;  those  who  owe  all 
they  have  to  the  pity  of  God,  should  not  be  pitiless  to  their  brethren. 
The  Saviour  never  for  a  moment  tolerates  the  self-righteous  isolation 
which  would  make  you  despise  the  prodigal,  and  cavil  at  his  restoration, 
much  less  the  Cainite  spirit  which  cries,  "Am  I  my  brother's  keeper  ?" 
No  doctrine  is  rightly  received  by  you  if  it  freezes  the  genial  current  of 
your  Christian  compassion.  You  may  know  the  truth  of  the  doctrine, 
out  jou  do  not  know  the  doctrine  in  truth  if  it  makes  you  gaze  on  the 
wrath  to  come  without  emotions  of  pity  for  immortal  souls.  You  shall 
find  everywhere  throughout  the  gospel  that  it  rings  of  brotherly  love, 
tender  mercy,  and  weeping  pity.  If  you  have  indeed  received  it  in  its 
power,  the  love  of  Christ  will  melt  your  spirit  to  compassion  for  those 
who  are  despising  Christ,  and  sealing  their  own  destruction. 

Let  me  beseech  you  to  believe  that  it  is  needful  as  well  as  justifiable 
that  you  should  feel  compassion  for  the  sons  of  men.  You  all  desire  to 
glorify  Christ  by  becoming  soul-winners— I  hope  you  do — and  be  it 
remembered  that,  other  things  being  equal,  he  is  the  fittest  in  Grod's  hand 
to  win  souls  who  pities  souls  most.  I  believe  he  preaches  best  who  loves 
best,  and  in  the  Sunday-school  and  in  private  life  each  soul-seeker 
shall  have  the  blessfiig  very  much  in  proportion  to  his  yearning 
for  it.  Paul  becomes  a  saviour  of  many  because  his  heart's  desire 
and  prayer  to  God  is  that  they  may  be  saved.  If  you  can  live 
without  souls  being  converted,  you  shall  live  without  their  being 
converted ;  but  if  your  soul  breaketh  for  the  longing  that  it  hath 
towards  Christ's  glory  and  the  conversion  of  the  ungodly,  if  like 
her  of  old  you  say,  **  Give  me  children,  or  I  die,"  your  insatiable  hunger 
shall  be  satisfied,  the  craving  of  your  spirit  shall  be  gratified.  Oh  !  I 
would  to  God  there  should  come  upon  us  a  divine  hunger  wliich  cannot 
stay  itself  except  men  yield  themselves  to  Jesus ;  an  intense,  earnest, 
longing,  panting  desire  that  men  should  submit  themselves  to  the 


GOMPAaSION  FOB  SOULS.  77 

gospel  of  Jesns.  This  will  teach  yon  better  than  the  best  college  train- 
ing how  to  deal  with  hnman  hearts.  This  will  give  the  stammering 
tongn^  the  ready  word  ;  the  hot  heart  shall  burn  the  cords  which  held 
fiist  the  tongne.  Yon  shall  become  wise  to  win  eonls,  even  though 
yon  never  exhibit  the  brilliance  of  eloquence  or  the  force  of  logic.  Men 
shall  wonder  at  yonrpower — the  secret  shall  be  hidden  from  them,  the 
fact  being  that  the  Holy  Ghost  shall  overshadow  you,  and  your  heart 
shall  teach  yon  wisdom,  God  teaching  your  heart.  Deep  feeling  on 
your  part  for  others  shall  make  others  feel  for  themselves,  and  God 
shall  bless  you,  and  that  right  early. 

But  I  stand  not  here  any  longer  to  justify  what  I  would  far  rather 
commend  and  personally  feel. 

**  Did  Christ  o'er  sinners  weep, 
And  shall  oar  cheeks  be  dry  ? 
Let  floods  of  consecrated  grief 
Stream  forth  from  every  eye." 

Is  God  all  love,  and  shall  God's  children  be  hard  and  cold?    Shall 
heaven  compassionate  and  shall  not  earth  that  has  received  heaven's 
mercy  send  oack  the  echo  of  compassion?    0  God,  make  ns  imitators 
of  thee  in  thy  pity  towards  erring  men, 
II.  We  shall  pass  on  to  notice  the  sight  which  true  compassion 

DBEADS. 

Like  Hagar,  the  compassionate  spirit  says,  **Let  me  not  see  the  death 
of  the  child,"  or  as  some  have  read  it,  **  How  can  I  see  the  death  of 
the  child?"  To  contemplate  a  soul  passing  away  vnthout  hope  is  too 
terrible  a  task  !  I  do  not  wonder  that  ingenious  persons  have  invented 
theories  which  aim  at  mitigating  the  terrors  of  the  world  to  come  to  the 
impenitent.  It  is  natural  they  should  do  so,  for  the  facts  are  so  alarming 
as  they  are  truthfully  given  us  in  God's  word,  that  if  we  desire  to  preach 
comfortable  doctrine  and  such  as  will  quiet  the  consciences  of  idle 
professors,  we  must  dilute  the  awful  truth.  The  revelation  of  God 
concerning  the  doom  of  the  wicked  is  so  overwhelming  as  to  make  it 
penal,  nay,  I  was  about  to  say  damnable,  to  be  indifferent  and  careless 
in  the  work  of  evangelising  the  world.  I  do  not  wonder  that  this  error 
in  doctrine  springs  up  justnow  when  abounding  callousness  of  heart  needs 
an  excuse  for  itself.  What  better  pillow  for  idle  heads  than  the  doctrine 
that  the  finally  impenitent  become  extinct  ?  The  logical  reasoning  of  the 
sinner  is,  "  Let  us  eat  and  drink,  for  to-morrow  we  die,"  and  the  pro- 
fessing Christian  is  not  slow  to  feel  an  ease  of  heart  from  pressing 
responsibilities  when  he  accepts  so  consolatory  an  opinion.  Forbear 
this  sleeping  draught,  I  pray  you,  for  in  very  deed  the  sharp  stimulant 
of  the  truth  itself  is  abundantly  needful;  even  when  thus  bestirred  to 
dnty  we  are  sluggish  enough,  and  need  not  that  these  sweet  but  sleep- 
prodncing  theories  should  operate  upon  us. 

For  a  moment,  I  beseech  you,  contemplate  that  which  causes  horror 
to  every  tender  heart;  behold,  I  pray  you,  a  soul  lost,  lost  beyond  all 
hope  of  restitution.  Heaven's  gates  have  shut  upon  the  sanctified,  and 
the  myriads  of  the  redeemed  are  there,  but  that  soul  is  not  among  them, 
for  it  passed  out  of  this  world  without  having  washed  its  robes  in  Jesus' 
blood.  For  it  there  are  no  harps  of  gold,  no  thrones  of  glory,  no  ex- 
ultation with  Christ ;  from  all  the  bliss  of  heaven  it  is  for  e\(iT^\di\X!ift^% 


78  METROPOUTAN  TABEBKACLE  PULPIT. 

This  punishment  of  loss  were  a  heavy  enough  theme  for  contemplation. 
The  old  divines  used  to  speak  much  of  the  pcena  damni^  or  the  punish- 
ment of  loss ;  there  were  enough  in  that  phase  of  the  future  to  make  us 
mourn  bitterly,  as  David  did  for  Absalom.  My  child  shut  out  of  heaven  ! 
My  husband  absent  irom  the  seats  of  the  blessed  !  My  sister,  my  brother 
not  in  glory !  When  the  Lord  counts  up  his  chosen,  my  dear  companion 
outside  the  gates  of  pearl,  outside  the  jewelled  battlements  of  the  New 
Jerusalem  !  0  God,  'tis  a  heartbreaking  son-ow  to  think  of  this.  But  then 
comes  the  punishment  added  to  the  loss.  Whatsaith  the  Saviour  ?  **  Where 
their  worm  dicth  not,  and  the  fire  is  not  quenched."  "  These  shall  go 
away  into  everlasting  punishment."  And  yet  again,  "  And  shall  cut 
him  asunder,  and  appoint  him  his  portion  with  the  hypocrites."  And  yet 
again,  *'  Into  outer  darkness :  there  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of 
teeth."  "Metaphors,"  say  you.  It  is  true,  but  not  meaningless 
metaphors.  There  is  a  meaning  in  each  expression — and  rest  assured 
though  man's  metaphors  sometimes  exaggerate,  God's  never  do;  his 
symbols  ever}^where  are  true ;  never  is  there  an  exaggeration  in  the 
language  of  inspiration.  Extravagances  of  utterance !  He  uses  them 
not ;  his  figures  are  substantial  truth.  Terrible  as  the  scriptural 
emblems  of  punishment  are,  they  set  forth  matters  of  undoubted  fact, 
which  if  a  man  could  look  upon  this  day,  the  sight  might  blanch  his 
hair,  and  quench  his  eye.  If  we  could  hear  the  wailings  of  the  pit 
for  a  moment,  we  should  earnestly  entreat  that  we  might  never  hear  them 
again.  We  have  to  thank  God  that  we  are  not  allowed  to  hear  the 
dolorous  cries  of  the  lost,  for  if  we  did  they  would  make  our  life 
bitter  as  gall.  I  cast  a  veil  over  that  which  I  cannot  paint ;  like  Hagar, 
I  cannot  bear  to  look  at  the  dread  reality  which  it  breaks  my  heart  to 
think  upon. 

How  all  this  gathers  intensity,  when  it  comes  to  be  our  own 
child,  our  own  friend  1  Hagar  might  perhaps  have  looked  upon  a 
dying  child,  but  not  upon  her  dying  Ishmael.  Can  you  bear  now  to 
think  for  a  moment  of  the  perdition  of  your  own  flesh  and  blood  ? 
Does  not  your  spirit  flinch  and  draw  back  with  horror  instinctively 
at  the  idea  of  one  of  your  own  family  being  lost  ?  Yet,  as  a  matter 
of  stem  fact,  you  know  that  some  of  them  will  be  lost  if  they  die  as 
they  are  now  living?  At  God's  right  hand  they  cannot  stand  unless 
they  be  made  new  creatures  in  Clirist  Jesus.  You  know  that,  do  not 
try  to  forget  it. 

It  will  greatly  add  to  your  feeling  of  sorrow  if  you  are  forced  to  feel 
that  the  ruin  of  your  child  or  of  any  other  person  may  have  been  partly 
caused  by  your  example.  It  must  be  a  dreadful  thing  for  a  father  tJ> 
fee),  "My "boy  learned  to  drink  from  me;  my  child  heard  the  first 
blasphemous  word  from  his  father's  lips."  Or  mother,  if  your  dying 
daughter  should  say,  **I  was  led  into  temptation  by  my  mother's 
example,"  what  a  grief  will  this  be !  0  parents,  converted  late  in  life, 
you  cannot  undo  the  evil  which  you  have  already  done ;  God  has 
forgiven  you,  but  the  mischief  wrought  in  your  children's  characters  is 
indelible,  unless  the  grace  of  God  step  in.  I  want  you  to  seek  after 
that  grace  with  great  earnestness.  As  you  must  confess  that  you  have 
help^  to  train  your  child  as  a  servant  of  sin,  will  you  not  long  to  see- 
your  evil  work  undone  before  it  ends  in  your  child's  eternal  destruction? 


COMPASHIOir  FOB  BOULS.  79 

If  we  shall  haye  to  feel  that  the  ruin  of  any  of  onr  friends  or  relations 
is  partly  occasioned  by  our  own  personal  neglect  of  religion,  it  will 
cause  us  bitter  pangs.  If  our  example  has  been  excellent  and  admirable 
in  all  respects,  but  that  we  have  forgotten  the  Lord  and  his  Christ,  it 
will  have  been  none  the  less  injurious  to  men*s  souls.  I  sometimes 
think  that  these  examples  are  the  very  worst  in  their  effect.  Immoral, 
ungodly  men  can  hardly  work  the  same  measure  of  mischief  as  moral 
but  unchristian  men.  I  will  tell  you  why.  The  ungodly  quote  the 
orderly  life  of  the  moralist  as  an  argument  that  there  can  be  goodness 
apart  from  Christianity,  and  this  oitcn  helps  men  to  rest  satisfied  apart 
£nom  Christ;  Jesus.  And  what,  0  moralist,  though  you  never  taught 
your  child  a  vice,  if  you  taught  it  unbelief,  and  if  your  example  helped 
to  harden  its  heart  in  bold  rebellion  against  God  1  Ah  I  then,  how  will 
you  blame  yourself  when  you  are  converted,  or  curse  yourself  if  both 
yon  and  your  child  perish. 

Dear  friends,  it  makes  a  terrible  addition  to  the  sight  of  a  soul  being 
lost  if  we  have  to  feel  we  were  under  responsibility  concerning 
it,  and  have  been  in  any  measure  unfaithful.  I  cannot  bear  the  idea  of 
any  of  my  congregation  perishing,  for  in  addition  to  the  compassion  I 
hope  I  feel,  I  am  influenced  by  a  further  additional  consideration,  for  I 
am  set  as  a  watchman  to  your  souls.  When  any  die,  I  ask  myself,  '^  Was 
I  faithful  ?  Did  I  speak  all  the  truth  ?  And  did  I  speak  it  f^om  my 
very  soul  every  time  1  preached  ? "  John  Walsh,  the  famous  Scotch 
preacher,  was  often  out  of  bed  in  the  coldest  night,  by  the  hour  together, 
in  supplication ;  and  when  some  one  wondered  that  he  spent  so  many 
hours  upon  his  knees,  he  said,  *^  Ah,  man,  I  have  three  thousand  souls 
to  give  account  of  in  the  day  of  judgment,  and  I  do  not  know  but  what 
it  is  going  very  ill  with  some  of  them."  Alas !  I  have  more  than  that 
to  give  account  of,  and  well  may  I  cry  to  God  that  I  may  not  see  you 
perish.  0  may  it  never  be  that  you  shall  go  from  these  pews  to  the 
lowest  helL  You,  too,  my  fellow  Christian,  have  your  own  responsi- 
bilities, each  one  in  your  measure — ^your  children,  your  school 
classes,  your  servants,  ay,  and  your  neighbours,  for  if  you  are  not  doing 
any  good  and  do  not  assume  any  responsibility  towards  the  regions  in 
which  you  dwell,  that  responsibility  rests  upon  you  none  the  less.  You 
cannot  live  in  a  district  without  being  responsible  to  God  for  doing 
something  towards  the  bettering  of  the  people  among  whom  you  reside. 
Can  you  endure  it  then,  that  your  neighbours  should  sink  into  hell  ? 
Do  not  your  hearts  long  for  their  salvation  ? 

Is  it  not  an  awful  thing  that  a  soul  should  perish  with  the  gospel  so 
near  ?  If  Ishmael  had  died,  and  the  water  had  been  within  bow-shot, 
and  yet  unseen  till  too  late,  it  had  been  a  dreadful  reflection  for  the 
mother.  Would  she  not  have  torn  her  hair  with  double  sorrow  ?  And 
yet  many  of  you  are  being  lost  with  the  gospel  ringing  in  your  ears ; 
you  are  perishing  while  Christ  is  lifted  up  before  you ;  you  are  dying  in 
the  camp  through  the  serpent's  bite,  though  the  brazen  serpent  is 
yonder  before  your  eyes,  and  with  many  tears  we  cry  to  you,  "  Look 
onto  Jesus  Christ,  and  live !  "  Ah,  woe  is  me,  woe  is  me,  if  you  perish 
when  salvation  is  brought  so  close  home  to  you.  Some  of  you  are  very 
near  the  kingdom  of  God ;  you  are  very  anxious,  veiy  c©neerned,  but 
you  have  not  believed  in  Jesus ;  you  have  much  that  is  good,  but  one 


80  METROFOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

thing  yon  lack.  Will  yon  perish  for  lack  of  only  one  thing?  A 
thonsand  pities  will  it  be  if  yon  make  shipwreck  in  the  harbonr'a  month 
and  go  to  hell  from  the  gates  of  heaven. 

We  mnst  add  to  all  this,  the  remembrance  that  it  is  not  one  aonl  which 
is  lost,  bnt  tcDs  of  thousands  are  going  down  to  the  pit  Mr.  Beecher 
said  in  one  of  his  sermons, ''  If  there  were  a  great  bell  hnng  high  in 
heaven  which  the  angels  swnng  every  time  a  sonl  was  lost,  how  con- 
stantly would  its  solemn  toll  be  heard  !"  A  sonl  lost !  The  thunder 
would  not  suffice  to  make  a  knell  for  a  lost  spirit  Each  time  the- 
clock  ticks  a  soul  departs  out  of  this  world,  perhaps  ofbener  than  that, 
and  out  of  those  who  make  the  last  journey  how  few  mount  to  the 
skies;  what  multitudes  descend  to  endless  woe!  0  Christians,  pull 
up  the  sluices  of  your  souls,  and  let  your  hearts  pour  out  themsefvesr 
in  rivers  of  compassion. 

III.  In  the  third  place,  I  said  I  would  speak  upon  oompassiok  por 

THE  SOULS  OP  MEN — THE  TEMPTATION  IT  MUST  RESIST. 

We  must  not  fall  into  the  temptation  to  imitate  the  example  of 
Hngar  too  closely.  She  put  the  child  under  the  shrubs  and  turned  away 
her  gaze  from  the  all  too  mournful  spectacle.  She  could  not  endure  to- 
look,  but  she  sat  where  she  could  watch  in  despair.  There  is  a  tempta- 
tion with  each  one  of  us  to  try  to  forget  that  souls  are  being  lost  I 
can  go  home  to  my  house  along  respectable  streets,  and  natnrally  should 
choose  that  way,  for  then  I  need  not  see  the  poverty  of  the  lowest 
quarters  of  the  city,  but  am  I  right  if  I  try  to  forget  that  there  are 
Bethnal  Greens  and  Kent  Streets,  and  such  like  abodes  of  poverty  ?  The 
close  courts,  the  cellars,  the  crowded  garrets,  the  lodging-houses — am  I 
to  forget  that  these  exist  ?  Surely  the  only  way  for  a  charitable  mind  to 
sleep  comfortably  in  London  is  to  forget  how  one  half  of  the  population 
lives ;  but  is  it  our  object  to  live  comfortably  ?  Are  we  sudn  brute 
beasts  that  comfort  is  all  we  care  for,  like  swine  in  their  stye  ?  Nay, 
brethren,  let  us  recall  to  our  memories  the  sins  of  our  great  city»  its 
sorrows  and  griefs,  and  let  us  remember  also  the  sins  and  sorrows  of  the 
wide,  wide  world,  and  the  tens  of  thousands  of  our  race  who  are  passing 
constantlv  into  eternity.  Nay,  look  at  them !  Do  not  close  those  eyes  I 
Does  the  horror  of  the  vision  make  your  eyeballs  ache  ?    Then  look  until 

Jour  heart  aches  too,  and  your  spirit  breaks  forth  in  vehement  agony 
efore  the  Lord.  Look  down  into  hell  a  moment ;  open  wide  the  door  ^ 
listen,  and  listen  yet  again.  You  say  you  cannot,  it  sickens  your  soul ;  let 
it  be  sickened,  and  in  its  swooning  let  it  fall  back  into  the  arms  of  Christ 
the  Saviour,  and  breathe  out  a  cry  that  he  would  hasten  to  save  men 
from  the  wrath  to  come.  Do  not  ignore,  I  pray  you,  what  does  exist  It 
is  a  matter  of  fact  that  in  this  congregation  many  are  going  down  to  hell, 
that  in  this  city  there  are  multitudes  who  are  hastening  as  certainly  to 
perdition  as  time  is  hastening  to  eternity.  It  is  no  dream,  no  fiction  of 
a  fevered  brain  that  there  is  a  hell.  If  you  think  so,  then  why  dare  you 
call  yourselves  Christians  ?  Renounce  your  Bible,  renounce  your 
baptism,  renounce  your  profession  if  one  spark  of  honesty  remains  in  you. 
Call  not  yourselves  Christians  when  you  deny  the  teaching  of  your 
Master.  Since  assuredly  there  is  a  dreadful  hell,  shut  not  your  eyes  to 
it,  put  not  the  souls  of  your  fellows  away  among  the  shrubs,  and  sit  not 
down  in  supineness.    Come  and  look,  come  and  look,  I  say,  till  your 


COMPASSION  FOR  SOULS.  81 

hearts  break  at  the  sight.  Hear  the  cries  of  dying  men  whose  con- 
sciences are  awakened  too  late.  Hear  the  groans  of  spirits  who  are 
feeling  the  sure  consequences  of  sin,  where  sin's  cure  will  never 
aTail  them.  Let  this  stir  you,  my  brethren,  to  action — to  action 
immediate  and  intense.  Yon  tell  me  I  preach  dreadful  things ;  ay,  and 
they  are  wanted,  they  are  wanted.  Was  there  ever  such  a  sleepy  age  as 
this  ?  Were  there  ever  such  sleepy  persons  as  ourselves  ?  Take  heed 
lest  yoa  take  sad  precedence  of  all  others  in  the  accusations  of  con- 
science, becanse  knowing  the  gospel,  and  enjoying  it,  you  nevertheless 
xise  so  little  exertion  in  spreading  it  abroaa  among  the  human  race. 
Let  ns  shun  the  temptation  which  Hagar's  example  might  suggest. 

IV.  I  will  now  speak  upon  the  path  which  true  compassion  will 
BE  STJBE  TO  FOLLOW;  and  what  is  that  ? 

First  of  all,  irtds  pity  does  all  U  can.  Before  Hagar  sat  down  and 
wept,  she  had  done  her  utmost  for  her  boy;  she  had  given  him  the 
last  drop  from  the  bottle;  she  had  supported  his  tottering  footsteps,  she 
bad  sought  out  the  place  under  the  shrubs  where  he  might  be  a  little 
sheltered  ;  she  had  laid  him  down  gently  with  soothing  words,  and  then, 
but  not  till  then,  she  sat  herself  down.  Have  we  done  all  that  it  is  pos- 
sible for  us  to  do  for  the  unconverted  around  us  ?  There  are  preventible ' 
causes  of  men's  ruin.  Some  causes  you  and  I  cannot  touch,  but  there 
are  some  we  ought  at  once  to  remove.  For  instance,  it  is  certain  that 
many  perish  through  ignorance.  It  ought  never  to  be  that  a  soul  should 
pmsh  of  ignorance  within  a  mile  of  where  a  Christian  lives. 
I  would  even  allot  a  wider  area  in  regions  where  the  people  dwell  not  so 
thickly.  It  should  at  least  be  the  resolve  of  each  Christian,  "  Within 
this  district  where  I  live,  so  for  as  my  ability  goes,  everybody  shall  know 
the  gospel  by  some  means  or  other.  If  I  cannot  speak  to  each  one  I 
will  send  something  for  bim  to  read ;  it  shall  not  be  said  that  a  man  lost 
his  way  for  ever  because  he  had  no  Bible.  The  Holy  Ohost  alone  can 
lead  men  into  the  truth,  but  it  is  our  part  to  put  the  letter  of  the  word 
before  all  men's  eyes. 

Prejudice,  too,  is  another  preventible  cause  of  unbelief.  Some 
will  not  hear  the  gospel,  or  listen  to  it,  because  of  their  notions  of  its 
sternness,  or  of  the  moroseness  of  its  professors.  Such  a  prejudice  may 
effectually  close  their  hearts ;  be  it  yours  to  remove  it.  Be  kind  to  the 
ungodly ;  be  loving,  be  tender,  be  affable,  be  generous  to  them,  so  that 
you  may  remove  all  unnecessary  antipathy  to  the  gospel  of  Jesus.  Do 
them  all  the  good  you  can  for  their  bodies,  that  they  may  be  the  more 
likely  £o  believe  in  your  love  towards  their  souls.  Let  it  be  said  by 
ea<^  one  here,  ''  If  a  soul  perishes,  I,  at  leasts  will  have  done  all  in  my 
p«wer  to  reclaim  it." 

Bat  what  next  does  compassion  do?  Having  done  all  it  can,  it  sits 
down  and  weeps  over  its  own  feebleness.  I  have  not  the  pathos  where- 
with to  describe  to  you  the  mother  sitting  there  and  pouring  out  her 
tears,  and  lifting  up  her  plaintive  voice  over  her  child.  The  voice  of  a 
broken  heart  cannot  be  described,  it  must  be  heard.  But,  ah  I  there  is 
wonderful  power  with  Ood  in  the  strong  crying  and  tears  of  his  people. 
If  yon  know  how  to  weep  before  the  Lord,  he  will  yield  to  tears  what 
he'will  not  yield  to  anything  besides.  0  ye  saints,  compassionate 
sinners ;  sigh  and  cry  for  them ;  be  able  to  say,  as  Whitfield  could  to 


82  XETBOFOLITAH  TABEBNACLE  PULPIT. 

his  congregation,  "  Sirs,  if  ye  are  lost,  it  is  not  for  want  of  my  weeping 
for  yon,  for  I  ponr  ont  my  sonl  day  and  night  in  petitions  onto  God 
that  ye  may  live."  When  Hagar's  compassion  had  wailed  itself  ont^ 
she  looked  nnto  God,  and  God  heard  her.  Take  care  that  yonr  prayers 
be  abundant  and  continuous  for  those  who  are  dying  without  hope. 

And  then  what  else  doth  Hagar  teach  us  ?     She  stood  there  ready 
to  do  adything  that  was  needful  after  the  Lord  had  interposed.     The 
angel  opened  her  eyes ;   until  then  she  was  powerless,  and  sat  and 
wept,  and  prayed,  but  when  he  pointed  to  the  well,  did  she  linger  for  a 
minute?      Was  she  unprepared  with  the  bottle  wherewith  to  draw 
water?     Did  she  delay  to  put  it  to  her  child's  lips?    Was  she  slack  in 
the  blessed  task  ?    Oh,  no !  with  what  alacrity  did  she  spring  to  the 
well ;  with  what  speed  did  she  fill  the  bottle ;  with  what  motherly  joy 
did  she  hasten  to  her  child,  and  give  him  the  saving  draught  I     And  so  I 
want  every  member  here  to  stand  ready  to  mark  the  faintest  indication 
of  grace  in  any  soul.    Watch  always  for  the  beginning  of  their  conver- 
sion, be  ready  with  the  bottle  of  promise  to  carry  a  little  comfort  to  their 
parched  lips  ;  watch  with  a  mother's  earnestness,  watch  for  the  oppor- 
tunity of  doing  good  to  souls ;  yearn  over  them,  so  that  when  God  shall 
work  you  shall  work  with  him  instmiter^  and  Jesus  shall  not  be  hindered 
because  of  your  carelessness  and  want  of  faith.     This  is  the  path  which 
the  true  Christian  should  pursue.    He  is  earnest  for  souls,  and  therefore 
he  lays  himself  out  for  them.    If  we  did  really  know  what  souls  are,  and 
what  it  is  for  them  to  be  cast  away,  those  of  us  who  have  done  very  little 
or  nothing  would  begin  to  work  for  Christ  directly.    It  is  said  in  old 
classic  story,  that  a  certain  king  of  Lydia  had  a  son  who  had  been 
dumb  from  his  birth,  but  when  Lydia  was  captured,  a  soldier  was  about 
to  kill  the  king,  when  the  young  man  suddenly  found  a  tongue,  and  cried 
out,  "Soldier,  would  you  kill  the  king?*'    He  had  never  spoken  a  word 
before,  but  his  astonishment  and  fear  gave  him  speech.     And  methinks  if 
ye  had  been  dumb  to  that  moment,  if  ye  indeed  saw  your  own  children  and 
neighbours  going  down  into  the  pit,  you  would  cry  out,  "  Though  I  never 
spoke  before  I  will  speak  now.  Poor  souls,  believe  in  Christ,  and  ye  shall  be 
fiaved."   You  do  not  know  how  such  an  utterance  as  that,  however  simple, 
might  be  blessed.    A  very  little  child  once  found  herself  in  company 
with  an  old  man  of  eighty,  a  fine  old  man  who  loved  little  children, 
and  who  took  the  child  upon  his  knee  to  fondle  it.    The  little  one 
turning  round  to  him  said,  "  Sir,  I  got  a  grandpa  just  like  you,  and  my 
grandpa  love  Jesus  Christ,  does  you  ?"     He  said,  **  I  was  eighty-four 
years  of  age  and  had  lived  always  among  Christian  people,  but  nobody 
ever  thought  it  worth  his  while  to  say  as  much  as  that  to  me."    Thi^ 
little  child  was  the  instrument  of  the  old  man's  conversion.    So  have 
I  heard  the  story.     He  knew  he  had  not  loved  the  Saviour,  and  he 
began  to  seek  him,  and  in  his  old  age  he  found  salvation.    If  as  much 


COMPASSION  FOR  SOULS.  83 

as  that  is  possible  to  a  child  it  is  possible  to  yon.  0  dear  brother,  if 
joa  loYe  Jesus,  burst  the' bonds  of  timidity,  or  it  may  be  of  snpineness; 
snap  all  fetters,  and  from  this  day  feel  that  yen  cannot  bear  to  think 
of  the  ruin  of  a  sonl,  and  must  seek  its  salvation  if  there  be  in  earth  or 
heaven  ways  and  means  by  which  yon  can  bring  a  blessing  to  it. 
y.  But  I  must  close,  and  the  last  point  shall  be  the  encouragement 

WHICH  TRXTB  COMPASSION  FOR  SOUI^  WILL  ALWAYS  RECEIVE. 

First  take  the  case  in  hand.  The  mother  compassionated,  God  com- 
passionated too.  You  pity,  God  pities.  The  motions  of  God's  Spirit 
in  the  souls  of  his  people  are  the  footfalls  of  God's  eternal  purposes 
about  to  be  fulfilled.  It  is  always  a  hopeful  sign  for  a  man  that  another 
man  prays  for  him.  There  is  a  difficulty  in  getting  a  man  to  hell  whom 
a  child  of  God  is  drawing  towards  heaven  by  his  intercessions.  Satan 
is  often  defeated  in  his  temptations  by  the  intercession  of  the  saints. 
Have  hope  then  that  your  personal  sense  of  compassion  for  souls  is  an 
indication  that  such  souls  God  will  bless.  Ishmael,  whom  Hagar  pitied, 
was  a  lad  about  whom  promises  had  been  made  large  and  broad ;  he 
could  not  die  ;  she  had  forgotten  that,  but  God  had  not.  No  thirst 
could  possibly  destroy  him,  for  God  had  said  he  would  make  of  him  a 
great  nation.  Let  us  hope  that  those  for  whom  yon  and  I  are  praying 
and  labouring  are  in  God's  eternal  purpose  secured  from  hell,  because 
the  blood  of  Christ  has  bought  them,  and  they  must  be  the  Lord's.  Oar 
prayers  are  ensigns  of  the  will  of  God.  The  Holy  Ghost  leads  us  to  pray 
for  those  whom  he  intends  eflPectoally  to  call. 

Moreover,  those  we  pray  for,  we  may  not  know  it,  but  there  may  be 
in  their  souls  at  this  time  a  stirring  of  divine  life.  Hagar  did  not 
know  that  her  son  was  praying,  but  God  did.  The  lad  did  not  speak, 
but  €k)d  heard  his  heart  cry.  Children  are  often  very  reticent  to  their 
parents.  Often  and  often  have  I  talked  with  young  lads  about  their 
souls,  who  have  told  me  that  they  could  not  talk  to  their  fathers  upon 
such  matters.  I  know  it  was  so  with  me.  When  I  was  under  concern 
of  soul  the  last  persons  I  should  have  elected  to  speak  to  upon  religion 
would  have  been  my  parents,  not  out  of  want  of  love  to  them,  nor 
absence  of  love  on  their  part ;  but  so  it  was.  A  strange  feeling  of 
diffidence  pervades  a  seeking  soul,  and  drives  it  &om  its  friends. 
Those  whom  you  are  praying  for  may  be  praying  too,  and  you  do 
not  know  it ;  but  the  time  of  love  will  come  when  their  secret  yearnings 
will  be  revealed  to  your  earnest  endeavours. 

The  lad  was  preserved  after  all,  the  well  of  waters  was  revealed,  and 
the  bottle  put  to  his  lips.  It  will  be  a  great  comfort  to  you  to  believe 
that  God  will  hear  importunate  prayers.  Your  child  will  be  saved,  your 
husband  will  be  brought  in  yet,  good  woman,  only  pray  on.  Your  neigh- 
bour shall  be  brought  to  hear  the  truth  and  be  converted,  only  be  earnest 
about  it. 


84  METROPOLITAN  TABBRNACLE  PULPIT. 

I  do  not  know  how  to  preach,  this  morning;  the  tongae  cannot 
readily  speak  when  the  heart  feels  too  much.  I  pray  that  we  may 
have  a  great  revival  of  religion  in  onr  midst  as  a  church  ;  my  spirit 
longs  and  pants  for  it.  I  see  a  great  engine  of  enormous  stren^h^ 
and  a  well-fashioned  machine  :  the  machine  cannot  work  of  itself,  it  has 
no  power  in  it,  but  if  I  could  get  the  band  to  unite  the  machine  with 
the  engine,  what  might  be  done !  Behold,  I  see  the  omnipotence  of 
God,  and  the  organisation  of  this  church.  0  that  I  ooald  get  the  band 
to  bind  the  two  together  !  The  band  is  living  faith.  Do  you  possess  it  7 
Brethren,  help  me  to  pass  it  round  the  fly  wheel,  and  oh,  how  God  will 
work,  and  we  will  work  through  his  power,  and  what  glorious  things 
shall  be  done  for  Christ !  We  must  receive  power  from  on  high,  and 
faith  is  the  belt  that  shall  convey  that  power  to  us.  The  divine  strength 
shall  be  manifest  through  our  weakness.  Cease  not  to  pray.  More 
than  you  ever  have  done,  intercede  for  a  blessing,  and  the  Lord  will 
bless  us :  he  will  bless  us,  and  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  shall  fear  him. 
4nien. 


Portions  op  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Romans  x.; 

and  Genesis  xxi.  1 — 21. 


The  attention  of  all  our   tnends   is   earnestly  directed  to   the  Sekirs  of 

Special  Services  at  the  Tabernacle.    In  order  that  London  friendfl  may 

unite  with  us  we  will  publish  the  meetings  week  by  week,  and  then  ourcountrj 

friends  can  join  with  us  in  spirit : — 

Mfitiflai/,  februartf  \Zth.—ThTeofo\fl  proycr-mceting ;  morning,  at  seven;  at  noon,  twelve; 
evcHin)5,  at  sevrn.  Let  nil  of  us  appear  iMiforo  the  Lord  at  one  or  other  of  these  times.  After 
each  of  these  services  enquirers  will  be  welcomed  to  Christian  conversation. 

Tursday,  Ffbruary  14/A. — From  elrren  in  the  morning  tUl  stren,  th»  Pastors  tci'/  icait  i»  the 
veftrim  to  see  enquiring  souls.  At  seven  there  will  be  a  meeting  for  seekers  and  the  undecided, 
and  suitable  addresses  will  be  given  to  them. 

Wednrsdav,  February  16/A.— Meeting  of  the  Members  of  the  Church  at  seven  to  implore  the 
divine  blessing,  and  confer  together  as  to  the  work  of  the  Lord.    C.  II.  Spurgeon  will  preside. 

Thursday,  February  IGfh.—ln  the  afternoon  at  four.  C.  H.  8.  will  meet  Mrs.  Brown's  class, 
and  any  others  of  the  young  women  of  the  congregation  who  may  obtain  tickets  from  Mrs. 
Brown'or  Mr.  W.  Olney.    Meetings  for  enquirers  at  8.80. 

Friday,  February  Vth.—X  Day  of  Vmyer  to  be  observed  by  the  Students  of  theC<>llefre,  and 
the  Ministers  who  were  educjit<Hl  with  us.  To  commence  at  ten  and  continue  till  six.  In  ilio 
evening  at  Hcven.  a  Meeting  in  the  Lecture  Hall  for  all  Christian  Workers,  Sabbath  Schi^fl 
Teachers,  Tract  Distributors,  Bible  Women,  Evangelists,  etc.    Short  Addresses  and  Prayers. 


pietiiupaBlan:  ^i^mmk 


THE  PARABLE  OP  THE  WEDDING  FEAST. 


DsuYSRSD  ON  Lobd'b-dat  Mobning,  February  12th,  1871,  by 

C.  H.    8PURGE0N, 

j^  THE  UETROFOLITAN  TABEKNAOLE,  NEWINOTON. 


«  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  a  certain  king,  which  made  a  marriage  for 
his  son,  and  sent  forth  his  serrants  to  call  them  that  were  bidden  to  the  wedding :  and 
they  wonld  not  come.  Again,  he  sent  forth  other  serrants,  saying,  Tell  them  which 
are  hidden.  Behold,  I  have  prepared  my  dinner :  my  oxen  and  my  f  atlings  are  kille<^ 
and  all  things  are  ready :  come  unto  the  marriage/* — Matthew  xxii.  2,  8,  4. 

If  Gk)d  grant  me  strength  I  hope  to  go  through  this  parable,  bnt  at 
this  present  we  shall  confme  onr  thoughts  to  the  opening  scene  of  the 
royal  festival  Before,  however,  we  proceed  farther,  it  is  most  fitting 
that  we  give  expression  to  our  deep  gratitude,  that  it  has  pleased 
the  infinite  mind  to  stoop  to  our  narrow  capacities,  and  instruct  us 
by  parable.  How  tenderly  condescending  is  God  to  devise  simili- 
tades,  that  his  children  may  learn  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom !  If 
it  be  sometimes  marvelled  at  among  men  that  great  minds  are  ever 
ready  to  stoop,  what  a  far  greater  marvel  that  God  himself  should  bow 
the  heavens  and  come  down  to  meet  our  ignorance  and  slowness  of 
comprehension  !  When  the  learned  professor  has  been  instructing  his 
class  in  the  hall  in  recondite  matters  of  deep  philosophy,  and  then  goes 
home  and  takes  his  child  upon  his  knee,  and  tries  to  bring  down  great 
truth  to  the  grasp  of  his  child's  mind,  then  you  see  the  great  love  of 
the  man's  heart :  and  when  the  eternal  God,  before  whom  seraphim,  i 
are  bnt  insects  of  an  hour,  condescends  to  instruct  our  childishness 
and  make  us  wise  unto  salvation,  we  may  well  say,  "  herein  is  love." 
Just  as  we  give  our  children  pictures  that  we  majr  win  the  attention, 
and  may  by  pleasing  means  fix  truth  upon  their  memories,  so  the 
Lord  with  loving  inventiveness  has  become  the  author  of  many  a 
charming  metaphor,  type,  and  allegory,  by  which  he  may  ffain  our 
interest,  and  through  his  Holy  Spirit  enlighten  our  minds.  It  he  who 
thunders  till  the  mountains  tremble,  yet  deigns  to  speak  with  us  in  a  still 
small  voice,  let  us  gladly  sit  in  Mary's  place  at  his  gracious  feet,  and 
willingly  learn  of  him.  0  that  God  would  give  to  each  one  a  teachable 
vpirifc^for  this  is  the  ^eatest  step  towards  unaerstanding  the  mind  of  God. 
He  who  is  willing  to  Team,  in  a  childlike  spirit,  is  already  In  a  considerable 
measure  taught  of  God.    May  we  all  so  study  this  instructive  parable 


•f 


80  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

as  to  be  qnickcned  by  it  to  all  that  is  well-pleasinpf  in  the  sight  of  God, 
for  after  all  true  learning  in  ffodliness  may  be  judged  of  by  its  results 
upon  our  lives.  If  we  are  holier  we  are  wiser,  practical  obedience  to  the 
will  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  the  surest  evidence  of  an  understanding  heart. 

In  order  to  understand  the  parable  before  us  we  must  first  direct  our 
attention  to  the  design  of  the  "certain  king  "  here  spoken  of.  He  had 
a  grayid  ohjWf  in  view  ;  he  desired  to  do  nonour  to  his  son  upon  the 
occasion  of  his  marriaji^e.  We  shall  then  notice  the  very  gemroui 
inHhod  by  which  he  proposed  to  accomplish  his  purpose ;  he  made  a 
dinner,  and  bade  many :  there  were  other  modes  of  honouring  his  son, 
but  the  great  kinp:  elected  the  mode  which  would  best  display  his 
bounty.  AVe  shall  then  observe,  with  sad  interest,  Uie  sermts  htndrancB 
which  arose  to  the  carrying  out  of  his  generous  design — ^those  who 
were  bidden  would  not  come.  There  was  nothing  to  hinder  the 
magnificence  of  the  festival  in  the  riches  of  the  prince — ^he  larished  out 
his  stores  for  the  feast ;  but  here  was  a  hindrance  strange  and  difficult 
to  remove,  they  would  not  come.  Then  our  thoughts  Vill  linger 
admiringly  over  f^ie  gracious  rejoinder  which  tlic  king  made  to  the 
op|)osers  of  his  design ;  he  sent  other  servants  to  repeat  the  invitation, 
*'  Come  ye  to  the  marriage."  If  we  shall  drink  deep  into  the  meaning 
of  these  three  verses,  we  shall  have  more  than  enough  for  one  meditation. 

I.  A  certain  king  of  wide  dominions  and  preat  power  designed  to  give 
a  mngnificent  banquet,  with  a  grand  orject  m  view.  The  crown 
prince,  his  well  beloved  heir,  was  about  to  take  to  himself  a  fair  bride, 
and  therefore  the  royal  father  desired  to  celebrate  the  event  wi^ 
extraordinary  honours.  From  earth,  look  up  to  heaven.  The  great 
object  of  God  the  Father  is  to  glorify  his  Son.  It  is  his  will  "  that  all 
men  should  honour  tlic  Son,  even  as  they  honour  the  Father."  (John 
V.  23.)  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  is  glorious  already  in  his  divine 
persoji.  He  is  ineffably  blessed,  and  infinitely  beyond  needing  honour. 
All  the  angels  of  God  worship  him,  and  his  glory  fills  all  heaven.  He 
has  appeared  on  the  stage  of  action  as  the  Creator,  and  as  such  his 
glory  is  perfect,  "  For  by  him  were  all  things  created,  that  are  in  heaven, 
and  that  are  in  earth,  visible  and  invisible,  whether  they  be  thrones,  or 
dominions,  or  principalities,  or  powers:  all  things  were  created  by  him, 
and  for  him."  He  said,  "  Light  be,"  and  it  flamed  forth.  He  bade  the 
mountains  lift  their  heads,  and  their  summits  pierced  the  clouds.  He 
created  the  water-floods,he  bade  them  seek  their  cnannels,and  he  appointed 
their  bounds.  Nothing  is  lacking  to  the  glory  of  the  Word  of  G^ 
who  was  in  the  beginmg  with  God,  who  spake  and  it  was  done,  who 
commanded,  and  it  stood  forth.  He  is  highly  exalted  also  as  ths 
preserver^  for  he  is  before  all  things,  and  by  him  all  things  consist.  He 
is  that  nail  fastened  in  a  sure  place,  upon  which  all  things  hang.  The 
keys  of  heaven,  and  death,  and  hell,  are  fastened  to  his  girdle,  and  the 
^^overnment  shall  be  upon  his  shoulders,  and  his  name  shall  be  called 
WonderfuL  Ho  hath  a  name  which  is  above  every  name,  before  which 
all  things  shall  how,  in  heaven,  and  earth,  and  under  the  earth.  He  is 
God  over  all  He  is  blessed  for  ever.  To  him  that  is,  and  was,  and 
is  to  come,  the  universal  song  goeth  up. 

But  there  is  another  relation  in  which  the  Son  of  God  has  gradonsly 
been  pleased  to  stand  towards  us.    He  has  undertaken  to  be  a  Saviour^ 


THE  PABABLE  OP  THE  WEDDIXO  FEAST.  87 

in  order  that  he  might  be  a  Jmdcgi'oom,  He  had  cnonp:h  glorj  before, 
but  in  the  greatness  of  his  heart,  he  would  magnify  his  compassion 
even  above  his  power,  and  he  therefore  condescended  to  take  into 
nnion  with  himself  the  nature  of  man,  in  order  that  he  might  redeem 
the  beloved  objects  of  his  choice  from  the  penalty  due  to  their  sins,  and 
might  enter  into  the  nearest  conceivable  nnion  with  them.  It  is  as 
Savionr  that  the  Father  seeks  to  honour  the  Son,  and  the  gospel  feast 
is  not  for  the  hononr  of  his  person  merely,  but  for  the  honour  of  his 
person  in  this  new,  yet  anciently  purposed  relationship.  It  is  for  the 
honour  of  Jesus  as  entering  into  spiritual  nnion  with  his  church,  that 
the  gospel  is  prepared  as  a  royal  entertainment. 

Brethren,  when  I  said  that  here  was  a  grand  occas?ion,  it  certainly  is 
so  in  God*B  esteem,  and  it  should  be  so  in  ours;  we  should  delight  to 
glorify  the  Son  of  God.  To  all  loyal  subjects  in  any  realm,  the  marriage 
of  one  of  the  royal  family  is  a  matter  of  great  interest,  and  it  is  usual  and 
fitting  to  give  expression  to  congratulations  and  sympathies  by  suit- 
able rejoicmgs.  In  the  instance  before  us  the  occnsion  calls  for  special 
joy  from  all  the  subjects  of  the  great  kins:  of  kings.  For  the 
occAsi(»i  in  itself  is  a  subject  for  great  delight  and  thankfulness 
to  UB  personally.  The  marriage  is  with  whom  ?  With  angels  ?  He 
took  not  np  angels.  It  is  a  marriage  with  our  own  nature,  "  he  took 
up  the  seed  of  Abraham."  Shall  we  not  rejoice  when  heaven's  great 
Lord  is  incarnate  as  a  man,  and  stoops  to  redeem  humanity  from  the 
ruin  of  the  fall  ?  Angels  rejoice  but  they  have  no  such  share  in  the 
joy  as  we  have.  It  is  the  highest  personal  joy  to  manhood  that  Jesus 
Christ  who  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God,  was  made  in 
the  likeness  of  men  that  he  might  be  one  flesh  with  his  chosen.  Arise 
ye  who  slnmber !  If  there  was  ever  an  occasion  when  ye  should  bestir 
yonr  spirits  and  cry  **  wake  up  my  glory,  awake  psaltery  and  harp  "  it  is 
now,  when  Jesns  comes  to  be  affianced  to  his  church,  to  make  himself 
of  one  flesh  with  her,  that  he  may  redeem  her,  and  afterwards  exalt  her 
to  sit  with  him  npon  his  throne.  Here  were  abundant  reasons  why  the 
invited  gnests  should  come  with  joyful  steps,  and  count  themselves 
thrice  happy  to  be  bidden  to  such  a  banquet.  There  is  overwhelming 
reason  why  mankind  should  rejoice  in  the  glorious  gospel  of  Jesus  anl 
hasten  to  avail  themselves  of  it. 

Beside  that  we  must  consider  the  royal  descent  of  the  Bridegroom. 
Remember  that  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour  is  very  God  of  very  God. 
Are  we  asked  to  do  him  honour  ?  It  is  right,  for  to  whom  else  should 
honour  be  given?  Surelv  we  should  glorify  our  Creator  and 
Preserver !  Wilftd  must  be  the  disobedience  which  will  not  pay  reverence 
to  one  so  highly  exalted  and  so  worthy  of  all  homage.  It  is  heaven  to 
eerve  such  a  Lord.  His  glory  reacheth  unto  the  clouds ;  let  him  be  adored 
for  ever  and  ever ;  0  come  let  us  worship  and  bow  down,  let  us  cheerfully 
obey  those  commands  of  God  which  aim  at  the  honour  of  his  Son. 

Kcmemberalso  the  person  oi  Immanuel,  and  you  will  desire  his  glory. 
This  glorious  Son,  whose  fame  is  to  be  spread  abroad,  is  most  certainly 
God — of  that  we  have  spoken,  but  he  is  also  most  assuredly  man,  our 
brother,  bone  of  our  bone,  and  flesh  of  our  flesh.  Do  we  not  delight  to 
believe  that  he,  tempted  in  all  points  as  we  are,  has  never  yet  sub- 
mitted to  be  stained  by  sin  ?    Never  such  a  man  as  he,  head  of  the  race. 


88  ]i£TROrOLITAN  TABSBNACLE  PULPIT. 

the  second  Adam,  tlie  everlasting  Father — ^who  among  Ufl  would  not  do 
him  reverence  ?  Will  we  not  sock  his  honour,  seeing  that  now  he  lifU 
onr  race  to  be  next  to  the  throne  of  God. 

Rememl)er,  too,  his  character.  Was  there  ever  such  a  life  as  his  ?  I 
\\\\\  not  so  much  speak  of  his  divine  character,  though  that  fhrnishei 
abimtlnnt  reason  for  worship  and  adoration,  but  think  of  him  even  as  a 
man.  0  beloved,  what  tenderness,  what  compassion,  yet  what  holj 
boUlncss ;  what  love  for  sinners,  and  yet  what  love  for  truth !  Men 
who  have  not  loved  him  have  nevertheless  admired  him,  and  hearts  in 
which  we  least  expected  to  see  such  recognition  of  his  excellencies  have 
nevci-thclcss  been  deeply  affcctcHi  as  they  have  studied  his  life.  We 
must  ]  (raise  him,  for  He  is  *' chief  among  ten  thousand,  and  altogether 
lovely."  It  were  treaspn  to  be  silent  when  the  hour  has  come  to  6|}eak 
of  him  who  is  peerless  among  men  and  matchless  among  angels.  Clap, 
clap  your  lianas  at  the  thought  of  the  marriage  of  the  King^s  Son,  for 
whom  his  bride  hath  made  herself  ready. 

Think,  too,  of  his  achievements.  We  take  into  reckoning  whenever 
we  do  honour  to  a  prince  all  that  he  may  have  done  for  the  nation  over 
which  he  I'ulcs.  What,  then,  has  Jesus  done  for  us  ?  Rather  let  me 
say  what  has  he  not  done?  Upon  his  shoulders  were  laid  our  sina ; 
he  carried  them  into  the  wilderness,  and  they  are  gone  for  ever. 
Against  him  came  forth  our  foes;  he  met  them  in  shock  of  battle,  and 
where  arc  they  now  ?  They  are  c^ist  into  the  depths  of  the  sea.  As  for 
death  itself,  that  last  of  foes,  he  has  virtually  ©vercome  it,  and  ere  long 
the  weakest  of  us  through  him  shall  say,  "  0  death,  where  is  thy  sting  ? 
0  grave,  where  is  thy  victory?"  He  is  the  hero  of  heaven.  He 
returned  to  his  Father*s  throne  amidst  ^he  acclamations  of  the  uni* 
verse.  Do  we  not,  for  wliom  he  fought,  for  whom  he  conquered, 
do  ive  not  desire  to  honour  him  ?  I  feel  I  speak  with  bated  breath 
upon  a  theme  where  all  our  powers  of  si)eecn  should  be  let  loose. 
Bring  forth  the  royal  diadem  and  crown  him !  Is  it  not  the  universal 
verdict  of  all  who  know  him  ?  Ought  it  not  to  be  the  cry  of  all  the 
sons  of  men  ?  East  and  west,  and  north  and  south,  ought  they  not 
to  ring  the  joy  bells  and  hang  out  streamers  on  his  marriage  day,  for 
loy  of  him  ?  Is  the  King's  Son  to  be  married,  is  there  a  festival  in 
his  honour?  0  then  let  him  be  great,  let  him  be  glorious  I  Lonff 
live  the  King!  Let  the  maidens  go  forth  with  their  timbrels,  and 
the  sons  of  music  make  sweet  melody — yea,  let  all  creatures  that  have 
breath  break  forth  with  his  praises.  '^Hosanna !  Hosanna !  Blessed 
is  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord." 

II.  Secondly,  here  is  a  generous  method  of  accomplishing  the  design. 
A  king's  son  is  to  be  honoured  on  the  day  of  his  marriage,  in  what  way 
shall  it  be  done  ?  Barbarous  nations  have  their  great  festivals,  and 
alas,  that  men  should  have  sunk  so  low ;  on  such  occasions  rivers  of 
Imman  blood  are  made  to  flow.  To  this  very  day,  on  the  borders  of 
civilisation,  there  is  found  a  wretched  tyrant  whose  infernal  customs, 
for  I  dare  not  call  them  by  a  less  severe  term,  command  the  murder  of 
hundreds  of  his  fellow  creatures  in  cold  blood,  on  certain  high  days  and 
festivals.  Thus  would  the  monster  honour  his  son  by  acting  like 
a  fiend.  No  blood  is  poured  forth  to  honour  the  Son  of  heaven's 
great  King.    I  doubt  not  Jesus  will  have  honour  even  in  the  destmction 


THE  PARABLE  OF  THE  WEDDIKG  FEAST.  89 

of  men  if  they  reject  his  mercy,  bat  it  is  not  so  that  God  elects  to 
Aority  his  Son.  Jesus  the  Saviour,  on  his  wedding-day  with  man- 
hood, is  glorified  by  mercy,  not  by  wrath.  If  blood  be  mentioned  on 
such  a  day,  it  is  his  own  by  which  he  is  glorified.  The  slaughter  of  mau- 
kind  womd  bring  no  joy  to  him,  he  is  meek  and  lowly,  a  lover  of  the 
sons  of  men.  It  has  been  the  custom  of  most  kings  to  signalise  a  princely 
wedding  by  levying  a  fresh  tax,  or  demanding  an  increased  subsidy 
from  their  subjects.  In  the  case  of  the  anticipated  wedding  of  our 
beloved  Queen's  daughter,  the  dowry  sought  will  be  given  with  great^^r 
pleasure  than  upon  any  former  occasion,  and  none  of  us  would  lift  a  wkis]>er 
of  complaint ;  but  the  parable  shows  that  the  King  of  kings  deals  with 
us  not  after  the  manner  of  man.  He  asks  no  dowry  for  his  Son ;  he 
makes  the  marriage  memorable  not  by  demands  but  by  gifts.  Nothing 
is  sought  for  from  the  people,  but  much  is  prepared  for  them,  gifts  are 
lavishly  bestowed,  and  all  that  is  requested  of  the  subjects  is,  that  they  for 
awhile  merge  the  subject  in  the  more  honourable  character  of  the  guest, 
and  willingly  come  to  the  palace,  not  to  labour  or  serve  at  the  table,  but 
to  feast  and  to  rejoice. 

Observe,  then,  the  generous  method  by  which  God  honoui*8  Christ  is 
set  forth  here  under  the  form  of  a  banquet.  I  noted  Matthew 
Henry*s  way  of  describing  the  objects  of  a  feast,  and  >vith  the  allitera- 
tion of  the  Puritans,  he  says,  "  A  feast  is  for  love  and  for  laughter,  for 
fulness  and  for  fellowship."  It  is  even  so  with  the  gospel.  It  is  for 
love ;  in  the  gospel,  sinner,  you  are  invited  to  be  reconciled  to  God,  you 
are  assured  that  God  forgives  your  sins,  ceases  to  be  angry,  and  would 
have  you  reconciled  to  him  through  his  Son.  Thus  love  is  established 
between  God  and  the  soul.  Then  it  is  for  laughter,  for  happiness,  for 
joy.  Those  who  come  to  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  believe  in  him,  have 
their  hearts  filled  with  overflowing  peace,  which  calm  lake  of  peace  often 
lifts  up  itself  in  waves  of  joy,  which  clap  their  hands  in  exultation. 

It  is  not  to  sorrow  but  to  joy  that  the  great  King  invites  his  subjects, 
when  he  glorifies  his  Son  Jesus.  It  is  not  that  yon  may  be  distressed,  but 
that  yon  may  be  delighted  that  he  bids  you  believe  in  the  crucified  Saviour 
and  live.  A  feast,  moreover,  is  for  fulness.  The  hungry  famislied  soul 
of  man  is  satisfied  with  the  blessings  of  grace.  The  gospel  fills  the 
whole  capacity  of  our  manhood.  There  is  not  a  faculty  of  our  nature 
which  is  not  made  to  feel  its  need  supplied  when  the  soul  accepts  the 
provisions  of  mercy;  our  whole  manhood  is  satisfied  with  good  things 
and  our  youth  is  renewed  like  the  eagles.  ''  For  I  have  satisfied  the 
weary  soul,  and  I  have  replenished  every  sorrowful  soul."  To  crown 
all,  tne  gospel  brings  us  into  fellowship  with  the  Father  and  his  Son 
Jesns  Christ.  In  Christ  Jesus  we  commune  with  the  sacred  Trinity. 
God  becomes  our  Father,  and  reveals  his  paternal  heart.  •  Jesus 
manifests  himself  unto  us  as  he  doth  not  unto  the  world,  and  the 
communion  of  the  Holy  Ghost  abides  with  us.  Our  fellowship  is  like 
that  of  Jonathan  with  David,  or  Jesus  with  John.  We  feast  on  the 
bread  of  heaven,  and  drink  wines  on  the  lees  well  refined.  We  are 
brought  into  the  heavenly  banqueting  house  where  the  secret  of  the 
Lord  is  revealed  to  us,  and  our  heart  pours  itself  out  before  the  Lord. 
Veiy  near  is  our  communion  with  God ;  most  intimate  love  and  con- 
descension does  he  show  to  us.    What  say  you  to  this  ?     Is  there  not 


90  MBTROPOLITAN  TABSRNACLE  PULPIT. 

here  a  rich  repast  worthy  of  him  who  prepares  it.  Here  all  your 
capacions  powers  can  wish,  0  sinner,  shall  be  given  to  yon ;  all  yea 
want  for  time  and  for  eternity  God  prepares  in  the  person  of  his  deur 
Son,  and  bids  yon  receive  it  without  money  and  withont  price. 

I  have  already  told  yon  that  all  the  expense  lies  with  mm.  It  was  i 
Tcry  sumptuous  festival,  there  were  oxen,  and  there  were  fatlings,  but 
none  of  these  were  taken  from  the  pastures,  or  stalls  of  the  guests.  The 
gos))el  is  an  expensive  business  ;  the  very  heart  of  Christ  was  drained 
to  find  the  price  for  this  great  festival;  but  it  costs  the  sinner  nothing, 
nothint^  of  money,  nothing  of  merit,  nothing  of  preparation.  You  may 
come  as  you  are  to  the  gospel  feast,  for  the  only  wedding  dress  required 
is  freely  provided  for  you.  Just  as  you  are,  you  are  bidden  to  believe  in 
Jesus.  You  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  receive  of  his  fulness,  for  to 
"  jis  many  as  received  him,  to  them  gave  he  jwwer  to  become  the  sons 
of  God,  even  to  them  that  Ixilieve  on  his  name."  You  are  not  asked  to 
contribute  to  the  provision,  but  to  be  a  feaster  at  the  divine  banqud^ 
of  infinite  compassion. 

How  honourable,  too,  is  the  gospel  to  those  who  receive  it.  An  in- 
vitation to  a  regal  niamagc  was  a  high  honour  to  those  who  were  bidden. 
I  do  not  suppose  that  many  of  us  are  likely  to  be  invited  to  the  Princess's 
weddinjr,  and,  if  we  were,  we  should  probably  be  greatly  elated,  for  we 
should  most  of  us  feel  it  to  be  one  of  the  great  events  of  our  lives.  So 
was  it  with  these  ))eople.  A  king's  son  is  not  married  every  day,  and 
it  is  not  everyl>ody  that  is  bidden  to  the  monarch's  entertainment  All 
their  lives  long  they  would  say,  '*  I  was  at  his  wedding,  and  saw  all  the 
splendour  of  the  marria^'e  festival."  Probably  some  of  them  had  never 
beiore  enjoyed  such  a  feast  as  the  luxurious  potentate  had  prepared  for 
that  day,  and  had  never  before  been  in  such  good  company.  My 
brethren,  nothing  so  honours  a  man  as  for  him  to  accept  the  gospel 
While  his  faith  honours  Christ,  Christ  honours  him.  It  is  no  mean 
thing  to  be  a  king's  son,  but  those  who  come  to  the  marriage  feast  of 
God's  own  Son  shall  become  King's  sons  themselves — themselves  parti- 
cipators in  the  glory  of  the  great  heir  of  all  things.  While  I  am  speak- 
ing of  this  generous  method  my  heart  glows  with  sacred  ardour,  and 
my  wonder  rises  tliat  men  do  not  come  to  the  banquet  of  love  which 
honours  all  its  guests.  When  the  banquet  is  so  costly  to  the  host,  so 
iree  to  the  guests,  and  so  honourable  to  all  concerned,  how  is  it  Uiat 
there  should  be  found  any  so  unwise  as  to  refuse  the  fieivonr.  Surely 
hei'e  is  an  illustration  of  the  folly  of  the  unrenewed  heart,  and  a  prooi 
of  the  deep  depravity  which  sin  has  caused.  If  men  turn  their  backs  on 
Moses  with  his  stony  tables,  I  do  not  marvel,  but  to  despise  the 
loaded  tables  of  grace,  heaped  up  with  oxen  and  fatlings — this  is  strange. 
To  resist  the  justice  of  God  is  a  crime,  but  to  repel  the  generosity  of 
heaven,  what  is  thi,s  ?  We  must  invent  a  term  of  infamy  with  which  to 
brand  the  base  ingratitude.  To  resist  God  in  majesty  of  terror  is  insanity 
but  to  spurn  him  in  the  majesty  of  his  mercy  is  something  more  than 
madness.  Sin  reaches  its  climax  when  it  resolves  to  starve  sooner  than 
owe  anythin?  to  divine  goodness.  I  feel  I  must  anticipate  the  period 
for  delivering  my  niessaj}:e,  and  as  I  have  described  to  you  the  way  in 
which  (lod  honours  his  Son,  1  must  at  once  )»roclaim  the  invitation,  and 
cry  to  you,  "  Come  to  the  wedding  feast.    Come  ye,  and  glorify  Jesna 


THX  PARABLB  OV   THB  WEDDIKa  FKAETT.  91 

by  accepting  the  provisioaB  of  grace.  Yonr  works  will  not  honour 
him,  if  yon  set  them  up  as  a  righteousness  in  competition  with  hia 
righteonsness.  Not  even  jonr  repentance  can  glorify  him,  if  yoa  th  ink 
to  make  it  a  rival  to  his  precioos  blood.  Come,  gaUty  sinner,  as  you 
are^  and  take  the  mercy  Jesns  freely  presents  to  you,  and  accept  the 
paidon  which  his  blood  secures  to  those  who  believe  in  him."  Methinks 
when  the  messenger  went  out  from  the  King  and  first  of  all  marked 
signs  of  neglect  among  those  who  were  bidden,  and  saw  that  they  would 
not  come,  he  must  have  been  mute  with  astonishment.  He  had  seen 
the  oxen,  and  seen  the  Mlings,  and  all  the  goodly  preparations,  he  knew 
the  King,  he  knew  His  Bon,  he  knew  what  joy  it  was  to  be  at  such  a 
(feast;  and  when  the  bidden  ones  began  to  tuni  their  backs  on  kirn, 
and  go  their  way  to  their  farms,  the  messenger,  repeated  his  message 
over  and  over  again  with  eagerness,  wondering  all  the  while  at  *the 
tzeason  which  dared  insult  so  good*  a  King.  I  think  I  sec  him,  at 
first  indignant  for  his  Master's  sake,  and  afterwards  melted  to  pity 
aa  he  saw  what  would  surely  come  of  such  an  extravagance  of 
ingratitude,  such  a  superfluity  of  insolence.  He  mourned  that  his 
feUow-citizens  whom  he  loved  should  be  such  fools  as  to  reject  sa 
good  an  offer,  and  spurn  so  blessed  a  proclamation.  I,  too,  am 
tossed  to  and  fro  iif  soul,  with  mingled  but  vehement  feelings.  0,  my 
Ood,  thou  hast  provided  the  gospel,  let  none  in  this  house  reject  it,  and 
80  slight  thy  Son  and  dishonour  thee,  but  may  all  rejoice  in  thy  generous 
way  of  glorifying  Jesus  Christ,  the  Bridegroom  of  his  church,  and  may 
they  come,  and  willingly  grace  the  festival  of  thy  love. 

III.  We  now  advance  to  our  third  point,  and  regretfully  remember 
THE  SERIOUS  HiKBRAKOE  which  for  awhile  inteifered  with  the  joyful 
event. 

The  king  had  thought  in  his  mind,  '*  I  will  make  a  great  feast,  I  will 
invito  a  large  number.  They  shall  enjoy  all  my  kingdom  can  afford, 
and  I  shall  thus  show  how  much  I  love  my  son,  and  moreover  all  the 
guests  will  have  sweet  memories  in  connection  with  his  marriage."  When 
his  messengers  went  out  to  intimate  to  those  who  had  received 
previously  an  express  invitation  that  the  time  was  come,  it  is  written, 
^  They  would  not  come ;"  not  they  could  not,  but  they  ''  ivould  not 
come.''  Some  for  one  reason,  some  for  another,  but  without  exception 
they  would  not  come.  Here  was  a  very  serious  hindrance  to  the  grand 
bosineas.  Oannot  the  king  drag  his  guests  to  the  table?  Yes,  but 
ttiea  it  would  not  accomplish  his  purpose.  He  wants  not  slaves  to 
grace  his  throne.  Persons  compelled  to  sit  at  a  marriage-feast  would 
not  adorn  it.  What  credit  could  it  be  to  a  king  to  force  his  subjects  to 
Ibast  at  his  table  ?  No,  for  once,  as  I  have  said  before,  the  subject 
must  be  merged  in  the  guest.  It  was  essential  to  the  dignity  of  the 
festival  that  the  guests  should  come  with  cheerfulness  to  the  festival^ 


92  KETBOPOLITAN  TABEBHAGLB  VUlSTt. 

bat  they  would  not  come.  Why?  Why  would  thqrnot  come?  The- 
answer  shall  be  such  as  to  answer  another  qaestion — ^Why  do  not  ytm- 
come  and  believe  in  Jesus  !  With  many  of  them  it  was  an  indURerenofr 
to  the  whole  aftair.  They  did  not  see  what  concern  they  had  in  the  king 
or  his  son.  Royal  marriages  were  high  things  and  concerned  high 
peo])le ;  they  were  plain-speaking  men,  farmers  who  went  hedging  and 
ditching,  or  tradesmen  who  made  out  bills  and  sold  by  the  yard  or 
pound.  What  cared  they  for  the  court,  the  palace,  the  kkig,  the  prince^ 
his  bride,  or  his  dinner !  They  did  not  say  quite  that,  but  sudi  waft 
their  feeling;  it  might  be  a  fine  thing,  but  it  was  altogether  out  oi 
their  line.  How  many  run  in  the  same  groove  at  this  hour  7  We  have 
heard  it  said,  **  What  has  a  working  man  to  do  with  religion  ?"  and 
we  have  heard  others  of  another  grade  in  life  affirm  that  persona  who 
are  in  business  cannot  afford  time  for  religion,  but  had  better  mind 
the  main  chance.  The  Lord  have  mercy  upon  your  folly  !  Here  ia 
one  great  obstacle  to  the  gospel,  the  stolid  indifference  of  the  human 
mind  concerning  this  grandest  of  all  conceptions — God's  glorifying  his 
dear  Son  by  having  mercy  upon  sinners. 

At  the  bottom  the  real  reason  for  the  refusal  of  those  in  the  paraUe 
was  that  tliey  were  disloyal,  they  would  not  come  to  the  supper  because 
they  saw  an  opportunity  for  the  loyal  to  be  glad,  and  not  being 
loyal  they  did  not  wish  to  hear  the  songs  and  acclamations  of  others 
who  were.  By  staying  away  they  insulted  the  king,  and  declared  that 
they  cared  not  whether  he  was  a  king  or  not,  whether  his  son  was  a 
prince  or  not.  They  determined  to  disavow  their  allegiance  by  refusing 
the  invitation.  They  said  in  effect,  ^'  Anyhow,  if  he  be  a  king  and  his 
son  a  prince,  we  will  do  him  no  honour,  we  will  not  be  numbered  with 
those  who  surround  his  board  and  show  forth  his  splendour.  No  doubt  a 
feast  is  worth  having,  and  such  a  feast  as  there  will  be  provided  t'were 
well  for  us  to  participate  in,  but  for  once  we  will  deny  our  appetites 
that  we  may  indulge  our  pride.  We  proclaim  a  revolt.  We  declare 
we  will  not  go.'*  Ah,  ye  who  believe  not  in  Jesus,  at  the  bottom  of  it 
your  unbelief  is  enmity  to  your  Maker,  sedition  against  the  great  Buler 
of  the  universe,  who  deserves  your  homage.  '*  The  ox  knoweth  his 
owner,  and  the  ass  his  master's  crib,"  but  ye  know  not,  neither  do  ye 
consider  ;  ye  are  rebels  against  the  Majesty  of  heaven. 

Moreover,  the  ref^isal  was  a  slight  to  the  prince  as  well  as  to  his- 
father,  and  in  some  oases  the  gospel  is  refused  mainly  with  this  intent^ 
because  the  unbeliever  rejects  the  deity  of  Christ,  or  despises  his  atona-^ 
ment.  0  sirs,  beware  of  this,  I  know  of  no  rock  more  fatal  than  tty 
dishonour  Christ  by  denying  his  sonship  and  his  deity.  Split  not  upon 
it,  I  beseech  you — ^'  Kiss  the  Son,  lest  he  be  angry,  and  ye  perish  firam 
the  way  when  his  wrath  is  kindled  but  a  little."  Indifference  coTered 
the  refusal  in  the  text,  "  they  made  light  of  it,"  but  if  you  take  off  thft 


THB  PARABLB  OF  THE  WEDDING  FEAST.  93 

film  yon  will  see  that  at  the  bottom  there  was  treason  against  the 
majesty  of  the  king,  and  distaste  to  the  dignity  of  his  son. 

No  doubt  some  of  them  despised  the  feast  itself.  They  must  have 
known  that  with  snch  a  kmg  it  conld  not  be  a  starveling  meal,  bat  they 
pretended  to  despise  the  feast.  How  many  there  are  who  despise 
the  gospel  which  they  do  not  understand,  I  say  which  they  do  not 
imderstand,  for  *  almost  invariably  if  you  hear  a  man  depreciate  the 
gospel,  yon  will  find  that  he  has  scarcely  even  read  the  New  Testament 
and  is  a  ntter  stranger  to  the  doctrines  of  grace.  Listen  to  a  man 
jrbo  is  Tolnble  in  condemnation  of  the  gospel,  and  you  may  rest  assured 
that  he  is  loud  because  he  is  empty.  If  he  understood  the  subject 
better  he  would  find,  if  he  were  indeed  a  m^n  of  candour,  that  he 
would  be  led  at  least  to  be  silent  in  admiration  if  he  did  not  become 
loyal  in  acceptance. 

Beloved  friends,  the  feast  is  such  as  you  greatly  need,  let  mc  tell  you 
what  it  is.  It  is  pardon  for  the  past,  renewal  of  nature  for  the  present, 
and  glory  for  the  future.  Here  is  God  to  be  our  helper,  liis  Son  to  be 
our  shepherd,  the  Spirit  to  be  our  instructor.  Here  is  the  love  of  the 
Father  to  be  our  delight^  the  blood  of  the  Son  to  be  our  cleansing,  the 
energy  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  be  life  from  the  dead  to  us.  You  cannot 
want  anything  that  you  ought  to  want,  but  what  is  provided  in  the 
gospel,  and  Jesus  Christ  will  be  glorified  if  you  accept  it  by  faitL 
But  here  is  the  hindrance,  men  do  not  accept  it,  **.they  would  not 
come."  Some  of  us  thought  that  if  wc  put  the  gospel  in  a  clear  lights 
and  if  we  were  earnest  in  stating  it  our  hearers  must  be  converted, 
and  Ood  forbid  we  should  ever  try  to  do  otherwise  than  make  it  plain 
and  be  earnest,  but  for  all  that  the  best  ministry  that  ever  was,  or  ever 
could  be,  will  be  unsuccessful  in  a  measure ;  yea,  and  altogether  so,  unless 
ihe  effectual  work  of  the  Spirit  be  present.  Still  will  the  cry  go  up, 
"Who  hath  believed  our  report?"  Still  will  those  who  serve  their 
«  MastOT  best,  have  reason  to  mourn  that  they  sow  on  stony  ground,  and 
cast  their  bread  on  thankless  waters.  Even  the  prince  of  preachers  had 
to  say,  "  Ye  search  the  scriptures,  for  in  them  ye  think  ye  have  eternal 
life,  but  ye  will  not  come  to  me  that  ye  might  have  life."  Alas,  alas, 
•that  mercy  should  be  rejected  and  heaven  spurned. 

ly.  So  now  we  must  close  with  the  most  practical  matter  of 
consideration,  .the  gracious  bejoindeb  of  the  king  to  the  imper- 
tinence which  interfered  with  his  plans.  What  did  he  say?  You 
will  observe  that  they  had  been  bidden,  and  then  called;  after  the 
'Oriental  custom,  the  call  intimated  that  the  festival  was  now  approach- 
ingy  BO  that  they  were  not  taken  unawares,  but  knew  what  they  did.  The 
second  inyitation  they  rejected  in  cold  blood,  deliberately,  and  with 
intent.  What  did  the  monarch  do?  Set  their  city  in  a  blaze,  and  at  once 
mot  oat  the  rebels?   No,  but  in  the  first  place,  he'winked  at  their  former 


94  METROPOLITAN  TABERNAOLB  PULPIT. 

insolenfc  refasal.  He  said  in  hiiDBelP,  <'  Peradventare  they  mistook  my 
servants,  peradyentnre  they  did  not  nnderstand  that  the  hour  was  come. 
Perhaps  the  mcs6ag:c  that  was  delivered  to  them  was  too  hmty  and  ih^ 
missed  its  meaning.  Or,  if  perchance,  they  have  fallen  into  some 
temporary  enmity  against  me,  on  reconsideration,  they  will  wish  thit 
they  had  not  been  so  rnde,  and  nngeneroas  to  me.  What  haTe  I  done 
that  they  shonid  refnse  my  dinner  ?  What  has  my  son  done  that  thej 
shonld  not  be  willing  to  hononr  him  by  feasting  at  my  table.  Men  love 
feasting,  my  son  deserves  their  hononr — why  shonld  they  not  come? 
I  will  pass  over  the  past  and  begin  again.**  My  hearers,  there  are  mtsaj 
of  you  who  have  rejected  Christ  afler  many  invitations,  and  this  morn- 
ing my  Lord  forgets  your  former  nnkindnesses,  and  sends  lae  again 
with  the  same  message,  again  to  bid  yon  ''come  to  the  wedding."  It 
is  no  small  patience  which  overlooks  the  past  and  perseveres  in  kindness, 
henestly  desiring  your  good. 

The  King  sent  another  invitation — "  all  things  are  ready,  come  ye  to 
the  marriage,"  but  you  will  please  to  observe  that  he  changed  the  mes- 
senger. "  Again  he  sent  forth  other  servants."  Yes,  and  I  will  say  it, 
for  my  soul  feels  it,  if  a  clianire  of  messengers  will  win  yon,  mnch  as 
I  love  the  task  of  six^aking  in  my  Master's  name,  I  wonld  gladly  die 
now,  where  I  am,  tliat  some  other  preacher  might  occupy  this  platform, 
if  thereby  you  might  be  saved.  I  know  my  speech  to  some  of  you 
must  be  monotonous.  I  seek  out  images  fresh  and  many,  and  try 
to  vary  my  voice  and  manner,  but  for  all  that  one  man  must  grow 
stale  to  you  when  heard  so  often.  Perhaps  my  modes  are  not  the  sort 
to  touch  your  peculiarities  of  temperament — well,  good  Master,  set 
thy  servant  aside,  and  consider  him  not.  Send  other  messengers  if 
perc'liance  they  may  succeed.  But  to  some  of  yon  I  am  another 
messenger,  not  a  better,  but  another,  since  my  brethren  have  fisuled  witii 
you.  Oh,  then,  when  my  voice  cries,  "  Come  unto  Jesus,  trust  in  his 
atonement,  believe  in  him,  look  to  him  and  live ;"  let  the  new  Toioebe 
successful,  where  fonner  heralds  have  been  disregarded. 

You  notice,  too,  that  the  messHge  was  a  little  changed.  At  first  it 
was  very  short.  Surely  if  men's  hearts  were  right,  short  sermons  would 
be  enough.  A  very  brief  invitation  might  suffice  if  the  heart  were 
right,  but  since  hearts  are  wrong  God  bids  his  servants  enlarge,  expand, 
and  expound.  "  Come,  for  all  things  are  ready.  I  have  prepared  my 
dinner,  my  oxen  and  my  fatlings  are  killed,  all  things  are  r^dy,  come 
to  the  marriage."  One  of  the  best  ways  of  bringing  sinners  to  Christ  is 
to  explain  the  gospel  to  them.  If  we  dwell  upon  its  preparations,  if  we 
speak  of  its  richness  and  freeness,  some  may  be  attracted  whom  the  short 
message  which  merely  tells  the  plan  of  salvation  might  not  attract.  To 
some  it  is  enough  to  say,  '*  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesas  Christ  and  thoa 
shalt  be  saved,"  for  they  are  asking,  "  Sirs,  what  must  I  do  to  be  saved?* 


THS  PARABLE  OF  THB  WEDDING  FBAST.  95 

fmt  others  need  to  be  attracted  to  the  wedding  feast  by  the  description 
<-of  the  snmptnousnesB  of  the  repast.    We  mnst  try  to  preach  the  gospel 
\inore  fally  to  yon,  bnt  we  shall  never  tell  you  of  all  the  richness  of  the 
grace  of  Qod.     As  high  as  the  heavens  are  above  the  earth,  so  high  are 
.his  fchonghts  above  yonr  thonghts,  and  his  ways  above  yonr  ways. 
Forsake  yonr  sins  and  yonr  thoughts  and  turn  to  the  Lord,  for  he  will 
abundantly  pard<Hi  yon.    He  will  receive  you  to  his  heart  of  love,  and 
.gire  yon  the  kiss  of  his  affection  at  this  honr,  i!^  like  prodigal  children, 
yon  come  back  and  seek  yonr  Father*s  face.    The  gospel  is  a  river  of 
kyre,  it  is  a  sea  of  love,  it  is  a  heaven  of  love,  it  is  a  universe  of  love, 
it  is  all  love.  Words  there  are  none,  inlly  to  set  forth  the  amazing  love 
of  Ood  to  sinners,  no  sin  too  big  or  too  black,  no  crime  too  crimson  or 
<ioo  cursed  for  pardon.    If  you  do  but  look  to  his  dear  crucified  Son  aU 
manner  of  sm  and  of  blasphemy  shall  be  forgiven  you.    There  is  forgive- 
ness.   Jesus  gives  repentance  and  remission.    And  then  the  happiness 
-which  will  be  brought  to  you  here  and  hereafter  are  equally  beyond 
description.    You  shall  have  heaven  on  earth  and  heaven  in  heaven ; 
Ood  riiall  be  your  Qod,  Christ  shall  be  your  friend,  and  eternal  bliss 
'J3hall  be  your  portion. 

In  this  last  messi^  the  guests  were  pressed  very  delicately,  but  still 

in  a  way  which  if  they  had  possessed  any  generosity  of  heart  at  all, 

must  have  touched  them.    You  see  how  the  evangelist  puts  it,  he  does 

not  say,  '^Come,  or  else  you  will  miss  the  feast ;  come,  or  else  the  king 

-will  be  angry;  come,  come,  or  else  you  will  be  the  losers."    No,  but  he 

puts  it,  as  I  read  it,  in  a  veiy  remarkable  way.    I  venture  to  say — if  I 

be  wrong,  the  Master  forgive  me  so  saying — the  king  makes  himself  the 

object  of  sympathy,  as  though  he  were  an  embarrassed  host.     See  here, 

'*My  dinner  is  ready,  but  there  is  no  one  to  eat  it;  my  oxen  and 

fatlings  are  all  killed,  but  there  are  no  guests."    "  Come,  come,"  he 

seems  to  say,  **  for  I  am  a  host  without  guests."    So  sometimes  in  the 

gospel  you  will  see  God  speaks  as  if  he  would  represent  himself  as 

-getting  an  advantage  by  our  being  saved.  Now  we  know  that  herein  he 

condescends  in  love  to  speak  after  the  manner  of  men.    What  can  he 

gain  by  us  ?    If  we  perish  what  is  he  the  loser  ?    But  he  makes  himself 

-often  in  the  gospel  to  be  like  a  father  who  yearns  over  his  child,  longing 

for  him  to  come  home.  He  makes  himself,  the  infinite  Ood,  turn  beggar 

to  his  own  creatures,  and  beseeches  them  to  be  reconciled.    Wondrous 

stoop ;  for,  like  a  chapman  who  sells  his  wares,  he  cries,  '*  Ho,  every 

•one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters ;  and  he  that  hath  no  money, 

let  him  come."    Do  you  observe  how  Christ,  as  he  wept  over  Jerusalem, 

seems  to  weep  for  himself  as  well  as  for  them.    *'  How  oft;en  would  I 

vhaye  gathered  thy  children  together."    And  God,  in  the  prophets,  puts 

it  as  bia  own  sorrow,  "  How  can  I  set  thee  as  Admah,  how  can  I  make 

'tbee  as  Zeboim,"  as  if  it  were  not  the  child's  loss  alone,  but  the  fother's 


\ 


DC  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

loss  also,  if  the  sinner  died.  Do  yon  not  feel,  as  it  were,  a  sympathy 
with  God  when  yon  see  his  gospel  rejected  ?  Shall  the  cross  be  lifted 
high,  and  none  look  to  it  ?  Shall  Jesns  die,  and  men  not  be  saved  faj 
his  death  ?  0  blessed  Ix)rd,  we  feel,  if  nothing  else  should  draw  nSi 
we  mast  come  when  we  see,  as  it  were,  thyself  represented  as  a  host 
under  our  embarrassment,  for  lack  of  guests.  Great  God,  we  come,  we 
<x>me  right  gladly,  we  come  to  participate  of  the  bounties  which  thou 
hast  provided,  and  to  glorify  Jesus  Christ  by  receiving  as  needy  sinnen 
that  which  thy  mercy  has  provided. 

Brethren  and  sisters  since  Christ  finds  many  loath  to  honour  him, 
my  exhortation  is  to  you  who  love  him,  honour  him  the  more  since  the 
world  will  not.  You  who  have  been  constrained  to  come,  remember  to 
sing  OS  you  sit  at  his  table,  and  rejoice  and  bless  his  name.  Next  go 
home  and  intercede  for  those  who  will  not  come,  that  the  Lord  will  en- 
lighten their  understandings,  and  change  their  wills,  that  they  may  be 
yet  constrained  to  believe  in  Jesus;  and  as  for  those  of  you  who  ibel 
half  inclined  this  morning  by  the  soft  touches  of  his  grace  to  come  and 
fcjist,  let  me  bid  you  come.  It  is  a  glorious  gospel — the  feast  is  good. 
He  is  a  glorious  king — the  Host  is  good.  He  is  a  blessed  Saviour,  he 
who  is  married,  he  is  good.  It  is  all  good,  and  you  shall  be  made  good 
too,  if  your  souls  accept  the  invitation  of  the  gospel  which  is  given  to 
you  this  day.  *'  He  that  helieveth  and  is  baptist  shall  be  saved :  he 
that  believcth  not  shall  be  damned."  *^  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesos 
Christ  and  thou  shalt  be  saved.'*  The  Lord  send  his  Spirit  to  make  the 
call  effectual,  for  his  dear  Son's  sake.    Amen. 


Portion  op  Scripture  Read  before  Sermon — Matthew  ixi. 


rhc  Attention  of  all  our  friends  is  earnestly  directed  to  the  Sebxbs  or 
Special  Services  at  thk  Taiieknaclb.  In  order  that  London  frienda  may 
unite  with  us  wc  will  publish  the  meetings  week  by  week,  and  then  our  coantty 
friends  can  join  with  us  in  spirit : — 

LnnVs-day.  Ffhnurru  10/A.— One  of  the  PMtors,  and  Deputations  from  th«  Blden,  wiU  addraa 
Mr.  HaiikB',  Mr.  Rowker's,  and  Mr.  McGregor's  cUtn. 

Monday,  February  20/A.— I'niyer  during  tlw  whole  day,  beginning  at  seven  a.m.,  and  a^Soum- 
ing  U*  the  TnlK'nioole  nt  seven  p.m.  It  isi  earnestly  desired  that  all  the  members  will  be  preaeat 
at  aouio  time  during  the  d:^'.  Endeavour  alao  to  bring  fhends  with  you  in  the  evening; 
esptKMiilly  such  ao  uro  unoonvortod. 

Turtday,  Ffhrmtry  S1«r.~Mt*4*ting  of  CItiMren  and  Tonng  P<Bopk  wider  Fifteen*  at  ssven 
o'clock.    (Tickets.)    A  Mothcn'  rrayer-uie^ting  nt  tho  i4uue  hour. 

Wtdneaday,  February  22iir/.— A  gathering  of  the  servants  of  our  members  and  friends;  and  of 
Mrs.  Tiewis's  and  Mrs.  Thomas's  meethigs.  Tea  at  nix ;  to  be  followed  by  adOreaaos.  (Tickets.) 
Enquiri'rs  will  find  fkiends  ready  to  converse  with  thetu  from  six  till  nine. 

Thurtday,  Febmary  ^-'trrf.^Toung  people's  prarer-meeting  at  six.  Arranptvmetits  uiadettaft 
enquirvrs  may  meet  with  fHemls  fur  directiuii  ana  encouragement  after  the  Leefcure. 

Friday,  Fthrwry  24/ A.— Prayer  for  our  orphans.  Public  Meeting  at  Stockwell  Orplianage  al 
eevcn.    One  of  the  Pastors  will  pn^side. 


|Pllctit0pflBiatt  iJatenmtk  |itl|tt. 


THE  WEDDING  GARMENT. 


%  pennon 


DKIJTEBEO  on  LoBD'S-DAT  MOBNINQ,  FeBBUABT   19th,    1871,  BT 

C.  H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  MKTROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,   NBWINGTON. 


**  And  when  the  king  came  in  to  see  the  guests,  he  saw  there  a  man  which  had 
not  on  a  wedding  garment :  and  ho  saith  unto  him,  Friend,  how  camest  thou  in 
hidier  not  haying  a  wedding  garment  ?  And  he  was  speechless.  Then  said  the  king 
to  the  aerrants,  Bind  him  hand  and  foot,  and  take  him  away,  and  cast  him  into  outer 
darkness  ;  there  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth.  For  many  are  called,  but 
few  are  chosen." — Matthew  xxii.  11 — 14. 

Apparently  the  parable  of  the  marriage  feast  would  have  been  com- 
plete withont  this  addition,  but  there  was  infinite  wisdom  in  appending 
this  seonel.  This  is  seen  practically  in  the  experience  of  the  church  of 
God.  Those  who  are  permitted  to  see  large  additions  to  the  church 
will  find  this  parable  of  the  wedding  garment  to  be  singularly  appropriate 
and  timely.  Whenever  there  is  a  revival,  and  many  are  brought  to 
Christ,  it  seems  inevitable  that  at  the  same  time  a  proportion  of  unworthy 
persons  should  enter  the  church.  However  diligent  may  be  the 
oversight,  there  will  be  pretenders  creeping  in  unawares  who  have  no 
true  part  or  lot  in  the  matter,  and  hence,  when  the  preacher  is  most 
earnest  for  the  ingathering  of  souls  to  Christ,  he  needs  to  couple  there- 
with a  holy  jealousy,  lest  those  who  come  forward  to  make  a  profession 
of  faith  should  be  moved  by  carnal  motives,  and  should  not  really 
have  given  their  hearts  to  God.  We  must  use  the  net  to  draw  in 
the  many,  but  all  are  not  good  fishes  that  are  taken  therein.  On  the 
threshing  floor  of  Zion  the  heap  is  not  all  pure  wheat,  the  chaff  is 
mingled  with  the  grain,  and  therefore  the  winnowing  fan  is  wanted. 
God's  furnace  is  in  Zion,  and  there  is  good  need  for  it,  for  the  gold  is 
vet  in  the  ore,  and  needs  to  be  sepai-ated  from  the  dross.  Wood, 
hay,  and  stubble  building  is  quick  work,  but  it  is  a  waste  of  effort ;  we 
need  continually  to  examine  our  materials,  and  see  that  we  use  only  gold, 
silver,  and  precious  stones.  It  is  most  needful  in  times  of  religious  ex- 
citement, to  remind  men  that  godliness  does  not  consist  in  profession, 
bat  must  be  proved  by  inward  vitality  and  outward  holiness.  Every- 
thing will  have  to  be  tested  by  a  heart-searching  God,  and  if,  when  he 
comes  to  search  us,  we  are  found  wanting,  we  shall  be  expelled  even 
from  the  marriage  feast  itself;  for  there  is  a  way  to  hell  from  the  very 
gates  of  heaven.  In  a  word,  it  is  well  for  all  men  to  be  reminded  that 
the  enemies  of  the  great  King  arc  not  only  outside  the  church,  but  they 
are  even  in  it ;  while  a  part  refuse  to  come  to  the  wedding  of  his  Son, 
others  press  into  the  banquet  and  are  still  his  foes.  May  God  grant 
that  this  subject  may  have  a  heart-searching  effect.  May  it  be  cc&  1.^*^ 
Jfoa.  076-77. 


9G  METROPOLITAN  TABEBNACLB  PULPIT. 

loss  also,  if  the  sinner  died.  Do  yon  not  feel,  as  it  were,  a  sympathy 
with  God  when  yon  see  his  gospel  rejected  ?  Shall  the  cross  be  lifted 
high,  and  none  look  to  it  ?  Shall  Jesas  die,  and  men  not  be  saved  faj 
his  death  7  0  blessed  Ix)rd,  we  feel,  if  nothing  else  should  draw  im, 
we  mnst  come  when  we  see,  as  it  were,  thyself  represented  as  a  hort 
under  our  embarrassment,  for  lack  of  guests.  Great  God,  we  come,  we 
come  right  gladly,  we  come  to  participate  of  the  bounties  which  thou 
hast  provided,  and  to  glorify  Jesus  Christ  by  receiving  aa  needy  ainnen 
that  which  thy  mercy  has  provided. 

Brethren  and  sisters  since  Christ  finds  many  loath  to  honour  him, 
my  exhortation  is  to  yon  who  love  him,  honour  him  the  more  since  the 
world  will  not.  Yoa  who  have  been  constrained  to  come,  remember  to 
sing  as  you  sit  at  his  table,  and  rejoice  and  bless  his  name.  Next  go 
home  and  intercede  for  those  who  will  not  come,  that  the  Lord  will  en- 
lighten their  understandings,  and  change  their  wills,  that  they  may  be 
yet  constrained  to  believe  in  Jesus;  and  as  for  those  of  you  who  Ifeel 
half  inclined  this  morning  by  the  soft  touches  of  his  grace  to  come  and 
fc'ist,  let  mc  bid  you  come.  It  is  a  glorious  gospel — the  feast  is  good. 
He  is  a  glorious  king — the  Host  is  good.  He  is  a  blessed  Saviour,  he 
who  is  married,  he  is  good.  It  is  all  good,  and  you  shall  be  made  good 
too,  if  your  souls  accept  the  invitation  of  the  gospel  which  is  given  to 
you  this  day.  ^'  He  that  helieveth  and  is  baptised  shall  be  saved :  he 
that  helieveth  not  shall  be  damned.*'  *^  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesos 
Christ  and  thou  shalt  be  saved.'*  The  Lord  send  his  Spirit  to  make  the 
call  effectual,  for  his  dear  Son*s  sake.    Amen. 


Portion  op  Scrti'turk  Read  before  Sermon — Matthew  xxi. 


The  Attention  of  all  our  friends  is  earnestly  directed  to  the  Sebxbs  or 
Special  Services  at  thk  Tabernacle.  In  order  that  London  frienda  may 
unite  with  us  wc  will  publish  the  meetings  week  by  week,  and  then  our  coantiy 
friends  can  join  with  us  in  spirit : — 

LorJCa-day,  Fth-unru  \9th. —Ono  of  the  Pastors,  and  Depntations  from  th«  BIden,  wfll  •ddrea 
Mr.  Hunks'.  Mr.  Bowker's,  oiid  Mr.  McGregor's  claaa. 

2fonilaif^  February  ZOfA.— I'myor  during  the  whole  dfty,  beginning  at  seven  a.m.,  and  a^Soum- 
ing  t<>  the  Tabeniacle  at  seven  i).m.  It  is  earnestly  desired  that  all  the  members  will  be  present 
at  some  time  during  the  di^.  Endeavour  also  to  bring  fHends  with  you  in  the  evening; 
especially  such  as  :iro  unconverted. 

Tuesdap,  February  81«/.— Meeting  of  Cliildren  nnd  Tonng  PeopV)  nnder  Fifteen,  at  aerea 
o'clock.    (Tickets.)    A  Mothers'  rra^'er-mo«ting at  the  hanio  hour. 

Wednesday,  February  22nd.— A.  gathering  of  the  8er\-ant8  of  our  members  and  friends ;  and  of 
Mrs.  Lewis's  and  Mrs.  Thomas's  meetings.  Ten  at  six ;  to  bo  followed  by  addreaaes.  (Ticketa.) 
£nquircrs  will  find  fHends  ready  to  converse  with  thetn  from  six  till  nine. 

Thwtday,  February  23rrf.— Young  people's  prayer-meeting  at  six.  Arrangements  made  tlial 
enquirers  may  meet  with  fHonds  for  direction  ana  encouragement  after  the  Leeturc. 

Friday,  Ftbruary  24/A.— Prayer  for  onr  orpluins.  Public  Meeting  at  Stockwcll  Orpluinageal 
seven.    One  of  the  Pastors  will  preside. 


JUlchtfljoBlan  i^alrcrnadc  iitlptt. 


THE  WEDDING  GARMENT. 


%  ^tmon 


Deutered  on  Lord's-day  Moenino,  Febkuary  19th,  1871,  by 

C.  H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  MBTROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NBWINGTON. 


'*  And  when  the  king  came  in  to  see  the  guests,  he  saw  there  a  man  which  had 
not  on  a  wedding  garment :  and  ho  saith  unto  him,  Friond,  how  earnest  thou  in 
hither  not  having  a  wedding  garment  ?  And  he  was  speechless.  Then  said  the  king 
to  the  aenrants,  Bind  him  hand  and  foot,  and  take  him  away,  and  cast  him  into  outer 
darkness  ;  there  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth.  For  many  are  called,  but 
few  are  chosen.'* — Matthew  xxii.  11 — 14. 

Afpabently  the  parable  of  the  marriage  feast  would  have  been  com- 
plete withont  this  addition,  bat  there  was  infinite  wisdom  in  appending 
this  seonel.  This  is  seen  practically  in  the  experience  of  the  church  of 
God.  Those  who  are  permitted  to  see  large  additions  to  the  church 
will  find  this  parable  of  the  wedding  garment  to  be  singularly  appropriate 
and  timely.  Whenever  there  is  a  revival,  and  many  are  brought  to 
Christ,  it  seems  inevitable  that  at  the  same  time  a  proportion  of  unworthy 
persons  should  enter  the  chnrch.  However  diligent  may  be  the 
oversight,  there  will  be  pretenders  creeping  in  unawares  who  have  no 
true  part  or  lot  in  the  matter,  and  hence,  when  the  preacher  is  most 
earnest  for  the  ingathering  of  souls  to  Christ,  he  needs  to  couple  there- 
with a  holy  jealousy,  lest  those  who  come  forward  to  make  a  profession 
of  faith  should  be  moved  by  carnal  motives,  and  should  not  really 
have  given  their  hearts  to  God.  We  must  use  the  net  to  draw  in 
the  many,  but  all  are  not  good  fishes  that  are  taken  therein.  On  the 
threshing  floor  of  Zion  the  heap  is  not  all  pure  wheat,  the  chaff  is 
mingled  with  the  grain,  and  therefore  the  winnowing  fan  is  wanted. 
God's  furnace  is  in  Zion,  and  there  is  good  need  for  it,  for  the  gold  is 
yet  in  the  ore,  and  needs  to  be  sepai'ated  from  the  dross.  Wood, 
hay,  and  stubble  building  is  quick  work,  but  it  is  a  waste  of  effort ;  we 
need  continnally  to  examine  our  materials,  and  see  that  we  use  only  gold, 
silver,  and  precious  stones.  It  is  most  needful  in  times  of  religious  ex- 
citement, to  remind  men  that  godliness  does  not  consist  in  professioui 
but  must  be  proved  by  inward  vitality  and  outward  holiness.  Every- 
thing will  have  to  be  tested  by  a  heart-searching  God,  and  if,  when  he 
comes  to  search  us,  we  are  found  wanting,  we  shall  be  expelled  even 
from  the  marriage  feast  itself;  for  there  is  a  way  to  hell  from  the  very 
gates  of  heaven.  In  a  word,  it  is  well  for  all  men  to  be  reminded  that 
the  enemies  of  the  great  King  are  not  only  outside  the  church,  but  they 
are  even  in  it;  while  a  part  refuse  to  come  to  the  wedding  of  his  Son, 
others  press  into  the  banquet  and  are  still  his  foes.  May  God  grant 
that  this  subject  may  have  a  heart-searching  effect.  May  it  be  as  tha 
^06.  076-77. 


98  HITBOPOLITAN  TABEBNACLE  FULPIT. 

north  wind  when  it  blows  throngh  the  marrow  of  the  bones.  May  ii; 
lead  us  to  desire  to  be  searched  and  tried  of  God,  whether  we  be  truly  in 
the  faith,  or  are  reprobates  in  his  esteem. 

The  parable  may  be  discoursed  upon  under  five  heads.  Here  is  an 
enemj/  at  the  feast ;  here  is  ths  king  at  ths  feast ;  that  king  becomes 
the  judge  at  the  feast ;  and  hence  the  enemy  becomes  the  criminal  at 
the  feast;  and  swiftly  is  removed  by  the  executioner  at  the  feast. 

I.  We  see  in  the  text  an  enemy  at  the  feast. 

He  came  into  the  banquet  when  he  was  bidden,  but  he  carae  only  in 
appearance,hc  came  not  in  heart.  The  banquetwas  intended  for  the  honour 
of  the  son,  but  this  man  meant  not  so ;  he  was  willing  to  eat  the  good 
things,  but  he  intended  no  respect  to  the  prince.  He  did  not,  like 
others,  say  "  I  will  not  come,  for  I  will  not  have  this  man  to  reign 
over  me;"  but  he  said,  **I  will  come,  but  it  shall  be  in  such  a  way 
that  the  royal  purpose  shall  not  be  served,  but  rather  hindered.  I  shall 
be  present  as  an  onlooker,  but  take  no  share  in  the  ceremony  ;  I  will, 
on  the  contrary,  show  that  I  have  no  care  for  the  business  in  hand,  except 
so  far  as  it  serves  my  turn."  The  man  came  in  the  full  exercise  of  self- 
will  and  self-love.  He  resolved  to  yield  no  homage,  but  to  assert  his 
independent  self-sovercigaty.  He  would  show  the  king  even  at  his 
table,  where  his  bounties  were  so  largely  dispensed,  that  he  was  not 
afraid  to  affront  him.  When  he  came  to  the  door  of  the  feast,  he 
found  the  guests  all  putting  on  the  garment  suitable  for  the  marriage 
banquet.  As  here,  in  our  own  country,  at  a  funeral,  each  mourner  is 
expected  to  put  on  the  articles  of  mourning  which  are  provided,  so  at 
the  wedding  feast  each  person  was  expected  to  wear  the  bridegroom's 
favours,  the  garment  which,  as  a  badge,  marked  him  as  an  attendant  at 
the  wedding,  and  as  one  who  rejoiced  in  it.  While  others  cheerfully  put 
on  this  wedding  dress  the  traitor  would  not;  he  resolved  to  defy  the 
rules  of  the  palace,  and  to  insult  the  king  by  appearing  in  bis  own 
garments.  He  scorned  to  wear  the  livery  of  respectful  joy,  he  pre- 
ferred to  make  himself  conspicuous  by  his  daring  insolence.  The  badge 
was  intended  to  show  that  tlie  wearer  was  a  real  participator  in  the  joy 
of  the  feast,  and  for  that  very  reason  he  would  not  put  it  on.  He  did 
not  acknowledge  the  king  nor  the  prince,  nor  care  one  atom  about 
the  gladsome  event.  He  had  no  objection  to  be  there,  to  eat  the 
dainties,  or  recline  upon  the  seats,  and  see  the  pomp  and  the  show,  but 
he  was  only  in  it,  ana  not  of  it ;  he  was  there  in  body,  but  not  in  spirit. 
Are  there  not  crowds  of  people  whose  union  to  the  church  is  nothing 
better  than  an  insult  to  God  ?  Custom  sways  them,  and  not  sincere 
faith.  They  have  no  reeard  to  the  great  Head  of  the  church  or  to  the 
heart-searching  God.  They  treat  church-membership  as  a  trifle,  and 
have  no  tenderness  of  heart  touching  the  matter.  They,  in  effect,  say, 
"  The  table  of  the  Lord  is  contemptible."  "  Spots  are  they  in  our 
feasts,  feeding  themselves  without  fear." 

Many  a  time  the  question  has  been  asked,  "What  was  the  wedding 
garment  ?  "  It  is  a  question  which  need  not  be  curiously  pryed  into.  So 
many  answers  have  been  given  that  I  conclude  that  if  our  Saviour  had 
intended  any  one  specific  thing  he  would  have  expressed  himself  more 
plainly,  so  that  we  should  have  been  able,  without  so  much  theological 
aiBpaiingy  to  have  understood  what  he  meant.  It  seems  to  me  Uiat 
our  Lord  intended  much  more  ftvan  an^  on^VJcvva^,   TVA^osts  were 


THE  WEDDING  GARMENT.  99 

bidden  to  come  to  the  wedding  to  show  their  respect  to  the  king  and 
prince ;  some  would  not  come  at  all,  and  so  showed  their  sedition  ;  tins 
man  came,  and  when  he  heard  the  regulation,  tliat  a  certain  garment 
should  be  put  on,  comely  in  appearance  and  suitable  for  the  occasion, 
he  determined  that  he  would  not  wear  it.  In  this  act  of  rebellion, 
he  went  as  far  in  opposition  as  they  did  who  would  not  come  at  all ; 
and  he  went  a  little  further,  for  in  the  very  presence  of  the  guests 
and  of  the  king,  he  dared  to  declare  his  disloyalty  and  contempt.  Alas, 
how  many  are  willing  enough  to  receive  gospel  blessings,  bnt  they  are  still 
at  enmity  with  God,  and  have  no  delight  in  the  only  Begotten  Son. 
Such  will  dare  to  use  the  forms  of  godliness,  and  yet  their  hearts  are 
fall  of  rebellion  against  the  Lord.  The  wedding  garment  represents 
anything  which  is  indispensable  to  a  Christian,  but  which  the  unrenewed 
heart  is  not  willing  to  accept,  anything  which  the  Lord  ordains  to  be 
a  necessary  attendant  of  salvation  against  which  selfishness  rebels. 
Hence  it  may  be  said  to  be  Christ's  righteousness  imputed  to  ns,  for 
alas,  many  nominal  Christians  kick  against  the  doctrine  of  justification 
by  the  righteousness  of  the  Saviour,  and  set  up  their  own  self-righteous- 
ness in  opposition  to  it.  To  be  found  in  Christ,  not  having  our  own 
righteousness,  which  is  of  the  law,  but  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God 
by  faith,  is  a  very  prominent  badge  of  a  real  servant  of  God,  and  to  re- 
fuse it  is  to  manifest  opposition  to  the  glory  of  God,  and  to  the  name, 
person,  and  work  of  his  exalted  Son.  But  we  might  with  equal  truth 
say  that  the  wedding  dress  is  a  holy  character,  the  imparted  righteous- 
ness which  the  Holy  Spirit  works  in  us,  and  which  is  equally  necessary 
as  a  proof  of  grace.  If  you  question  such  a  statement,  I  would  remind 
you  of  the  dress  which  adorns  the  saints  in  heaven.  What  is  said  of 
it  ?  "  They  have  washed  their  robes  and  made  them  white  m  the  blood 
of  the  Lamb."  Their  robes  therefore  were  such  as  once  needed  waslnng : 
and  this  could  not  be  said  in  any  sense  of  the  righteousness  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ ;  that  was  always  perfect  and  spotless.  It  is  clear  then 
that  the  figure  is  sometimes  applied  to  saints  in  reference  to  their  personal 
character.  Holiness  is  always  present  in  those  who  are  loyal  guests  of 
the  great  King,  for  **  without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."  Too 
many  professors  pacify  themselves  with  the  idea  that  they  possess  imputed 
righteousness,  while  they  are  indifferent  to  the  sanctifying  work  of  the 
Spirit.  They  refuse  to  put  on  the  garment  of  obedience,  they  reject  the 
wnite  linen  which  is  the  righteousness  of  saints.  They  thus  reveal  their  self- 
will,  their  enmity  to  God,  and  their  non-submission  to  his  Son.  Such 
men  may  talk  what  they  will  about  justification  by  faith,  and  salvation  by 
grace,  bnt  they  are  rebels  at  heart,  they  have  not  on  the  wedding  dress 
any  more  than  the  self-righteons,  whom  they  so  eagerly  condemn. 
The  fact  is,  if  we  wish  for  the  blessings  of  grace,  we  must  in  our  hearts 
submit  to  the  rules  of  grace  without  picking  and  choosing.  It  is  idle 
to  dispute  whether  the  wedding  garment  is  faith  or  love,  as  some  have 
done;  for  all  the  graces  of  the  Spirit  and  blessings  of  the  covenant  go 
together.  No  man  ever  had  the  imputed  righteousness  of  Christ  with- 
out receiving  at  the  same  time  a  measure  of  the  righteousness  wrought 
in  us  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  Justification  by  faith  is  not  contrary  to  tlie 
production  of  good  works :  God  forbid.  The  faith  by  which  we  are 
justified  is  the  faith  which  produces  holiness,  and  no  man  is  juatified  hv 
faith  which  does  not  also  sanctify  him,  and  deliver  him  Iroxa  \.\v^  \ox^ 


810 


^13 


100  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

of  sin.  All  the  essentials  of  the  Christian  character  may  be  under- 
stood as  makinjj  np  the  great  wedding:  garment.  In  one  word,  we  put 
on  Christ,  and  he  is  *'  made  of  God  unto  us  wisdom,  righteousness, 
sanctification,  and  redemption." 

The  wedding  garment  is  simply  mentioned  here  as  being  a  test  of 
loyalty  to  those  who  came  to  the  marriage  feast,  and  as  a  mode  by 
which  rebellion  was  avowed  and  loyalty  made  apparent.  Here  was  a 
man  then  who  came  in  to  the  gospel  feast,  and  yet  refused  to  comply 
with  the  command  which  related  to  that  feast.  He  wilfully  preferred 
self  to  God,  his  heart  was  full  of  enmity  and  pride,  he  despised  the  gifts 
of  grace,  he  scorned  the  rule  of  love,  he  stood  a  defiant  rebel  even  at 
the  banquet  of  mercy  which  his  King  had  spread. 

His  sin  lay,  first  of  all,  in  coming  in  there  at  all  without  the  wedding 
garment.  If  he  did  not  mean  to  be  of  one  heart  with  his  fellow  guesU 
and  his  lord,  why  did  he  come  ?  If  a  man  does  not  intend  to  yield 
himself  up  to  God's  will,  why  does  he  profess  to  be  of  God's  church  ? 
If  a  man  is  not  saved  by  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  why  does  he  pro- 
fess to  be  a  believer  in  Christ  ?  If  he  will  not  be  obedient  to  Christ's 
holy  will,  why  does  he  protend  to  be  a  follower  of  Christ?  It  is  a 
grave  mistake  for  any  person  to  imagine  that  he  can  be  in  the  church 
of  God  to  his  own  advantage  unless  his  heart  is  renewed,  unless  he 
means  what  he  declares,  and  sincerely  loves  the  rule  under  which  he 
professes  to  put  himself. 

The  intruder's  sin  was  aggravated  by  the  fact,  that  after  he  had  unlaw- 
fully come  into  thefeast  he  still  continued  there  without  the  wedding  robe. 
He  does  not  appear  to  have  had  any  compunction,  or  to  have  thought  of 
amending  his  error.  Only  when  the  king  came  in  and  said,  **  Take  him 
away,"  had  the  insolent  rebel  any  idea  of  removing.  Had  he  come  in 
there,  as  1  fetu*  some  of  you  have  come  into  the  church,  under  a  mistake, 
thinking  that  there  was  no  need  of  the  wedding  dress,  when  he  looked 
around  and  saw  all  other  persons  wearing  it,  and  observed  that  it  was 
the  peculiar  mark  of  a  guest,  he  would  have  felt  uneasy  and  have  gone 
to  those  who  kept  the  royal  wardrobe  to  get  such  a  robe  for  himself ; 
and  then  his  sin  in  the  matter  would  not  have  been  laid  to  his  charge. 
But  he  i>ersisted  in  remaining  where  he  was,  and  as  he  was.  0  my  dear 
hearers,  if  you  have  already  perpetrated  the  sin  of  union  with  the  visible 
church  of  God  without  having  the  prerequisites,  without  being  indeed 
submissive  to  God  in  heart  and  desirous  to  honour  Christ,!  eutreat  yon, 
seek  what  is  wanted,  seek  faith  in  God,  seek  a  new  heart,  seek  holiness  of 
life,  seek  to  become  a  loyal  subject  of  the  king,  and  be  not  content  until 
you  have  these  things,  for  the  King  will  soon  come  in  :  he  gives  you 
time  as  yet,  may  he  also  give  you  grace  to  see  to  it  that,  being  now 
where  you  ought  never  to  have  been,  yon  may  yet  make  your  position 
a  right  one  by  obtaining  that  which  will  justity  you  in  remaining  where 
you  are.  The  guest  in  his  own  clothes  was  a  speckled  bird  amongst 
that  company,  it  wiis  possible  for  him  even  then  to  have  become  one 
of  them;  but  he  would  not,  he  continued  to  defy  the  King. 

This  persistence  he  retained  though  he  probably  knew  the  fate  of 

those  who  had  refused  to  come.    He  knew  that  the  king  had  sent  forth 

his  ai'mies  and  destroyed  those  wicked  men  who  had  molested  his 

meBBengers,  and  yet  he  dared  to  recline  at  his  ease  in   the  veiy 

teeth,  and  defying  the  terribk  ]po\^et   of  the  monarch.    He  madf^ 


TIIE  WKDDING  GABMENT.  101 

his  brow  as  brass  and  hardened  his  heart  as  adamant,  and  forced 
his  way  into  a  position  where  his  seditious  spirit  would  be  able  to 
display  itself  conspicuously.  He  said  within  his  soul,  **I  care  nothing 
for  this  marriage.  I  will  make  sport  of  it;  I  \vill  intrude  myself  into 
that  feast  and  show  my  contempt.  I  will  take  the  provisions,  but 
the  son  shall  have  no  lionour  from  me,  and  the  king  shall  not 
find  me  bend  my  will  to  his  command."  Thus  he  had  the  audacity  to 
disport  himself  as  a  wilful  rebel  at  the  feast  of  mercy.  Are  there  any 
such  among  you  here?  The  tendency  will  be  for  those  who  are  not  so, 
to  begin  to  condemn  themselves.  I  know  already  one  who  has  said, 
"  I  am  that  gnest  that  had  not  on  a  wedding  garment."  She  is  not 
that  one,  for  she  is  not  even  a  member  of  the  church,  and  therefore  it 
cannot  concern  her;  but  many  like  her  write  bitter  things  against 
themselves.  Another  will  be  saying,  "  I  am  that  one,"  whereas,  if  there 
be  one  that  lives  near  to  God  and  whose  desire  is  to  be  like  Christ,  and 
to  be  in  all  things  conformed  to  the  divine  will,  he  is  the  man.  Yon 
who  are  most  assuredly  right  will  probably  be  suspicious  that  you  are 
not,  and  you  who  are  insincere  and  have  never  submitted  yourselves 
to  the  will  of  God  will  probably  say,  "What  does  it  matter?  I  am 
doing  as  well  as  others,  I  give  as  much,  I  attend  the  means  as  much, 
surely  there  can  be  no  cause  for  concern  in  me."  God  grant  that  you 
may  feel  anxiety  and  fear  before  the  Lord. 

II.  We  pass  on  to  the  next  point — the  kln'g  at  the  feast. 
"  The  king  came  in  to  see  the  guests."  What  un  honour  and  privilege  tliis 
was  to  the  poor  creatures  whom  his  royal  munificence  had  brought 
together !    Was  it  not  indeed  the  chief  point  of  the  entire  festival  ? 
One  of  our  greatest  joys  is  to  sing — 

**  The  king  himself  comes  near 
And  feasts  his  saints  to-day  !" 

What  would  church  fellowship  be  if  it  had  not  the  fellowship  of  God 
with  it?  To  sit  with  my  dear  brethren  and  rejoice  in  their  love 
is  exceedingly  delightful;  but  the  best  wine  is  fellowship  with  the 
Father,  and  with  his  Ron  Jesus  Christ.  The  king  did  not  provide 
the  banquet  and  leave  his  guests  to  eat  by  themselves,  but  he  **  came 
in;'*  and  into  every  gospel  church  gathered  according  to  his  command 
the  King  will  come.  I  am  sure  the  most  fervent  desire  of  this  church 
is  that  the  King  may  personally  visit  us.  We  trust  he  is  with  us,  but 
we  want  him  yet  more  fully  to  reveal  himself.  Our  cry  is,  "  Come, 
great  King,  with  all  thy  glorious  power,  with  thy  Spirit  and  with  thy 
glorious  £ton,  and  manifest  thyself  to  us  as  thou  dost  not  unto  the 
world." 

When  the  king  came  into  the  banqueting  chamber  he  saw  iJis 
(fuestSy  and  they  also  saw  him.  It  was  a  mutual  revelation.  Ever 
sweet  is  this  to  the  saints,  that  their  God  looks  upon  them ;  his  look 
brings  no  terror  to  our  minds  when  we  arc  loyal  and  loving.  **  Thou 
God  seest  me  "  is  sweet  music.  We  desire  to  abide  for  ever  beneath 
the  divine  inspection,  for  it  is  an  inspection  of  unbounded  love.  He 
sees  our  faults,  it  is  to  remove  them  ;  he  notes  our  imperfections,  it  is 
to  cleanse  them  awav.  Behold  me,  0  great  King,  and  lift  up  thine 
eyes  upon  me,  acceptmg  mo  in  the  Beloved.  What  joy  it  \a  \jci  \3l% '^^Yvo 
arc  saved  in  Christ  Jesus  that  wc  uJho  can  see  liiml    **  TlV\tox\^\  ^  ^vMe*^ 


102  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLB  PULPIT. 

darkly,"  I  p:rant  you  we  behold  him,  for  as  yet  we  arc  not  fit  to  behold 
the  lull  splendour  of  his  Godhead !  but  yet  how  sweetly  doth  he  reveal 
himself  to  our  souls  and  unveil  his  eternal  love.  Then  it  is  that  the 
feast  is  most  fully  a  banquet  of  wine,  when  the  banner  of  love  wavcB 
oyer  us,  and  the  kinj^^s  voice  fills  us  with  unspeakable  delight. 

"  The  king  came  in  to  see  his  jruests."  This,  I  say,  was  the  crowning 
point  of  the  entire  banquet.  Observe,  that  he  came  in  after  they  were 
in  their  places.  They  did  not  see  him  before  they  had  entered  his  balls. 
When  an  inferior  entertains  a  superior  he  always  advances  to  ihe  door 
to  meet  him  and  waits  till  he  comes.  If  her  Majesty  the  Qaeen  were 
entertained  by  one  of  her  nobles,  he  would  be  in  waiting,  and  at  the 
threshold  would  meet  her ;  but  when  a  superior  entertains  an  inferior 
the  inferior  may  take  his  scat  at  the  table,  and  when  all  is  ready  the 
noble  host  will  come  in.  It  is  so  in  the  banquet  of  mercy.  You  and 
I  see  nothing  of  God,  by  way  of  commonion  with  him,  until  first  we 
have  been  brouijht  in  by  the  message  of  mercy  to  the  marriage-feast 
of  the  gospel;  for,  indeed,  until  then  a  sight  of  God  woald  strike  as 
with  terror : — 

"  Till  God  in  humnn  flesh  I  see. 
My  thoughts  no  comfort  find ; 
The  holy,  just,  and  sacred  Three 
Arc  terrors  to  my  mind ; 

But  when  Immnnuel's  face  appear, 

My  hope,  my  joy,  begins  ; 
His  name  forbids  my  slavish  fear, 

His  grace  removes  my  sins." 

• 

When  I  <ret  to  the  banquet  of  mercy,  then  it  is  that  I  can  dare  to  look 
at  the  King  of  kings,  but  not  till  then.  What  a  joyous  sight,  a  vision 
of  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Father  of  glory  as 
he  appears  in  the  gospel,  feasting  us  upon  his  failings.  An  incar- 
nate God  makes  God  visible  to  us  and  makes  us  happy  in  the  sight 
**  How  canst  thou  see  my  face  and  live  ?"  was  the  old  question, 
but,  behold,  it  is  answered  this  dav.  At  the  marriage  union  of  Christ 
with  his  people  wc  see  the  face  of  tlie  King  in  his  beauty,  and  our  souls 
not  only  Jive,  but  we  have  life  more  abundantly. 

Observe,  dear  brethren,  that  the  King  has  special  times  for  this.  He 
is  not  always  in  the  festal  chamber ;  to  our  sorrow  we  sometimes  miss 
the  King's  presence  at  his  table.  We  have  the  ordinances  always, 
but  we  do  not  always  enjoy  the  God  of  ordinances.  The  means  of 
grace  are  abiding,  but  the  grace  of  the  means  will  come  and  go  accord- 
ing to  the  sovereign  good  pleasure  of  our  God.  The  King  has  his 
times  of  coming  in.  These  are  glad  times  to  his  people,  but  they 
are  trying  times  to  the  mass  of  professors.  When  are  these  times? 
So  far  as  unworthy  guests  are  concerned,  the  times  of  God's  visitation 
are  those  seasons  when  character  is  manifested.  All  times  and  periods 
do  not  reveal  character.  A  lion  may  lie  all  day  asleep,  you  may  scarce 
know  but  what  it  is  tame ;  but  when  the  night  brings  the  time  for  it  to 
go  forth  to  its  prey,  then  it  howls,  and  displays  its  ferocitv.  And  so 
an  ungodly  man  may  lie  down  in  the  church  of  God  with  the  lambs  ©f 
the  flock,  and  nothing  may  lead  you  to  suspect  his  true  character, 
but  when  the  time  comes  for  him  to  make  profit  by  sin,  or  to  get 
pleasarc  by  sin,  or  to  escape  from  pcisecwlvo^  m^  «wv,  Vfesav  ^ou  find  out 


THE  WEDDING  GARMENT.  103 

• 

what  he  is.  These  providences  are  the  King's  comins:  in  to  scrntinise 
the  ^ests.  Changes  in  the  conditions  of  the  church,  changes  in  the 
condition  of  the  individual,  all  sorts  of  providential  events  go  to  make 
up  the  great  sieve  by  which  the  wheat  and  the  chaff  are  separated. 

A  great  and  most  solemn  coming  in  of  the  King  to  see  the  guests  ia, 
when  having  looked  over  the  church,  unknown  to  us,  he  decides  that 
such  and  such  a  hypocrite  has  had  space  enough  for  repentance 
and  time  enough  for  mischief,  and  must  now  be  summoned  to  the 
dread  tribunal  by  death.  The  time  when  the  King  comes  in  to  see  his 
gaests  is  not  the  last  judgment,  for  that  is  the  coming  of  the  Son  and  not 
of  the  Father;  and  if  it  were  intended  in  the  paraljle,  we  should  read 
that  the  prince  came  in  to  see  his  guests.  We  are  led  to  view  the 
King  himself  as  continually  judging  professors  and  detecting  the  re'u^ls 
who  place  themselves  among  the  saints;  by  this  judgment  of  God  men 
are  taken  away  from  the  church  in  their  transgi-essions,  bound  hand  and 
foot,  and  cast  into  the  outer  darkness,  where  there  is  weeping  and 
gnashing  of  teeth.  I  do  not  know,  iny  dear  brethren,  when  God  may 
be  visiting  this  church,  and  taking  away  the  men  that  are  rebels  in  onr 
midst,  but  I  do  know  that  when  professors  die  it  is  not  certain  that  all 
of  them  sleep  in  Jesus,  but  some  of  them  are  rooted  up,  like  tares  from 
among  the  wheat,  and  are  bound  up  in  bundles  to  burn.  The  division 
is  going  on  constantly.  The  King's  presence  is  known  to  believers  in 
the  joy  which  they  feel,  but  it  is  made  known  to  hypocrites  by  his 
cutting  them  off  and  appointing  them  their  portion  in  eternal  woe. 

If,  however,  there  is  any  one  time  when  w^e  may  be  quite  sure  that  the 
King  comes  in  to  see  the  guests,  it  is  after  large  ingatherings  from  the 
world;  for  notice  here,  when  the  servants  had  gathered  in  guests  in  large 
numbers,  it  was  then  that  the  king  came  in.  Now  it  will  be  after  the 
time  of  revival  which  we  are  feeling  just  now,  when  I  hope  a  great  many 
will  be  added  to  the  church,  that  the  Lord  will  search  and  sift  us.  If 
there  has  been  no  visitation  of  the  church  before  for  purposes  of  love 
or  judgment — for  they  go  together — we  shall  be  quite  sure  to  have  such 
a  visit  from  the  great  Lord  himself  at  this  time. 

in.  Solemnly  think  of  the  judge  at  the  feast.  To  all  the  rest 
at  the  festival  he  was  the  king,  the  beloved  raouarch,  the  munificent 
donor  of  a  splendid  banquet,  and  all  eyes  feasted  as  they  looked  at  him : 
it  was  joy  enough  to  behold  the  king  in  his  beauty,  and  to  see  his  Son 
with  all  his  royal  jewels  on,  attired  ibr  the  wedding  feast ;  but  he  was 
a  judge  to  the  hypocritical  intruder.  The  day  of  comfort  to  his  saints 
is  also  the  day  of  vengeance  of  our  God.  He  who  comes  to  comfort  all 
that  mourn,  comes  at  the  same  time  to  smite  the  rebellious  with  a  rod 
of  iron. 

The  judge  begins,  as  you  perceive,  by  seeing,  "  He  saw  there  a  man." 
What  eyes  are  those  of  Omniscience  !  The  parable  represents  but  one 
snch  man  as  present,  yet  the  All-seeing  King  saw  him  at  once,  he  fixed 
his  flaming  eyes  on  that  one.  I  suppose  it  was  a  greater  crowd  than 
this,  but  the  king  fixed  his  eyes  on  the  solitary  offender  at  once.  Does 
the  parable  speak  of  only  one  because  we  may  expect  to  find  only  one 
hypocrite  in  a  church  ?  Alas !  there  have  been  many  such  at  the 
wedding  feast,  but  one  only  is  mentioned  to  show  us  that  if  there  were 
but  one,  God  would  find  him  out ;  and,  being  many,  the  sinners  in  ^vow 
may  be  the  more  Bure  that  they  mil  not  escape.    It  is  \io^sto\^  NJasi^* 


lot  Mi:ri:oi'OLiTAX  tabernacle  pulpit. 

none  oi  the  pncsta  inny  have  noticed  the  man's  garnients;  the 
pjirahle  makes  no  remark  u|)OU  any  expostulations  made  to  him  b/ 
others ;  perhaps  tliey  were  all  so  taken  up  with  the  sight  of  the  king, 
and  so  ^lad  to  be  at  the  feast  themselves,  that  they  had  no  heart  to 
make  remarks  upon  others.  But  this  is  certain,  that  the  king  detected 
at  once  the  absence  of  what  was  requisite  to  the  marriage  feast.  It 
was  not  the  presence  of  anything  offensive,  but  the  absence  of  something 
which  was  requisite.  He  did  not  say  to  the  unworthy  guest,  "  Thou 
hast  rags  upon  thee,"  or  "  thou  art  filthy,"  or  "  thou  hast  an  unwashed 
face :  "  he  enquired  solely  into  the  absence  of  the  peculiar  badge 
which  denoted  a  loving  guest.  God  will  judge,  and  does  continnallj 
judge  his  church  upon  this  question,  the  absence  of  what  is  absolutely 
necessary  to  being  a  Christian,  the  absence  of  honouring  the  Son,  and 
obeying  the  Father.  0  soul,  if  thou  art  a  professor  of  religion,  and  yet 
dost  not  love  Jesus,  and  dost  not  fear  the  great  King  of  kings,  thou 
lackest  the  wedding  robe,  and  what  dost  thou  here  ?  The  king  will  see 
at  once  that  thou  lackest  it.  Thy  morality,  thy  generosity,  thy  high 
Bounding  prayers,  ay,  and  even  thine  eloquent  discoursings,  these  cannot 
conceal  from  him  the  fact  that  tliy  heart  is  not  with  liiia  The  one 
thins:  needful  is  to  accept  loyally  the  Lord  as  King. 

The  king  next  began  to  deal  with  the  rebel.  Note  how  he  spoke 
witli  him.  He  took  him  on  his  own  ground.  It  was  too  high  a  day  for 
the  king  to  use  rough  speech  ;  the  man  pretended  to  be  a  friend,  and  he 
addressed  him  as  such,  but  though  the  word  I  doubt  not  was  uttered 
softlv,  it  must  have  stung  him  if  he  had  anv  feeling  left.  Judas  ex- 
emplified  in  his  own  person  this  character.  When  he  gave  the  Saviour 
the  traitor's  kiss,  our  Lord  addressed  him  as  '*  friend."  He  pre- 
tended to  be  a  friend.  A  friend,  indeed,  to  insult  his  king  at  his  own 
table,  and  to  select  for  the  insult  the  delicate  occasion  of  the  prince's 
marriage  to  which  he  had  been  hospitably  invited  !  This  was  infamous ! 
Friend  indeed!  Where  will  vou  find  enemies  if  such  shall  be  called 
friends?  The  king  ])Ut  it  to  him,  "  How  earnest  thou  in  hither  ?  What 
business  hast  thou  here  ?  What  could  have  induced  thee  so  maliciously 
to  defv  me  ?  To  smite  me  in  my  tonderest  point,  and  mock  ujy  guests,  anS 
trample  on  my  son  ?  Didst  th(ni  intend  such  daring  insolence  ?  *'  How 
earnest  thon  in  hither  ?  In  /lif/tcr/  Was  there  nowhere  else  to  pour 
forth  thy  sedition,  no  other  spot  in  which  to  play  the  traitor  ?  Needest 
thou  come  into  my  palace,  and  to  my  table,  and  before  my  son  on  his 
wedding  day  reveal  thy  enmity?  Was  there  a  need  to  do  this?" 
So  may  the  Lord  say  to  some  of  us.  "  Were  there  no  other  ways  to 
sin,  but  that  you  must  profess  to  be  my  servant  when  you  were  not 
so  ?  AVcre  there  no  other  bowls  that  you  could  drink  from,  that  ye 
must  i)rofane  tl.e  cups  of  my  table?  Was  there  no  other  bread  that 
you  could  put  into  your  wicked  mouths  but  the  bread  that  represents 
the  body  of  my  Son  ?  Had  you  uuwhere  else  to  si^i  in  that  you 
must  needs  sin  in  the  church  ?  Could  vou  do  nothing  else  to  show 
your  spite  but  that  you  must  make  a  lying  profession  of  faith  in  my 
Son,  who  bled  upon  the  cross  to  redeem  the  sons  of  men  ?  Could  you 
assail  me  nowhore  else  but  through  the  wounds  of  my  only-begotten 
Son  ?  Could  you  vex  my  Spirit  by  no  other  means  than  by  pretending 
to  be  my  friend,  and  thrusting  yourself  in  hither,  while  defiantly 
tvjocting  that  which  w^is  nwcssavy  W  do  \\\^  liouour,  and  to  do  my 


THE  WKDDINTt  GARMENT.  105 

Son  honour,  at  the  festival  of  ray  fjnice?"  I  dare  not  dwell  upon  the 
topic.  I  give  you  the  text ;  I  pray  that  your  conscience  may  preach 
the  sermon. 

Notice,  however,  one  thine:,  and  that  is,  that  the  king,  when  he 
thustnrned  a  judge,  dealt  with  this  man  only  ahout  himself.  '^  How 
earnest  ihmi  in  hither  ? "  Did  I  hear  a  whisper  in  some  one's  mind, 
"Well,  if  I  am  unfit  to  be  a  church  member,  there  are  a  great 
many  others  who  are  in  the  same  condemnation."  What  is  that  to 
thee?  See  thou  to  thyself!  When  the  king  came  in  to  see  the 
gnests  he  did  not  say  to  this  man,  '^  How  came  yonder  persons  here 
without  the  wedding  garment?'*  His  dealings  were  personal  with  him 
alone :  *'  How  camest  thou  in  hither,  not  having  on  the  wedding  gar- 
ment ?'  Professor,  look  to  thyself,  look  to  thyself.  Let  thy  charity 
begin  at  home.  Cast  out  the  beam  from  thine  own  eye,  and  then 
mayst  thou  see  clearly  to  cast  out  the  mote  that  is  in  thy  brother's 
eye.  He  fixed  on  the  one  man,  made  him  his  entire  audience,  and 
directed  to  him  the  solemn  question,  **  Friend,  how  camest  thou  in 
hither  ?  "  Ah,  my  dear  hearers,  as  the  pastor  of  this  church  it  has 
been  a  very  great  joy  to  me  to  see  our  numbers  increased;  many  have 
been  added  to  us,  and  many  have  gone  forth  from  us  to  form  other 
churches;  my  joy  has  been  constant  in  God  concerning  this  matter. 
Our  beloved  brethren  associated  with  me  in  otiice  have  done  their  besc 
to  keep  any  of  you  back  who  have  sought  membership  in  whom  we 
could  see  no  fruits  corresponding.  We  have  not  used  our  office  deceit- 
folly  ;  as  in  the  sight  of  God  we  have  tried  to  be  neither  too  severe  nor 
too  lax,  but  for  all  that  I  cannot  but  know  that  there  are  some  of  you 
who  are  not  Christians  though  you  bear  the  name.  Like  those  of  old, 
yon  say  you  are  Jews  and  are  not,  but  do  lie.  I  am  not  now  speaking  of 
any  who  have  fallen  into  sin  and  have  suffered  our  rebuke,  or  have  been 
separated  from  us  by  excommunication  and  yet  remain  in  the  congrega- 
tion ;  I  mean  others  of  you  whose  lives  are  all  that  could  be  desired  openly, 
and  yet  there  is  a  worm  at  the  heart  of  your  profession  ;  you  are  not 
vitally  godly,  you  have  a  name  to  live,  and  you  keep  that  name  un- 
tarnished as  yet,  but  you  are  dead.  Search  ye  yourselves;  do  not  from 
this  tabernacle  descend  into  hell ;  let  your  prayer  be,  "  Gather  not  my 
Bonl  with  sinners,  nor  my  hfe  with  bloody  men.'*  I  am  as  concerned 
abont  myself  as  about  you,  that  I  should  be  found  "  accepted  in  the 
Beloved  ;"  lest  after  having  preached  to  others  I  myself  should  be  a 
castaway !  Do  let  it  be  a  matter  of  solemn  anxiety  with  each  one. 
If  you  have  never  come  to  Jesus,  come  now ;  if  you  have  never  sought 
holiness  of  life,  seek  it  now.  If  you  have  never  had  the  wedding  gar- 
ment, it  is  yet  procurable;  go  ye  to  him  who  freely  gives  it,  the  Lord 
will  not  refuse  you ;  go  to-day  and  he  will  accept  you. 

IV.  He  who  was  the  unworthy  guest  is  now  TiiK  criminal  at  the 
FEAST.  The  king  has  now  become  a  judgo»to  him;  the  question  has 
been  personally  put  to  him,  and  ho  is  sppechleas.  Why  is  he  silent  ? 
Surely  it  was  because  he  was  convicted  of  open,  undeniable  disloyalty. 
No  evidence  was  required  ;  he  had  come  there  on  set  purpose  with 
malice  aforcthouirht  to  display  his  disloviilty,  and  had  done  so  in  the 
presence  of  the  King.  I  do  not  think  he  represents  at  all  a  person  who 
enters  the  church  through  ignorance,  with  a  sincere  but  ignorant  in- 
tention, but  lu  pourtrays  one  who  makes  a  DrofcBBion  n«\1\vo\x\.  ^«jcvi  \.q 


lOG  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PrLPIT. 

make  it  true — wilfully  despisinj^  the  Lord's  commands.  He  is  a 
man  wiilinj;:  to  be  saved  by  grace,  and  professing  to  be  so,  but 
refusing  to  acknowledge  his  duty  to  God  and  his  obligations  to  the  Son. 
He  was  speechless ;  he  could  not  have  chosen  a  worse  place,  nor  a  more 
impertinent  method  of  ventilating  his  disloyalty  than  that  which  he 
selected;  there  was  nothing  he  could  say  in  self-defence.  At  that 
moment,  when  the  King  looked  him  through  and  through,  he  saw 
the  full  horror  of  his  position;  his  loins  were  loosed,  like  Belshaz- 
zar  of  old  when  he  saw  the  handwriting  on  the  wall ;  he  saw  now  that 
his  time  to  insult  was  over,  and  the  day  of  retribution  had  come.  He 
was  taken  in  the  very  fact,  and  could  not  escape.  He  had  been  guilty 
of  a  superfluity  of  naughtiness,  of  an  unnecessary  extravagance  of 
wickedness  in  coming  into  the  feast  to  air  his  pride.  He  had  committed 
a  suicidal  intrusion.  He  might  have  kept  himself  away  at  any  rate, 
and  not  have  thrust  himself  into  the  Judge's  presence.  He  saw  now 
that  the  cause  of  sedition  was  hopeless,  the  King  was  there  and  he 
was  in  his  power  and  none  could  rescue  him.  Why  did  he  not  burst 
into  tears  7  why  did  he  not  confess  the  wrong  ?  why  did  he  not  say, 
"  My  King,  I  have  insulted  thee,  have  pity  upon  me?"  His  proud 
heart  would  not  let  him.  Sin  made  him  incapable  of  repentance. 
There  is  a  verse  in  one  of  Hart's  hymns  which  runs  thus — 

"  Fixed  is  their  everlasting  state  : 
Could  they  repent,  'tis  now  too  late." 

That  is  true  enough,  but  it  supposes  an  impossibility,  and  I  think  it 
would  have  been  far  better  to  have  said — 

"  Fixed  is  their  everlastin<(  state ; 
They  can't  repent,  'tis  now  too  late.'' 

Because  the  sinner  goes  on  to  sin  he  continues  still  to  suffer;  he  will 
not  turn,  he  cannot  turn.  As  the  Ethiopian  cannot  change  his  skin, 
nor  the  leopard  his  spots,  so  when  sin  has  reached  its  height  the  man 
cannot  bend,  or  bow,  or  retrace  his  steps.  Oh,  if  he  could  have  repented 
even  then  !  But  he  could  not ;  and  the  teai's  that  came  after  the  king 
had  pronounced  the  sentence  were  no  tears  of  penitence,  but  only  of 
despairing  pride,  lie  stood  spceihloss.  It  was  not  only  that  he  had 
no  excuse,  but  he  would  not  confess  his  wrong.  Have  I  any  one  here 
in  such  a  condition  of  heart,  that  while  he  h.s  been  sinning  by  making 
a  false  profession,  and  knows  it,  yet  he  sullenly  refuses  to  confess  his 
fault  ?  Yield  thee,  man !  Yield  at  once.  Fall  at  the  King's  feet  at 
once.  Even  if  you  are  not  a  hypocrite,  if  you  have  any  suspicion  that 
you  are,  fall  down  and  say,  *'  ^ly  King,  make  me  sincere ;  I  submit 
myself  to  thy  will,  and  am  ready  to  put  on  the  wedding  badge ;  if  there 
is  any  method  by  which  I  can  honour  thy  Son,  T  cavil  not  at  it;  let 
me  wear  his  colours,  and  be  known  by  all  men  to  be  truly  a  lover  of  the 
great  Prince." 

V.  But  now,  lastly,  while  he  stood  speechless  in  the  king's  presence, 
the  kiu'i  gave  ]>lace  to  tiik  kxhcutioner,  for  he  uttered  these  words, 
"  Bind  him  hand  and  foot.''  He  was  lawless,  make  him  feel  the  law  ; 
he  said,  "I  am  free,  and  I  will  do  as  I  like,*'  let  him  never  be  free 
again;  bind  liim,  pinion  him.  Exccntioner,  do  your  duty,  prepare 
him  tor  death,    AJas,  there  ai-e  Bomo  >\l\o  at^  bound   and    pmioned 


THK  WEDDING  GARMENT.  107 

eyen  before  the  breath  is  out  of  their  bodies.  In  their  dying 
hours  false  professors  haye  often  found  that  they  could  not  pray, 
and  could  not  repent;  like  dying  Spira,  that  arch-hypocrite 
and  apostate,  they  nave  been  sensible  of  misery,  but  not  penitent, 
and  no  gospel  promise  has  availed  to  comfort  them.  Their  hearts 
were  seared,  they  were  twice  dead  before  they  were  dead.  Then 
came  the  sentence,  *'  Take  him  away^''  which  is  sometimes  executed 
by  the  church  in  her  excommunications — deceivers  are  taken  away 
m>m  the  gospel  feast  by  just  discipline;  but  which  is  more 
folly  carried  out  in  the  hour  of  death,  when  the  man's  hope  fails 
him.  Ah,  sirs,  what  will  ye  do  if  ye  have  no  true  grace  in  your  hearts 
when  you  are  taken  away  from  the  Lord*s  table,  taken  away  from  the 
baptism  in  which  you  gloried,  taken  away  from  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel 
which  you  understooa  so  well  by  head,  but  which  you  did  not  know  in 
your  heart.  John  Bunyan's  description  of  the  man  dragged  by 
seven  devils,  bound  with  cords,  comes  up  before  my  mind.  "Bind 
him  hand  and  foot  and  take  him  away."  How  thankful  I  am 
that  the  servants  who  brought  them  in  are  not  the  same  who  were 
commanded  to  take  them  away.  The  Douloi  brought  them  in,  the 
diakonoi  took  them  away,  the  king  has  a  special  order  of  servants  for  the 
taking  of  deceivers  away ;  his  angels  do  that  in  the  hour  of  death — they 
execute  his  vengeance.  He  gives  us  ministers  a  better  oflSce,  he  bidi 
us  be  his  heralds  of  mercy.  Then  the  judge  said,  "  Goat  him"  fling 
him  like  a  useless,  worthless  thing.  That  wretch  has  dared  pollute  my 
marriage  feast,  cast  him  away,  as  men  fling  weeds  over  the  garden  wall 
or  shake  off  vipers  into  the  fire.  There  is  none  in  heaven  or  earth 
thought  more  despicable,  more  fit  to  be  thrown  away  as  rubbish  and 
offal,  than  a  man  who  had  a  Christian  name,  but  had  not  the  essentials 
of  the  Christian's  nature.  Cast  him  away.  Where?  "/n/<?  outer 
darkness**  far  from  the  banquet  hall  where  torches  flame  and  lamps 
are  bright  ;  drive  him  out  into  the  cold,  chilly  midnight  air.  He  has 
once  seen  the  light,  it  will  be  all  the  darker  now  for  him  when  he  is 
driven  into  the  dark.  There  is  no  darkness  so  dark  as  the  darkness  of 
the  man  who  once  saw  light.  Cast  him  into  the  outer  darkness. 
"What  will  he  do  there  ?  "We  are  not  told  what  would  be  done  to  him, 
it  was  not  needful,  we  learn  elsewhere  as  much  as  could  be  revealed 
to  us,  but  we  are  told  tvhat  he  did,  for  "  there  shall  be  weeping,"  not 
the  gush  of  tears  which  gives  relief  bub  the  everlasting  dropping  of 
scalding  tears  which  create  fresh  sorrow  and  enlarge  their  own  source. 
The  ontcast  shed  no  tears  of  regret,  but  of  sullen  disappointment, 
because  he  could  not  after  all  dishonour  the  king,  and  had  even  served 
to  illustrate  the  royal  justice  and  power,  and  so  had  brought  glory 
to  the  king  whom  he  hated  in  soul.  Then  came  the  "  gnashing  of 
teeth,"  caused  by  wrath  and  envy  because  he  could  do  no  more  mischief. 
No  sorrow  is  equal  to  that  of  a  malicious  spirit,  that  having  attempted 
a  daring  deed  of  atrocious  wickedness,  has  been  defeated  and  has  con- 
tributed to  the  triumph  of  the  good  and  excellent.  The  misery  of 
hell  is  not  a  misery  which  God  arbitrarily  creates,  it  is  the  necessary 
result  of  sin,  it  is  sin  itself  come  to  ripeness.  Here  you  see  the  picture 
of  the  man  who  was  insolent  enough  to  come  into  the  church  without 
being  a  Christian,  and  now  for  ever  he  gnashes  with  his  teeth  against 
that  glorious  Majesty  of  heaven  which  it  will  never  be  in  \i\a  ^^^t  \a 


108  MnTROrOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PUIJ»IT. 

injure,  bat  which  it  will  always  be  in  his  heart  to  hate;  and  this  will  be 
his  lioli — that  he  hates  God,  this  his  darkness — that  lie  cannot  see 
beauty  iti  God,  and  this  the  ooterness  of  the  darkness — that  he  cannot 
enter  into  God's  will.  "  Depart  ye  cursed,"  is  only  love  repelling  that 
which  is  not  lovely,  it  is  only  justice  giving  to  man  what  his  fallen 
nature  craved  after.  "  Get  away  from  me,  ye  did  not  honor  me  ;  when 
ye  did  come  to  me  it  was  with  your  lips  only.  Go  where  your  hearts 
were ;  depart  from  me,  ye  cursed."  Oh,  may  God  grant  that  not  one 
here  may  come  under  the  lash  of  this  terrible  parable,  but  may  we  be 
found  of  the  Lord  in  peace  in  the  day  of  his  appearing,  xou  see, 
then,  how  the  Lord  sifcs  us.  First,  we  are  sifted  by  the  preaching  of 
the  gospel,  and  many  will  not  come — there  is  one  heap  of  chaff :  next, 
by  the  judgment  of  God  in  his  church,  and  others  are  found  wanting 
— there  is  another  heap  of  chaff.  Ah,  when  this  is  done,  and  the  two 
great  sieves  are  used,  shall  we  b3  found  among  the  wheat  ? 

Do  you  say,  "the  sermon  has  nothing  to  do  with  me,  I  never 
made  a  profession,  I  shall  go  home  easy  enough."  Come  hither  friend, 
I  must  not  let  you  go.  There  is  a  vagabond  brought  before  the  magis- 
trate accused  of  theft,  he  says  he  is  perfectly  innocent,  but  he  is  con- 
victed, and  has  to  suffer  for  it ;  after  him  comes  a  bragging  fellow,  who 
says,  **  I  do  not  make  any  profession  of  being  honest,  I  rob  anybody  I 
can,  and  I  mean  to  do  so,  I  do  not  pretend  to  keep  the  law."  Why, 
methinks  the  magistrate  would  say,  "  I  condemned  the  man  who  did  at 
least  pretend  to  something  decent,  but  to  you  I  give  double  punish- 
ment, you  are  evidently  incorrigible,  and  your  case  needs  no  considera- 
tion." You  who  do  not  say  you  are  christians,  who  confess  you  are  not, 
you  avow  yourselves  the  enemies  of  Christ ;  get  no  comfort  therefore 
out  of  this  parable  I  pray  you,  but  yield  yourselves  to  the  Saviour,  and 
believe  in  him,  for  he  tliat  believeth  and  is  baptised  shall  be  saved. 


Portion  of  Scripture  Read  before  Sermon— Epistle  of  Jude. 


The  nttcntion  of  all  our  friends  is  earnestly  directed  to  the  Sekies  of 
RpE<'i  VL  Skrvicf:s  at  the  Tabkhxacle.  In  order  that  London  friends  may 
unite  '^vith  us  we  publish  the  meetings  week  by  week,  and  at  the  same  time 
our  country  friends  can  join  with  us  in  spirit: — 

LorCx-day,  TVftnwry  26^A .—Sermon  to  the  Sabbnth  School  and  young  people  genermlly.  By 
C.  \i.  S.,  at  3  p.m. 

Monday,  Februarv  27/A.— l^myer-mt'Ctinjc  for  females  only,  at  six.  Toung  people's  prayer- 
UKvliiip  ill  the  suue  linio.  At  Nt-ven,  Elders  aud  Deai*ous  will  deliver  addrcasoti  to  the  umvHi- 
vorled  at  the  lUiiial  prayer- mt'eting. 

Tuf^sIn;/,  Ffhn.ary  2S/A.— Groat  mooting  of  butchers*  men.  invited  by  Mr.  Hcnvy  Varley. 
Addressei)  in  the  Tiibernoelo  at  7.    (TK'^i-t'*.)    C  H.  S.  to  pixside. 

Wtfl.i.sJn,/,  M.i'uh  l«f.— Pniyor-nuvtiniTM  at  the  lionsrs  cf  our  friends,  according  to  list,  which 
will  be  Kx««iutL    .M:i>  ll.c  i»rayers  of  all  ilie  househuUls  Ik'  htanl  in  he:iven. 

Thursiiaii,  M  irdt  2'«/.-  Moihera'  pniyor-ujooliiis?  at  six.  Mcvtinc  for  i)crsons  under  conoeru 
of  Mjiihil  h.iir-p;ist  eight,  after  the  leetiire.    Fathers'  prayer-mevting  at  8.80. 

Friiaif.  M.uch  .V</.— Mrt't inic  of  our  voune  firiends  alxne  llflcen,  and  yet  unsaved.  Tea  at  six- 
(Tickets  to  Ih^  had  of  the  KMen.) 


lEWdrirpKtatt  Sfakrnade  f  tiljit 


THE  MASTER'S  PROFESSION— THE  DISCIPLE'S  PURSUIT. 


Deliyereb  on  Thuksday  Evening,  April  21st,  1870,  by 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT     THE     MKTROPOIJTAN    TABERNACLE,     NEWINOTON. 
In  aid  of  the  Baptist  Young  Men*s  Missionary  Association, 


"I  havo  preached  righteousness  in  the  great  congregation:  lo,  I  have  not 
refrained  my  Ups,  O  Lord,  thou  knowest.  I  Imve  not  hid  thy  righteousness  within 
my  heart ;  I  have  declared  thy  faithfulness  and  thy  salvation :  I  have  not  concealed 
thy  lovingkindness  and  thy  truth  from  the  great  congregation.** — Psalm  xl.  9,  10. 

Who  is  the  speaker  that  gives  utterance  to  these  marvellous  words  ? 
In  the  first  instance  they  must  be  understood  to  proceed  from  our  Lord 
Jesas  Christ.  By  the  Spirit  of  prophecy  in  the  Old  Testament  they  were 
spoken  of  him,  and  by  the  Spirit  of  interpretation  in  the  New  Testament 
tney  have  been  applied  to  him.  Mark,  then,  how  vehemently  he  here 
declares  that  he  has  fully  discharged  the  work  which  he  was  sent  to  accom- 
plish. When,  in  the  days  of  his  flesh,  he  was  crying  to  his  Father  for 
preservation  in  a  season  of  dire  distress,  he  might  well  ask  that  he  should 
then  be  helped,  since  ail  the  previous  strength  he  possessed  had  been 
laid  out  in  his  Father's  service.  But  because  this  profession  emphati- 
cally belons:s  to  our  Saviour  we  need  not  suppose  that  it  exclusively 
belongs  to  him.  On  the  other  hand,  Christ  being  our  forerunner  ana 
our  example,  we  are  encouraged  to  emulate  the  high  calling  and  the 
dutiful  obedience  he  so  perfectly  exhibited. 

I.  Undoubtedly  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  we  read  his  history 
IN  the  four  evanqblists,  most  gloriously  fulfilled  his  life- 

XISSIOK. 

He  was  constantly  testifying  to  the  gospel  of  God,  the  gospel  of  his 
righteousness  and  of  his  grace.  From  the  first  moment  when  he, 
being  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  began  to  preach  the  gospel,  until  the  day 
when  he  was  taken  up  into  heaven,  while  he  blessed  his  disciples,  he  was 
instant  in  season  and  out  of  season.  There  were  no  waste  moments  of 
time,  no  neglected  opportunities,  no  talents  held  in  reserve.  "  I  must 
work,"  was  his  motto.  The  zeal  of  God's  house  consumed  him.  It  was 
his  meat  and  bis  drink  to  do  the  will  of  him  that  sent  him.  A  marvellous 
study  is  this  life  of  Christ  on  earth ;  and  as  one  looks  at  it  thought 
begets  thought,  for — 

"  Kindred  objects  kindred  thoujjhts  inspire, 
Aa  Slimmer  clouds  flash  forth  electric  fire." 


110  METROPOLITAN  TABEnNACLK  PULPIT. 

Mark  ye  not  how  he  concentrated  every  aMribule  of  his  nature^  mmy 
faculty  of  his  mind^  and  every  power  of  his  body  iii  the  one  work  he  had 
undertaken — to  do  his  Father's  will  ?  He  seems  all  his  life  ihron^ 
to  have  challenged  the  enquiry,  **  Wist  ye  not  that  I  mast  be  about 
'my  Father's  bnsiness?"  lie  was  continually  preaching:  the  gospel 
"  Never  man  spake  as  this  man,"  may  apply  to  the  quantity  as  well  as 
the  quality  of  his  utterances.  All  places  seemed  to  be  alike  suitable  to 
his  ministry.  Yonr  gowns  and  your  pulpits,  your  chancels  and  naves, 
jour  aisles  and  transepts,  were  of  no  account  with  him.  He  wanted  no 
toga  or  rostrum,  nor  did  he  need  a  preconcerted  arrangement  of  the 
assembly  to  lend  grace  to  his  discourses  when  he  made  known  the  word 
of  God  to  the  people  and  astonished  them  with  his  doctrine.  He  could 
speak  anywhere — even  along  the  crowded  thoroughfare,  where  the  mul- 
titudes thronged  him.  He  went  down  the  lowest  streets,  and  from  the 
poorest  beggars  he  did  not  turn  aside.  He  was  not  thwarted  by  the 
sneers,  and  sarcasms,  and  subtle  questionings  of  the  Pharisees  and 
Sadducees.  One  thought  possessed  him,  and  he  persistently  wrought  it 
out.  His  life-sermon  was  so  thorough  that  nothing  of  earthly  splendour 
could  allure  or  distract  him,  or  hreak  the  thread.  He  was  always  and 
everywhere  either  pleading  with  God  for  men,  or  else  pleading  with 
men  for  God.  The  reiterated  expressions  of  these  two  verses  are  em- 
phatically the  truth  :  the  asseverations  arc  vehement,  yet  the  efifect  is 
a  noble  vindication  of  integrity.  **I  have  preached  righteousness 
in  the  great  congregation :  lo,  I  have  not  refrained  my  lips,  0  Lord, 
thou  knowest.  I  have  not  hid  thy  righteousness  within  my  heart;  I 
have  declared  thy  faithfulness  and  thy  salvation :  I  have  not  concealed 
thy  lovingkindness,  and  thy  truth  from  the  great  congregation."  He 
was  the  great  Witness  for  God,  the  great  Testifier,  who  went  proclaiming 
everywhere  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  the  good  tidings  of  salvation  to  men. 

Do  not  these  words  likewise  suggest  to  you  the  thought  that  Christ 
testified  frequently  to  t]ie  greatest  crowds  ?  "  I  have  preached  righteoujaiess 
in  the  great  congregation.  ...  I  have  not  concealed  thy  lovingkindness 
and  thy  truth  from  the  great  congregation."  On  the  hill-top,  where  his 
disciples  came  unto  him  and  he  began  with  his  benediction  of 
"Blessed,"  the  multitude  that  gathered  together,  when  he  sat  down 
and  taught  them,  was  doubtless  imposing::.  The  people  sometimes 
thronsred  to  hear  him  in  such  numbers  that  the  historian  describes 
them  as  innumerable,  and  tells  us  that  they  trod  one  upon  another. 
From  the  statement  given  us,  that  there  were  at  one  time  five  thousand 
and  at  another  time  four  thonstmd  men,  besides  women  and  children, 
collected  together  in  the  desert  place  and  the  wilderness,  when  he  fed 
them,  we  might  reasonably  infer  that  in  populous  places  the  crowds 
assembled  on  a  yet  vaster  scale.  Of  course,  the  whole  population  of 
Judea,  scattered  all  over  the  land,  was  scarcely  equal  to  the  population 
of  this  city,  and  therefore  greater  crowds  may  be  collected  in  London 
than  could  have  been  gathered  in  Jerusalem  ;  yet  the  concourse  there 
must  at  times  have  been  exceedingly  great  and  the  siKJctacle  unusually 
grand,  es[)ecially  when  at  the  great  feiist  our  Lord  stood  up  before  the 
people,  and  rang  out,  in  words  clear  and  distinct — "  If  any  man  thirst, 
let  him  come  unto  me  and  drink."  Why,  for  years  afterwards,  the 
yeiy  tones  of  his  voice  must  have  haunted  the  memories  of  those  who 


THE  MISTER'S  PROFESSION— THE  DISCIPLE'S  PURSUIT.  Ill 

stood  and  listened  to  him,  if  they  rejected  the  message.  It  is  not  easy 
to  scand  op  before  a  crowded  assembly ;  let  those  who  think  so  come 
and  try.  Oftentimes  it  tests  a  man's  valonr.  It  brings  him  many  trials 
to  his  spirit  to  be  prepared  for  the  work.  But  oar  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
was  fully  equipped  for  his  blessed  ministry.  He  was  a  great  preacher, 
with  a  great  message,  full  of  a  great  love,  with  a  great  Father  by 
whom  he  was  commissioned,  sustained,  cheered.  All  the  qualities  of 
his  character  and  conduct  were  congruous.  With  a  great  assembly  he 
was  at  home ;  for  his  sympathy  was  mighty  in  its  aggregate  and  minute 
in  its  detail.  At  the  same  time,  Christ  did  not  want  a  great  congre- 
gation to  enable  him  to  preach.  The  first  verse  of  our  text,  if  I  catch 
the  heart  of  its  meaning,  seems  to  me  to  intimate  that  he  could  speak 
personally  to  one  or  to  two :  "  Lo,  I  have  not  refrained  my  lips,  0 
Lord,  thou  knowest."  From  the  court  of  human  conscience  to  the  court 
of  divine  omniscience  the  appeal  is  carried.  Fame  hath  not  heard  of 
this  private  fidelity.  Howbeit  he  that  dwelleth  in  the  heavens  takes 
cognisance  of  it.  ^'  0  Lord,  thou  knowest,  and  canst  bear  witness 
to  it.  When  there  was  but  one  woman  at  the  well's  brink,  I  refrained 
not  my  lips."  When  there  were  but  two — ^liis  disciples,  as  he  was 
going  to  Emmaus — he  opened  his  mouth.  Whether  they  were  those 
whom  he  had  made  or  would  make  his  disciples,  he  had  a  word  for  all 
at  all  times  and  at  all  seasons.  In  this  we  ought  to  imitate  the 
Master.  Be  ready  to  tell  of  Christ  not  only  when  your  heart  is 
prepared  for  it  at  a  set  time,  but  at  all  times,  whether  you  have  prepared 
for  it  or  not.  Your  spirit  should  be  always  on  the  alert ;  you  should 
always  be  on  the  watch  for  souls.  Fain  would  I  be  like  the  eagle  that  is  on 
its  way  to  the  eyrie,  and  looks  for  it  long  before  it  comes  in  sight, 
and  no  sooner  discerns  it  than,  like  a  lightning-flash,  it  darts  off  and 
alights  upon  it.  0  for  a  heart  that  is  set  on  winning  souls,  that  is 
set  on  glorifying  God,  that  is  set  on  coming  nearer  to  the  model  and 
being  more  conformed  in  this  matter  unto  Christ  our  Head  !  Our  Lord 
could  truly  assert  that  he  had  not  kept  back  the  gospel;  he  had 
preached  it  publicly  to  the  crowds,  and  he  had  declared  it  privately,  as 
opportunity  allowed.  That  he  never  did  seal  his  lips  or  stifle  his 
t^timony,  he  could  call  God  to  witness. 

Does  not  the  tenth  verse,  in  its  first  clause,  iniimak  iliat  Chrisrs 
preaching  was  never  heartless  preaching  ?  "  I  have  nor.  hid  thy  righteous- 
ness within  my  heart."  As  if  he  had  said,  *'  It  is  in  my  heart,  but  I 
have  never  concealed  it  there.  What  I  have  received  of  thee,  0  my 
Father,  I  have  made  known  unto  the  people :  forsooth,  thy  will, 
which  I  have  observed  in  heaven,  and  engaged  to  fulfil  on  eartn ;  thy 
righteousness,  as  it  appears  in  the  justice  of  thy  throne  and  the  bene- 
volence of  thy  laws  ;  thy  faithfulness,  as  it  is  verified  in  the  stability 
of  thy  covenant  and  the  perpetuity  of  thine  ordinances;  thy  salvation, 
as  it  was  prepared  in  thy  counsels  of  old,  and  is  displayed  when  thou 
makest  bare  thy  right  hand  and  thy  holy  arm;  thy  lovingkindness, 
which  flows  in  one  perpetual  stream  of  mercy  ;  and  thy  truth,  which 
Bets  the  final  seal  to  thy  testimonies ; — all  these  have  1  treasured  in 
my  heart,  not  to  hide  them  from  the  children  of  men,  but  to  manifest 
them  for  the  jjlory  of  thy  name  and  the  welfare  of  thy  people."  Is  it 
80  ?    Then  this  solemn  protest  before  God  is  of  vital  interest  to  us. 


112  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Henceforth  eveiy  word,  every  statute,  every  precept  of  the  gospel, 
comes  to  us  distilled  throa<^h  the  heart  of  Christ.  I  like  the  idea  of 
pourin«;  our  sermons  out  of  our  own  hearts.  They  must  come  from  our 
lieartK,  or  they  will  not  ^o  to  our  hearers'  hearts.  But,  oh,  how  full  of 
gracious  secrets  our  hearts  ought  to  be,  priceless  secrets,  which  thoa^di 
hidden  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  are  revealed  unto  babes !  Jesua^ 
we  thank  thee  for  this,  that  thou  hast  not  concealed  thy  Father's  loving- 
kindness  and  truth  from  ns. 

Sec,  too,  our  Master  kept  alwa3rs  to  vital  matters.  We  notice  h^e 
how  he  uses  words  which  show  that  his  tcachin^i:  had  a  distinct  reference 
to  God.  *'  I  have  not  hid  thi/  righteousness ;  I  have  declared  thy  faith- 
fulness and  thj/  salvation  ;  I  have  not  concealed  fht/  lovingkindoess 
and  ihy  truth  from  the  great  congregation."  Our  Loixl  in  his  teaching 
never  seems  to  have  diverged  from  the  great  central  truth.  We  are  too 
apt  to  be  taken  up  with  the  mere  externals,  and  if  we  do  not  become 
mere  sectarians,  it  is  just  possible  that  points  of  our  creed  of  the  least 
importance  occupy  the  most  prominent  place  in  our  thought  and 
conversation.  Our  Lord,  with  eagle  eye,  descries  what  is  most  impor- 
tant for  men  to  know,  and  upon  that  he  dwells.  Sinners  must  know  of 
God's  righteousness;  they  will  never  know  their  sinfulness  else,  or 
knowing  it  they  will  think  it  to  be  a  little  thing.  The  righteousness  of 
God  comes  like  a  stream  of  light  into  the  soul,  and  reveals  its  corniption. 
God's  salvation,  again,  must  be  shown  in  its  true  colours.  It  does  not 
owe  its  origin,  its  accomplishment,  or  ^ts  ap])lication  to  our  works  or  our 
merits,  but  it  proceeds  from  God's  grace,  and  redounds  to  his  glory.  I 
hold  that  this  should  be  the  cherished  motive  of  the  gospel  preacher,  to 
glorify  God !  While  it  should  be  the  chief  end  and  aim  of  Christians 
ordinarily,  it  is  to  be  the  chief  end  and  aim  of  the  preacher  extraordinarily. 
Beyond  everyone  else,  he  is  concerned  with  that  which,  beyond  everj*- 
thing  else,  brings  glory  to  him  who  is  first,  last,  midst,  and  without  end. 
Jesus  Christ  preached  God's  ri<^hteousness,  and  showed  God's  righteous- 
ness even  in  salvation,  and  then  he  preached  that  salvation  fully. 

Nor,  dear  friends,  did  he  withhold  his  testimony  of  the  other 
attributes  of  God.  Think  for  an  instant  of  God's  faithfulness.  Oh, 
what  a  delightful  theme  I  As  immutability  is  a  glory  that  belongs 
to  all  his  attributes,  so  faithfulness  pertains  to  all  his  purposes  and 
promises.  Well  may  his  people  everywhere  rely  upon  his  fidelity.  Well 
may  we  tell  that  we  serve  no  mutable  God.  **  lie  is  not  a  man  that  he 
should  lie  ;  neither  the  Son  of  Man  that  he  should  repent.  Hath  he 
said,  and  shall  he  not  do  it?  Or  hath  he  spoken,  and  shall  he  not  make 
it  good  ?"  Moreover  he  will  rest  in  his  love,  **  for  the  Lord  will  not 
forsake  his  people  for  his  great  name's  sake."  He  is  **  the  Father  of 
lights,  with  whom  is  no  variableness,  neither  shadow  of  turning."  His 
promises  and  his  threatenings  abide  steadfast.  Side  by  side  with  the 
faithfulness  of  God  there  is  witness  of  his  lovingkindncss.  Oh,  what  a 
glorious  revelation  !  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is 
the  God  of  pity  and  of  pardon,  the  God  of  love.  Not  of  love  as  with  us, 
in  a  mere  effeminate  sense,  as  though  it  were  only  an  impulse  of  human 
admiration  that  would  wink  at  iniquities.  He  is  Love,  love  in  the  essence, 
love  essentially  divine ;  love  consistent  with  holiness,  that  bums  like 
Qiimcs  of  fire.    In  justice  deep  and  terrible  is  God ;  in  majesty  he  doth 


THE  master's  profession — ^TUE   DISCIPLE*8  PURSUIT.  113 

TiJe  on  the  wings  of  the  wind.  This  God  of  tempest,  is  the  God  of  God, 
and  this  is  the  God  whom  Jesns  preached ;  and  while  he  did  not  conceal 
the  sterner  attributes  of  the  Almighty,  yet  he  did  not  forget  to  depict  the 
heart  of  mercy  and  the  hand  that  is  ready  to  help.  The  God  whom  he 
preached  is  fall  of  gentleness  and  tenderness.  May  we  learn  to  believe 
m  the  God  and  Father  whom  his  only  begotten  Son  Jesns  Christ  de- 
lighted to  make  known,  and  if  called  to  testify  of  Him  may  we  testify 
fally  and  heartily  as  Jesus  did. 

To  sum  up  all,  we  may  say  that  our  Lord's  three  years'  ministry  was 
matchless  in  its  perfection,  such  as  he  could  look  back  upon  without  a 
single  r^ret,  but  with  unsullied  complacency.  It  was  matchless  as  to 
its  doctrines,  and  as  to  its  completeness  it  was  unsurpassed.  More 
might  be  said  of  his  manner,  which  was  full  of  tenderness  to  the  men 
among  whom  he  walked,  and  of  his  majestic  oratory,  which  we  may 
admire  and  seek  to  imitate,  but  which  we  can  reach  only  at  a  distance, 
for  it  is  peerless  beyond  all  competition,  it  stands  alone ;  '*  Never  yet 
man  spake  like  this  man,"  shall  be  true  of  him  to  the  world's  end.  All 
his  life  long  there  is  no  flaw,  there  is  no  excess.  **  I  have  finished  the 
work  wliich  thou  gavest  me  to  do,"  he  could  truly  say,  as  he  laid  down 
his  earthly  ministry,  and  ascended  to  exercise  his  ministrations  before 
the  throne.  In  the  retrospect  of  his  labours  there  was  no  occasion  for 
self-reproach,  no  cause  for  a  fault  to  be  found,  even  by  the  accuser  of 
the  brethren.  All  was  to  be  joy  and  rejoicing  when  he  had  completed 
his  life-work. 

Thus  much  concerning  our  Lord.  I  have  only  opened  the  door  for 
you  to  enter.  I  wonder  whether  it  will  ever  be  given  to  us  to  be  able 
to  say,  as  Christians,  in  our  humbler  measure,  what  he  said,  as  the  very 
Christ  in  such  exalted  strains  ? 
II.  Let  us  now  use  the  text  in  reference  to  ourselves. 
It  ought  to  be  the  ambition  of  every  believer  here,  in  a  sense  more  or 
less  extensive,  to  be  able  to  say,  "  I  have  preached  righteousness;  I  have 
not  refrained  my  lips;  I  have  not  hid  thy  righteousness  within  my  heart; 
I  have  declared  thy  faithfulncBS  and  thy  salvation;  1  have  not  concealed 
thy  lovingkindness  and  thy  truth." 

It  is  quite  certain  that  many  careless  Christians  will  never  be  able  to 
lay  this  unction  to  their  heaii.  In  all  our  churches  there  is  a  very 
large  proportion  of  idle  people.  I  hope  they  are  saved;  the  Lord  knows 
whether  they  are  or  not,  but  whatever  else  they  are  saved  from,  certainly 
they  are  not  saved  from  laziness.  We  have  in  the  visible  church  a  large 
proportion  of  flesh  that  is  not  living,  or  if  it  is  alive  it  gives  very  little 
mdication  of  life.  Now,  I  do  like  as  pastor  to  be  in  fellowship  with  a 
living  church,  all  alive,  and  everybody  active.  Though  it  may  be  our 
happy  lot  to  have  a  goodly  pre})onderance  in  this  church  of  living  men 
and  women,  I  know  there  is  a  considerable  portion  of  added  flesh  about 
it.  Albeit,  there  are  some  portions  of  the  body  which  may  be  said  to  be 
oroamental,  it  is  equally  true  that  they  also  have  some  distinct  service ; 
there  is  not  one  of  them  put  there  to  do  nothing.  Some  Christians 
seem  to  think  themselves  '*  a  thing  of  beauty  and  a  joy  for  ever*'  to  the 
church,  and  tiiat  they  have  nothing  to  do  in  it  for  the  common  weal. 
They  mttsl  imagine  that  they  are  ornaments,  for  certainly  they  are  of  no 
use,  so  fur  as  any  good  offices  are  concerned.    It  used  to  be  vViVmQ^X. 


114  METBOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

thoupfht  that  the  whole  duty  of  man  consisted  in  taking  your  sitting, 
paying  your  quarter's  rent,  filling  up  your  place,  and  listening  wiw 
more  or  less  attention  to  the  sermons  that  were  preached.  As  to  the 
idea  of  everybody  doing  something  for  Christ,  and  the  exhortation  to 
them  as  good  soldiers  of  the  cross  not  to  shirk  their  duty,  these  people 
said  that  it  was  sheer  madness.  To  do  or  dare,  to  labour  or  suffer  in  the 
cause  of  the  Captain  of  our  salvation,  was  no  article  of  their  creed. 
Sleepy  souls,  ^thoy  presently  become  victims  of  their  own  infatuation. 
As  men  who  habituate  themselves  to  take  opium,  they  grow  soporific. 
Then  their  Christianity  becomes  like  a  dream.  It  may  be  they  are  filled 
with  flattering  illusions,  but  in  full  many  a  case  they  are  scared  with 
strange  spectres  that  issue  in  the  short  sighs,  weak  cries,  and  dismal  groans 
of  doubt  and  fear.  Alas  for  them!  they  will  not  be  able  to  say,  ''I  hare 
preached  righteousness ;  lo,  I  have  not  refrained  my  lips,  0  Lord,  then 
knowest  I  have  not  hid  thy  righteousness  within  my  heart;  I  hare 
declared  thy  faithfulness  and  thy  salvation ;  I  have  not  concealed  thy 
lovingkindness  and  thy  truth."  Nay,  nay ;  when  their  conscience  is 
awakened,  they  shall  have  poignant  regrets  that  they  have  neglected  so 
many  glorious  opportunities  of  bringing  crowns  to  Christ. 

Nor  will  cowardly  people  be  able  to  make  this  protest.  Many  Christians 
are  of  a  retiring  disix)sition,  and  their  retiring  disposition  is*  exemplified 
somewhat  in  the  same  way  as  that  of  the  soldier  who  felt  himself  unworthy 
to  stand  in  the  front  ranks.  He  felt  that  it  would  be  too  presomptuons 
a  thing  for  him  to  be  in  front,  wlicre  the  cnnnon  balls  were  mowing 
down  men  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left,  and  therefore  he  would 
rather  be  in  the  van-guard.  1  always  look  upon  those  very  retiring 
and  modest  people  as  arrant  cowards,  and  I  shall  venture  to  call 
them  so.  I  ask  not  everv  man  and  woman  to  rush  into  the  front 
ranks  of  service,  but  I  do  ask  every  converted  man  and  woman  to  take 
some  place  in  t)ie  ranks,  and  to  be  prepared  to  make  some  sacrifice  in 
that  position  they  choose  or  think  themselves  fit  to  occupy.  But  ah  ! 
there  arc  some  who  shrink  back  from  any  ix)st  that  demands  toil  or 
vigilance.  When  they  were  young  their  ardour  was  never  kindled,  the 
spirit  of  enterprise  was  never  stirred  within  them.  Had  they  shown 
any  mettle  then,  they  might  have  been  lion-hearted  now;  had  they  done 
something  then,  their  career  of  usefulness  might  have  been  in  full 
vigour  now.  But  alas  for  the  man  upon  whom  there  is  the  rust  of  wasted 
years ;  he  waits,  he  doubts,  he  parleys  still,  and  shelters  himself  nnder  a 
fictitious  humility.  Would  God  I  had  more  courage  myself  but  I  will 
tell  you  one  thing,  I  dare  not  fold  my  arms,  nor  dare  I  hold  my  tongue  ;  it 
seems  to  me  so  awfnl  a  thing  not  to  be  doing  good,  and  it  seems  to  me 
so  dastxirdly  a  thing  to  shrink  back  when  opportunities  lie  in  one's  path. 
I  do  wish  that  some  of  you  would  learn  to  imitate  the  character  of  the 
godly  man — 

"  Who  holds  no  parley  with  unmanly  foars  ; 
Where  duty  bids,  he  conBdently  Btcers, 
Faces  a  thousand  dan^irers  nt  her  call, 
And,  trusting  in  his  God,  surmounts  them  nll.^* 

The  cowards  will  not  be  able  to  say,  "  I  have  preached  righteousness:  lo, 
I  have  not  refrained  my  lips,  0  Lord,  thou  knowest.  I  have  not  hid  thy 
righteousness  within  my  heart;  I  have  declared   thy  faithfulness  and 


THE  MABTBR'S  FB0FES8I0N — THE  DISCIPLE'S  PURSUIT.  115 

thy  salTation :  I  have  not  concealed  thy  loyingkindncss  and  thy 
truth." 

Nor,  again,  will  spasmodic  people  be  able  to  adopt  this  language.  There 
are  some  people  who,  if  there  is  a  revival,  are  bo  marvellously  zealous 
and  earnest  that  we  are  ready  to  clap  our  hands,  but  all  on  a  sudden 
they  stop.  That  Sunday-school  class  they  were  just  getting  into  ri^ht 
order,  bat  before  there  was  an  opportunity  to  reap  the  fruit  they  felt 
it  was  not  precisely  what  they  were  called  to.  That  Young  Men's  Bible 
Class — ^yes,  that  was  a  happy  thought,  the  pastor  was  delighted;  but, 
unfortanately,  some  little  diiiicalty  occurred  that  you  had  not  foreseen, 
and  that  also  has  fallen  through.  So  it  has  been  in  other  cases.  Know 
therefore  that  those  who  cannot,  like  the  Master,  look  back  upon  a  con* 
tinoons  and  persevering  testimony,  will  nob  be  able  to  speak  with  a  clear 
conscience  as  he  did. 

Bat  although  so  many  classes  of  those  who  profess  and  call  them- 
selves Christians  will  not  be  able  to  take  a  happy  retropect  of  their 
lives,  yet  there  are  not  wanting  those  who  could  do  so.  I  have  known 
men  of  one  talent  who  without  any  self-righteousness  could  say,  *'I  have 

E reached  righteousness ;  1  have  not  refrained  my  lips,  0  Lord,  thou 
newest  I  have  not  hid  thy  righteousness  within  my  heart ;  I  have 
declared  thy  faithfulness  and  thy  salvation;  I  have  not  concealed  thy 
lovingkindness  and  thy  truth."  Dear  good  men  in  many  a  country  vil- 
lage whose  names  will  never  be  known  to  fame  have  gathered  just  a 
few  people  together  and  have  preached  on,  on,  on  for  years,  and  when  they 
come  to  die  in  the  Lord  ai^  rest  from  their  labours,  their  works  will 
follow  them,  and  their  life-service  will  be  as  acceptable  as  the  services  of 
many  men  with  ten  times  the  talents  and  ten  times  the  scope  for  their 
exercise.  Perhaps  the  Master  will  say  to  them,  '*  Well  done!"  with  a 
stronger  emphasis  than  to  some  who  were  better  known.  That  poor 
girl  whose  only  work  she  could  do  for  Christ  was  to  teach  those  two 
little  children  who  were  entrusted  to  her;  and  that  nursery  maid  with 
but  one  gift,  and  one  only,  may  be  able  to  say,  "  I  have  preached 
righteonsness;  lo !  I  have  not  refrained  my  lips :  I  have  declared  thy 
faithfulness  and  thy  salvation ;  1  have  not  concealed  thy  lovingkindness 
and  thy  truth.'*  You  one-talent  servants,  you  have  this  within  your  reach. 
And  those,  too,  with  an  extremehj  imrrow  spheie  may  be  able  to 
say  this.  It  is  not,  perhaps,  the  man  who  can  stand  and  talk  to 
thousands,  but  it  may  be  you  in  the  family — the  housewife,  the  kitchen 
maid,  the  serving-man,  or  the  woman  who  has  been  bed-ridden  for  years, 
whose  only  audience  will  be  a  few  poor  neighbours,  or  perhaps,  now 
and  then,  a  generous  friend — it  is  you  within  these  narrow  spheres  who 
may  yet  be  able  to  say,  **  I  have  preached  righteousness ;  I  have  not 
refrained  my  lips,  0  Lord,  thou  knowest ;  I  have  not  hid  thy  righteous- 
ness within  my  heart ;  I  have  declared  thy  faithfulness  and  thy  salva- 
tion ;  I  have  not  concealed  thy  lovingkindness  and  thy  truth."  I  have 
sat  by  a  bedside  where  I  have  envied  the  poor  woman  despite  the 
agonies  and  pains  of  body  she  suffered,  because  she  yet  could  praise  and 
magnify  the  lovingkindness  revealed  to  her  there. 

But,  brethren,  we  may  he  able  to  quote  these  words,  some  of  us  to 
whom  greater  talents  have  been  committed.  Though  we  may  feel  that 
we  have  not  preached  as  earnestly  as  we  could  have  wished  *^  that  viq 


lie  METa01X>LITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

have  not  done  onr  utmost  towards  those  whom  we  have  taught ;  tiiat  in 
our  house-to-houBC  visitation  we  have  not  been  so  earnest  witli  poor  aoali 
as  we  might  have  been  in  this  respect,  for  alas  !  alas !  we  are  all  uu- 

frofi table  servants;  yet  we  can  say,  '^  I  have  preached  righteousness ; 
have  not  refrained  my  lips,  O  Lord,  thou  knowest  I  have  not  hid 
thy  righteousness  within  my  heart ;  I  have  declared  thy  faithfulness 
and  thy  salvation ;  I  have  not  concealed  thv  lovingkindness  and  thj 
truth." 

Fervently  do  I  hope  that  those  of  you  with  the  largest  oppartumUee 
may  yet  be  privileged  to  make  this  good  profession  with  all  sincerity. 
I  am  not  afraid  for  those  friends  who  have  but  narrow  spheres — Bome- 
times  I  wish  that  mine  were  such — I  am  not  afraid  for  those  in  humbler 
fields,  but  oh,  if  with  such  spheres,  and  such  churches  as  God  here  and 
there  allots  to  some  of  his  servants,  they  can  thus  give  ac-count  of  their 
stewardship,  it  will  be  grace  indeed,  and  to  grace  alone  will  the  honour 
be  due.  Yet  let  us  hope  that  we  too  may  be  able  to  say,  '*  I  have  preached 
righteousness  in  the  great  congregation ;  lo,  1  have  not  refrained  my  lips, 

0  Lord,  thou  knowest.   I  have  not  hid  thy  righteousness  within  my  heart ; 

1  have  declared  thy  faithfulness  and  thy  salvation ;  I  have  not  concealed 
thy  lovingkindness  and  thy  truth  from  the  great  congregation." 

in.  It  is  with  an  overwhelming  sense  of  the  importance  as  well  as  the 
moral  grandeur  of  this  profession  that  1  re]>eat  it  to  you  again  and 
again;  lor  when  we  are  able  to  feel  this,  and  to  say  it  humbly  and 
confidently,  with  good  faith  and  without  guile,  it  casts  much  oomfobt- 

ABLK   UGHT  OX  MANY   SOLEMN   RUJUECT8.     J 

How  awful  to  remember  that  every  hour  there  are  hundreds  of  men 
and  women  who  are  dying  witJiout  Christ,  Turn  to  the  bills  of  mortality 
of  this  one  city.  Be  our  sentiments  ever  so  charitable,  let  us  judge  with  the 
utmost  liberality,  the  dreadful  fact  fills  our  mind,  and  every  knell  speaks 
it  to  our  heart,  "  They  go  out  of  this  world  unforgiven;  they  go  before 
their  Maker's  bar  without  a  hope  I "  I  think  our  hearts  would  break 
with  the  dread  recollection  of  this  if  we  could  not  say,  "I  have  preached 
righteousness  in  the  great  congregation ;  lo,  1  have  not  refrained  my 
lips,  0  Lord,  thou  knowest.  I  have  not  hid  tliy  righteousness  within  my 
heart ;  I  have  declared  thv  faith  in  Incss  and  thv  salvation :  I  have  not  con- 
cealed  thy  lovingkindness  and  thy  truth  from  the  great  congregation." 

And  how  many  deaths  there  always  are  among  our  hearers  !  What 
comfort  can  any  Christian  who  knows  you  have,  if  you  die  unsaved, 
unless  he  is  able  to  appeal  to  God,  and  say,  **  My  Father,  I  did  all  I 
could  to  teach  that  soul  the  way  of  salvation  ;  1  did  all  I  could  to 
persuade  him  to  accept  the  Chrisit  of  God  "  ? 

Dear  friends,  whenever  you  see  any  of  your  neighbours,  your  relatives, 
your  acquaintance  die,  can  you  forbear  to  ask  yourselves,  shall  their  blood 
be  required  at  my  hands  ?  Are  your  skirts  stained  '  Are  there  no  blood- 
drops  there  ?  Come,  look  them  down,  and  say  if  you  can  ponder  with 
a  clear  conscience  the  fajt  of  a  sinner  dying  in  a  Christless  state 
without  your  being  able  to  sav,  "  1  have  done  all  1  could  to  bring  that 
soul  to  Christ "  ? 

And  as  for  that  dreadful  outlook — the  hereafter  of  the  lost — would 
that  we  could  believe  the  softer  theories  which  some  so  eagerly  embrace! 
Wc  woald,  but  dare  noU    We  believe  that  those  who  die  in  tlieir  sins 


THE  MASTER'S  PROFESSION— THE  DISCIPLE'S  PURSUIT.  117 

when  they  fMu»  from  this  life  into  the  next,  shall  find  that  second  death 
to  be  no  extinction  of  existence,  but  an  eternity  of  sin  and  of  misery, 
4h  I  hovr  can  any  of  us  bear  to  think  of  this  if  we  feel  that  we  are 
morally  responsible  for  any  one  sonl  that  is  damned  ?  Tet  are  we  so, 
I  speak  bnt  the  bare  truth,  until  we  ha?e  delivered  ourselves  from  that 
responsibility  by  faithful  earnestness.  Is  there  a  Cain  here  who  says, 
^*  Am  I  my  brother's  keeper  ?  "  I  shall  not  appeal  to  your  unsympathetic 
soul,  but  leave  you  to  your  Judge.  But  to  the  Christian  I  say,  "  No 
man  liveth  to  himself."  When  you  think  of  a  spirit  in  despair,  cast 
oat  for  ever  from  the  presence  of  his  Ood  and  from  the  glonr  of  his 
power,  may  yon,  friends,  be  able  to  say,  "  Great  Ood,  though  I  under- 
stand not  thy  ways,  for  thy  judgments  are  a  great  deep ;  yet  I  warned 
the  sinner,  I  admonished  him  to  lay  hold  on  Christ,  and  if  he  perished 
it  was  not  for  want  of  preaching  to  or  for  praying  over;  my  warnings 
and  tears  were  never  spared.  I  did  wiiat  was  in  me  to  prevent  bis 
rniiL**  Put  in  that  light,  we  may  look  at  least  with  some  degree  of 
serenity  upon  the  doctrine  of  divine  sovereignty.  I  must  confess  that 
the  sovereignty  of  God  is  a  great  mountain  whose  top  we  cannot  scale. 
I  often  marvel  at  the  coldness  with  which  some  men  talk  of  the 
sovereignty  of  God,  as  though  it  were  of  small  concern  whether  men 
were  lost  or  saved.  They  seem  to  take  these  things  as  easily  as  if 
they  were  only  talking  of  blocks  of  wood,  or  fields  filled  with  tares.  I 
do  not  think  that  we  can  equitably  plead  the  divine  sovereignty  as  a 
counterpart  to  our  futile  efforts,  till  we  can  say,  '^  I  have  done  all  that 
was  possible  to  bring  that  soul  to  God,  I  have  prayed  over  him  and 
wept  over  him,  and  now  if  he  perish  I  must  believe  that  this  man 
wilfully  rejected  Christ,  that  his  iniquities  are  upon  his  own  head,  and 
Uiat  in  him,  as  a  vessel  of  wrath,  God  will  get  glory  as  well  as  in  vessels 
of  mercy. 

The  doom  of  the  heathen  is  a  subject  in  like  manner,  of  which  it  were 
too  painful  for  any  of  us  to  speak  unless  we  can  say,  "  I  have,  as  far  as 
lieth  in  me,  sought  to  do  something  for  them."  This  is  a  thing  about 
which  we  ought  not  to  think  with  any  ease,  unless  we  feel  that  we  would 
fain  save  them,  and  give  them  the  knowledge  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus 
Christ;  and  to  carry  out  this,  our  cherished  purpose,  we  will  do  the  best 
we  can. 

The  vprisings  of  error  often  cause  us  dismay.  Every  now  and  then 
we  see  some  old  form  of  error  spring  up  that  was  stamped  out,  as  we 
supposed,  in  the  days  of  our  ancestors.  Not  unfrequcntly  a  foul  old 
heresy  is  brought  out  as  a  brand  new  discovery,  and  all  the  world 
admires  it,  and  wonders  whence  it  came.  Now,  whenever  these  old 
heresies  crop  up,  and  are  brought  out  as  new,  and  lead  men  astray,  it  is 
a  great  comfort  when  you  and  I  are  able  to  say,  "  I  have  preached 
righteousness  in  the  great  congregation;  lo,  I  have  not  refrained  my 
lips,  0  Lord,  thou  knowest.  I  have  not  hid  thy  righteousness  within  my 
heart;  I  have  declared  thy  faithfulness  and  thy  salvation ;  I  have  not 
concealed  thy  lovingkindness  and  thy  truth  from  the  great  congregation." 
Let  men  propagate  whatever  errors  they  choose,  if  we  have  no  share  in 
misleading  the  people,  and  are  continually  engaged  in  instructing  them, 
we  may  wrap  ourselves  in  our  integrity,  and  lay  the  matter  before  our 
God  to  vindicate  our  righteous  cause. 


118  XETBOFOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

The  apathy  of  the  chnrch,  which  has  lasted  so  loncf,  is  trulj  dis- 
heartening. With  many  a  deep-drawn  sip^h  do  we  bewail  it.  0  that  we 
could  get  the  church  to  awake  !  You  might  sound  the  trump  of  Uie 
archangel  before  you  could  rouse  fall  many  to  the  appalling  destitution  bj 
reason  of  which  the  people  perish  for  lack  of  knowledge.  Even  the  cries 
of  lost  souls,  and  the  shrieks  of  the  sinners  in  this  Metropolis,  rushing 
headlong  to  the  pit  that  is  bottomless,  do  not  startle  some  of  as.  Yes, 
but  if  we  can  say,  **  I  have  preached  righteousness ;  I  have  not  refrained 
my  lips,  0  Lord,  thou  knowest.  I  have  declared  thy  faithfulness  and 
thy  salvation,"  then  we  may  take  courage  to  work  nobly,  and  to  persevere 
under  terrible  difficulties.  Though  for  awhile  we  should  see  no  conver- 
sions; and  though  for  a  season  the  ploughshare  should  break  against 
the  rock,  or  against  even  the  very  adamant  itself,  yet  still  if  we  can  say, 
''  I  have  preached  righteousness ;  I  have  not  refrained  my  lips,  0  Lord, 
thou  knowest.  I  have  not  hid  thy  righteousness  within  my  heart ;  I 
have  declared  thy  faithfulness  and  thy  salvation;  I  have  not  concealed 
thy  lovini^'kindness  and  thy  truth " — we  are  exonerated  from  blame ; 
nay,  more,  we  are  unto  God  a  sweet  savour  of  Christ  in  the  testimony 
we  liave  delivered.  Yes,  brethren,  I  apprehend  that  amongst  the  sweetest 
dying-bed  recollections,  and  amongst  the  minor  comforts,  in  taking  our 
farewell  of  the  world  as  it  is,  not  the  least  will  be  that  of  having  been 
constant  and  faithful  all  our  lives  to  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ. 

Give  me  a  few  minutes  lonp:er  while  I  turn  this  sermon  into  the  special 
direction  which  it  was  intended  to  take.  I  do  not  know  that  there  are 
many  more  **  young  men'*  present  to-night  than  there  are  usually  at  our 
week-day  lecture.  I  generally  find  when  I  preach  a  sermon  for  any  of 
our  societies  it  so  happens  that  everybody  connected  with  the  society 
seems  to  stay  away.  They  would  be  willing  enough  to  come  if  it  were 
for  the  Primitive  Methodist,  or  any  other  denomination.  They  are  in 
love  with  everybody  else  except  their  own  relations.  I  do  not  say  this 
byway  of  censure,  but  surely  if  there  be  a  people  under  heaven  without 
a  grain  of  clannishness  it  is  that  denomination  to  which  we  belong.  If 
it  had  been  a  sermon  for  Jews  or  Turks  the  building  would  havQ  been 
crowded ;  but  as  it  is  for  ourselves  it  docs  not  signify.  However,  if 
they  are  not  present  for  whom  it  was  intended,  they  may  probably  read 
the  sermon ;  so  I  will  add  a  few  words  expressly  for  them. 

Young  man,  it  may  be  that  you  are  one  of  th^se  who  ought  to 
become  a  missionary;  it  may  be  that  you  ought  to  dedicate  your  life  to 
some  work  for  God  either  at  home  or  abroad.  Well,  if  it  be  so,  do  not 
mistake  your  path  in  life.  We  do  not  urge  you  to  rush  into  the  ministry, 
much  less  into  the  foreign  ministry,  unless  you  are  called  to  it^  for 
that  is  the  very  last  place  for  a  man  to  be  in  who  is  not  called  to  the 
work.  Act  as  a  Christian  young  man  for  once  in  your  life  by  asking 
whether  it  may  not  be  your  vocation  to  bear  the  cross  of  Christ  into 
lands  where  as  yet  it  is  unknown.  Surely,  whatever  answer  you  may 
feel  called  upon  to  give  you  will  be  ready  for  it.  You  will  at  least  be 
willing  to  give  yourself  up  to  the  very  hardest  form  of  service  to  which 
you  may  be  called.  I  should  like  you,  then,  to  be  sure  about  this  on  the 
outset  lest  you  should  in  the  turn  of  the  road  miss  the  path  and  so  not  be 
able  to  say  at  the  last :  *^  I  have  preached  righteousness ;  lo,  I  have 
not  refrained  my  lips,  0  Liord,  thou  knowest.    I  have  not  bid  thy 


THE  MASTER'S  PB0FE8SI0K — THE  DISCIPLE'S  PURSUIT.  119 

righteousneis  within  my  heart;  I  have  declared  thy  faithfulness  and 
thy  Balvation ;  I  have  not  concealed  thy  lovingkindness  and  thy  truth 
from  the  great  congregation."  I  should  not  like  you,  if  meant  by 
the  gifts  of  Ood  for  a  great  missionary,  to  die  a  millionaire. 
I  should  not  like  it,  were  you  fitted  to  be  a  missionary,  that  you 
should  drivel  down  into  a  king;  for  what  are  all  your  kings,  what  are 
all  your  nobles,  what  are  all  your  stars,  what  are  all  your  garters,  what 
are  all  your  diadems  and  your  tiaras,  when  you  put  them  all  together, 
compared  with  the  dignity  of  winning  souls  for  Christ,  with  the  special 
hoDonr  of  building  for  Christ,  not  on  another  man's  foundation,  but 
preaching  Christ's  gospel  in  regions  yet  fAt  beyond?  I  reckon  him  to 
De  a  man  honoured  of  men  who  can  do  a  foreign  work  for  Christ,  but 
he  who  shall  go  farthest  in  self-annihilation  and  in  the  furtherance  of 
the  gloiy  of  Christy  he  shall  be  a  king  among  men,  though  he  wear  no 
crown  that  carnal  eyes  can  see.  Ask  yonrselyes  the  question  then, 
Christian  young  men,  whether  that  is  your  vocation. 

Should  it  happen  that  you  feel  convinced  this  is  not  your  calling, 
remember  you  may  still  in  your  daily  business  be  able  to  say  these 
words.  Some  of  my  friends  here  pever  will  be  able  to  say  them. 
They  have  been  church  members  for  twenty  years,  and  dnring  all  those 
twenty  years  they  have  not  preached  righteousness,  they  have  refrained 
their  lips,  they  have  hidden  iiis  righteousness,  they  have  not  declared 
his  faithfulness  and  his  salvation,  they  have  concealed  his  lovingkind- 
ness  and  his  truth.  Yon,  young  men  and  women,  have  an  opportunity 
of  doing  what  is  gone  from  them.  Though  they  might  publish  Christ 
abroad  irom  now  till  they  die,  there  are  twenty  years  they  must  ever 
regret  and  look  back  upon  as  waste  land  for  which  they  will  have  to 
give  an  account  at  the  last.  You  have,  it  may  be,  those  twenty  years 
before  you,  and  it  is  a  noble  thing  to  be^in  working  young,  and  so 
long  as  ever  you  live  to  go  on  building  on  that  work.  I  have  heard  it 
said  that  you  should  not  put  young  converts  to  work  for  which  they 
are  not  qualified.  Oh !  say  I,  put  the  youngsters  in  ;  they  will  never 
learn  to  swim  if  they  are  not  put  in  at  once.  Why  should  you,  young 
men  and  women,  be  received  as  church  members  at  all  unless  you  are 
prepared  to  do  something  for  Christ?  Work  becomes  you  as  well  as 
worship.  I  mean,  of  course,  if  not  disqualified  by  sickness,  and  even 
then  there  is  a  sphere  for  testimony.  You  can  make  a  sick  bed  a  pulpit 
to  preach  Christ,  while  by  patience  and  resignation  you  show  forth  his 
praise.  No  one  should  join  a  church  without  seeking  out  something  to 
do  for  the  glory  of  Jesus*  Christ.  Do  start  your  lives,  young  men,  with 
high  pnrpose,  that  you  may  close  them  with  holy  cheer. 

In  order  to  do  this,  you  will  need  much  more  zeal  than  you  are  likely 
to  possess  by  making  resolutions,  and  much  more  grace  than  you  will 
ordunarily  get  without  much  self-denial  and  devout  consecration. 
You  have  need  to  be  baptised  into  the  Holy  Ghost  and  in  fire.  I  do 
like  those  converts  who  are  thoraiujhly  purged  from  the  corruptions  of 
the  world,  and  thoroughly  converted  to  God,  every  faculty  of  the  mind 
ttid  every  member  of  the  body  being  surrendered  to  Christ,  all  of  them 
M  instruments  of  righteousness.  We  seem  to  get  some  people  who  are 
not  half  converted.  I  hope  their  hearts  are  converted,  but  the  effect  is 
fiot  to  drain  their  pockets  or  to  set  their  hands  to  work. 


120  METROPOLITAN  TABBBNACLB  PULPIT. 

You  need,  dear  friends,  to  p^o  much  to  Jesns  Christ,  to  lire  much  in 
communion  with  him,  for  this  life-service  has  many  expenses,  and  yon 
have  no  ready  money.  You  must  go  to  the  great  exchequer  of  the 
King  of  kings  and  draw  from  its  inexhaustible  treasury.  Do  so.  Do 
resolve  to  live  lavishly  in  the  service  of  Christ,  and  the  divine  store- 
house will  supply  all  that  you  need,  be  your  ambition  as  large  as  it  may. 

There  are  habits,  it  is  true,  to  be  acquired  which  must  be  the  result 
of  growth,  for  they  cannot  be  matured  without  the  manifold  experience 
of  sunshine  and  shower,  summer  and  winter,  heat  and  cold ;  to  all  of 
these  you  will  be  exposed.  But  when  once  you  have  yielded  yourselves 
to  those  divine  influences  which  foster  life,  you  will  prove  that  by  all 
these  things  men  live.  To  this  I  can  bear  you  witness.  Drudgery 
ceases  to  be  irksome  when  the  ruling  passion  of  labouring  for  the  Lord 
has  begun  to  ferment  in  your  breasts,  and  the  sweet  assurance  that 
your  labour  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord  has  quickened  a  sacred  enthu- 
siasm in  your  spirit.  It  may  be  that  in  your  apprenticeship  you  have 
to  encounter  many  hardships,  but  it  shall  be  that  in  the  full  mscharge 
of  your  vocation  you  will  reap  a  harvest  of  joy. 

God  help  you  never  to  refrain  from  preaching  the  truth,  never  to 
withhold  any  part  of  it;  may  you  be  clear  in  all  these  matters  as 
before  the  living  God. 

Oh  !  yours  will  be  cheerful  dying  if  you  familiarise  yourselves  with 
such  noble  living  as  this.  You  will  have  a  welcome  entrance  into 
heaven  if  such  has  been  your  life  on  earth.  The  pastor,  when  he  can 
preach  no  more  the  gospel,  will  say,  "  I  preached  when  there  was  time, 
and  now  I  will  sing  when  sermons  all  are  o'er."  You  Sunday-school 
teachers  cannot  teach  any  longer,  but  your  Sabbath  recreations  below 
will  prove  the  sweet  prelude  to  your  Sabbatic  felicities  above.  Tract 
distributors,  now  that  all  ytmr  work  is  over,  you  will  say,  "  I  did  but 
distribute  the  leaves  of  the  tree  of  life  for  the  healing  of  the  people, 
but  now  I  feed  myself  on  all  its  luscious  fruits." 

I  do  not  say  that  rewards  are  given  as  mere  rewards  of  merit,  but 
this  I  do  assuredly  know,  there  are  rewards  given  in  respect  of 
service  through  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christy  and  I  pray  you 
seek  the  prize.  So  run  that  you  may  obtain  it.  May  you  be  able  to 
say,  "  While  I  w«s  down  below  where  service  could  be  done  for  my 
Master — 


**  In  works  which  perfect  saints  above, 
And  holy  angels  cannot  do/* 

with  all  my  might  I  laboured  to  excel,  and  now  I  enter  into  the  bliss 
of  him  who  helped  and  strengthened  me,  who  revealed  his  grace  in  me, 
and  counted  me  worthy  to  put  me  into  some  part  of  the  ministr}'  of 
his  church." 

God  bless  you,  dear  friends,  and  make  you  earnest  to  tell  to  others 
those  things  he  has  made  known  unto  you,  for  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ's 
sake.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scriptube  read  before  Sermon— Psalm  xl. 


^tiftf$tt&m  ilafrcmatlt  iuliiit. 


ALL  FULNESS  IN  CHRIST. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  February  26th,  1871,  by 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT     THE     METROPOLITAN     TABERNACLE,     NEWINGTON. 


"  For  it  pleased  the  Father  that  in  him  should  aU  fiilnesa  dwoU." — Col<9ssians  i.  19. 

The  preacher  is  under  no  difficalties  this  morning  as  to  the  practical 
object  to  be  aimed  at  in  his  discourse.  Every  subject  should  bo  con- 
sidered with  an  object,  every  disconrse  shonld  have  a  definite  spiritual 
aim;  otherwise  we  do  not  so  much  prcr^ch  as  play  at  preaching.  The 
connection  plainly  indicates  what  our  drift  should  be.  Read  the  words 
immediately  preceding  the  text,  and  you  find  it  declared  that  our 
Lord  Jesus  is  in  all  things  to  have  the  pre-eminence.  We  would  seek  by 
this  text  to  yield  honour  and  glory  to  the  ever-blessed  Redeemer,  and 
enthrone  him  in  the  highest  seat  in  our  hearts.  0  that  we  may  all  be  in 
an  adoring  frame  of  mind,  and  may  give  him  the  pre-eminence  iu  our 
thoughts,  beyond  all  things  or  persons  in  heuvcn  or  earth.  Blessed  is  he 
who  can  do  or  think  the  most  to  honour  such  a  Lord  as  our  ImmunueL 
The  verse  which  succeeds  the  text,  shows  us  how  we  may  best  promote 
the  glory  of  Christ,  for  since  he  came  into  this  world  that  he  might 
reconcile  the  things  in  heaven  and  the  things  in  earth  to  himself,  we 
shall  best  glorify  him  by  falling  m  with  his  great  design  of  mercy. 
By  seeking  to  bring  sinners  into  a  state  of  reconciliation  with  God, 
we  are  givmg  to  the  great  Reconciler  the  pre-eminence.  Our  gospel 
shall  be  the  gospel  of  reconciliation  on  this  occasion.  May  the  recon- 
ciling word  come  home  by  the  power  of  Christ's  Spirit  to  muny,  so  that 
hundreds  of  souls  mav  from  this  day  forth  glorify  the  great  Ambassador 
who  h»s  made  peace  by  the  blood  of  his  cross. 

The  text  is  a  great  deep,  we  canijot  explore  it,  but  we  will  voyage 
over  its  surface  joyously,  the  Holy  Spirit  giving  us  a  favourable  wind. 
Hero  are  plenteous  provisions  far  exceeding  those  of  Solomon,  though  at 
the  sight  of  that  royal  profusion,  Sheba's  queen  felt  that  there  was  no 
more  spirit  in  her,  and  declared  that  the  half  had  not  been  told  her. 

It  may  give  some  sort  of  order  to  our  thoughts  if  they  fall  under 
four  heads.  WTiat  is  here  spoken  of — "  all  fulness.*'  Where  is  it  placed — 
"  m  Aftw,"  that  is,  in  the  Redeemer.  We  are  told  why,  because  "  it 
pleased  the  Father;"  and  we  have  also  a  note  of  time,  or  trh^n,  in  the 
)Vord  '*  dwell."    "  It  pleased  the  Father  that  in  him  should  all  fulness 

No.  978. 


122  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

dwell."  Those  catch  words,  what^  tchere,  why,  and  when,  may  help  yon 
to  remember  the  run  of  the  sermon. 

I.  First,  then,  let  us  consider  the  subject  before  us,  or  what — **  It 
pleased  the  Father  that  in  him  should  all  fulness  dwell."  Two  mighty 
words ;  "ftihiess"  a  6u])stantial,  comprehensive,  expressive  word  in 
itself,  and  "  all,**  a  great  little  word  including  everything.  When  com- 
bined in  the  expression,  "  all  fulness, ^^  we  have  before  us  a  superlative 
wealth  of  meaning. 

Blessed  be  God  for  those  two  words.  Our  hearts  rejoice  to  think 
that  there  is  such  a  thine:  in  the  universe  as  "  all  fulness,"  for  in  the 
most  of  mortal  pursuits  utter  barrenness  is  found.  "  Vanity  of  vanity, 
all  is  vanity."  Blessed  be  the  Lord  for  ever  that  he  has  provided 
a  fulness  for  us,  for  in  us  by  nature  there  is  all  emptiness  and  utter 
vanity.  "  In  me,  that  is,  in  my  flesh,  there  dwelleth  no  good  thing." 
In  us  there  is  a  lack  of  all  merit,  an  absence  of  all  power  to  procure 
any,  and  even  an  absence  of  will  to  procure  it  if  we  conld.  In 
these  respects  human  nature  is  a  desert,  empty,  and  void,  and 
waste,  inhabited  only  by  tlie  dragon  of  sin,  and  the  bittern  of  sorrow. 
Sinner,  saint,  to  you  both  alike  these  words,  "  all  ftilness,"  sound  like 
a  holy  hymn.  The  accents  are  sweet  as  those  of  the  angel-messenger 
when  he  sang,  "  Behold,  I  brine:  you  glad  tidings  of  great  joy."  Are 
they  not  stray  notes  from  celestial  sonnets  ?  **  All  fulness !"  Ton, 
sinner,  are  all  emptiness  and  death  ;  you,  saint,  would  be  so  if  it  were 
not  for  the  **  all  fulness  "  of  Christ  of  which  you  have  received  ;  there- 
fore both  to  saint  and  sinner  the  words  are  full  of  hope.  There  is 
joy  in  these  words  to  eveiy  soul  conscious  of  its  sad  estate,  and  humbled 
before  God. 

I  will  ring  the  silver  bell  aeain,  "  all  fulness,"  and  another  note 
charms  us  ;  it  tells  us  that  Christ  is  substance,  and  not  shadow, 
fulness,  and  not  foretaste.  This  is  good  news  for  us,  for  nothing  but 
realities  will  meet  our  case.  Types  may  instruct,  but  they  cannot 
actually  save.  The  patterns  of  the  things  in  the  heavens  are  too  weak 
to  serve  our  turn,  we  need  the  heavenly  things  themselves.  No 
bleeding  bird  nor  slaughtered  bullock,  nor  running  stream,  nor  scarlet 
wool  and  hyssop,  can  take  away  our  sins. 

**  No  outward  forms  can  moke  me  clean, 
The  leprosy  lies  deep  within." 

Ceremonies  under  the  old  dispensation  were  precious  because  they  set 
forth  the  realities  yet  to  be  revealed,  but  in  Christ  Jesus  we  deal  with 
the  realities  themselves,  and  this  is  a  happy  circumstance  for  ns ;  for 
both  our  sins  and  our  sorrows  are  real,  and  only  substantial  mercies 
can  counteract  them.  In  Jesus,  we  have  the  substance  of  all  that  the 
symbols  set  forth.  He  is  our  sacrifice,  our  altar,  our  priest,  our  incense, 
our  tabernacle,  our  all  in  all.  The  law  had  "  the  shadow  of  good 
things  to  come,"  but  in  Christ  we  have  "  the  very  image  of  the  thinygs.** 
Heb.  z.  1.  AVhat  transport  is  this  to  those  who  so  much  feel  t£eir 
emptiness  that  they  could  not  be  comforted  by  the  mere  representation 
of  a  truth,  or  the  pattern  of  a  truth,  or  the  symbol  of  a  truth,  but  must 
have  the  very  substance  itself!  **  The  law  was  given  by  Moses,  but  grace 
and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ."    John  i.  16. 


ALL  FULNESS  IN  0HBI6T.  123 

I  must  return  to  the  words  of  the  text  again,  for  I  perceive  more  honey 
dropping  from  the  honeycomb.  "All  fnlness"  is  a  wide,  far-reaching, 
all-comprehending  term,  and  in  its  abundant  store  it  offers  another 
sonrce  of  delight.  What  joy  these  words  give  to  us  when  we  remember 
that  onr  vast  necessities  demand  a  fulness,  yea,  "a//  fulness"  before 
they  can  be  sup^^iedl  A  little  help  will  be  of  no  use  to  us,  for  we  are 
altogether  without  strength.  A  limited  measure  of  mercy  will  only  mock 
OUT  misery.  A  low  degree  of  grace  will  never  be  enough  to  bring  us  to 
heaven,  defiled  as  we  are  with  sin,  beset  with  dangers,  encompassed  with 
infirmities,  assailed  by  temptations,  molested  with  HfQictions,  and  all  the 
while  bearing  about  with  us  ''  the  body  of  this  death."  But  "  all  ful- 
ness," ay,  that  will  suit  us.  Here  is  exactly  what  our  desperate  estate 
demands  for  its  recovery.  Had  the  Saviour  only  put  out  his  finger  to 
help  onr  exertions,  or  had  he  only  stretched  out  his  hand  to  perform  a 
measure  of  salvation's  work,  while  he  left  us  to  complete  it,  our  soul  had 
for  ever  dwelt  in  darkness.  In  these  words,  **  all  fuhiess,"  we  hear  the 
echo  of  his  death-cry,  "  It  is  finished."  We  are  to  bring  nothing,  but 
to  find  all  in  him,  jea,  the  fulness  of  all  in  him :  we  are  simply  to  re- 
ceive out  of  his  fulness  grace  for  grace.  We  are  not  asked  to  contribute, 
nor  required  to  make  up  deficiencies,  for  there  are  none  to  make  up — 
all,  all  18  laid  up  in  Christ.  All  that  we  shall  want  between  this  place 
and  heaven,  all  we  could  need  between  the  gates  of  hell,  where  ^e  lay 
in  onr  blood,  to  the  gates  of  heaven,  where  we  shall  find  welcome 
admission,  is  treasured  up  for  us  in  the  Lord  Christ  Jesus. 

"  Great  God,  the  treasures  of  thy  love 
Are  everlasting  mines, 
Deep  as  our  helpless  miseries  are. 
And  boundless  as  our  sins/' 

Did  I  not  say  well  that  the  two  words  before  us  are  a  noble  hymn  ? 
Let  them,  I  pray  you,  lodge  in  your  souls  for  many  days;  they  will  be 
blessed  guests.  Let  these  two  wafers,  made  with  honey,  lie  under 
your  tongue;  let  them  satiate  your  souls,  for  they  are  heavenly 
bread.  The  more  you  bemoan  your  emptiness  the  sweeter  these  wordfa 
will  be;  the  more  you  feel  that  ypu  must  draw  largely  upon  the  bank 
of  heaven,  the  more  will  you  rejoice  that  your  drafts  will  never  diminish 
the  boundless  store,  for  still  will  it  retain  the  name  and  the  quality  of 
"  all  fulness." 

The  expression  here  used  denotes  that  there  is  in  Jesus  Christ  the 
folness  of  the  Godhead;  as  it  is  written,  *^In  him  dwelleth  all  the 
fnlness  of  the  Godhead  bodily."  When  John  saw  the  Son  of  Man 
in  Patmos,  the  marks  of  Deity  were  on  him.  ''  His  head  and  his  hairs 
were  white  like  wool,  as  white  as  snow" — here  was- his  eternity ;  "  His 
eyes  were  as  a  flame  of  fire"-^here  was  his  omniscience ;  "  Out  of  his 
mouth  went  a  sharp  two-edged  sword" — here  was  the  omnipotence  of  his 
word;  "  And  his  countenance  was  as  the  sun  shineth  in  his  strength" — 
here  was  his  unapproachable  and  infinite  glory.  He  is  the  Alpha  and 
Omega,  the  beginning  and  the  end,  the  first  and  the  last.  Hence 
nothmg  is  too  hard  for  him.  Power,  wisdom,  truth,  immutability,  and 
all  the  attributes  of  God  are  in  him,  and  constitute  a  fulness  in- 
conceivable and  inexhaustible.  The  most  enlarged  intellect  must 
necessarily  fail  to  compass  the  personal  fulness  of  Christ  as  God ; 


{ 


124  METBOFOLITAH  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

therefore  we  do  no  more  than  quote  again  that  noble  text :  ^  In  him 
dwelleth  all  the  falness  of  the  Godhead  bodily;  and  ye  are  complete  in 
him." 

FolnesB,  moreover,  dwells  in  onr  Lord  not  only  intrinsically  fitmi 
his  natnre,  but  as  the  result  of  his  mediatorial  work.  He  achieved 
by  suffering  as  well  as  possessed  by  nature  a  wondrous  fulness.  He 
carried  on  his  shoulders  the  load  of  our  sin ;  he  expiated  by  his 
death  our  guilt,  and  now  he  has  merit  with  the  Father,  infinite, 
inconceivable,  a  fulness  of  desert.  The  Father  has  stored  up  in  Christ 
Jesus,  as  in  a  reservoir,  for  the  use  of  all  his  people,  his  eternal  love  and 
his  unbounded  grace,  that  it  may  come  to  us  through  Ohrist  Jesus, 
and  that  we  may  glorify  him.  All  power  is  put  into  his  hands,  and 
life,  and  light,  and  grace,  are  to  the  full  at  his  disposal  ''  He  shutteth 
and  no  man  openeth,  he  openeth  and  no  man  shutteth."  He  has 
received  gifts  for  men ;  yea,  for  the  rebellious  also.  Not  only  as  the 
Mighty  God,  the  Everlasting  Father,  is  he  tlic  possessor  of  heaven  and 
earth,  and  therefore  filled  with  all  fulness,  but  seeing  that  as  the 
Mediator  he  has  finished  our  redemption,  *'  he  is  m^e  of  God  unto  us 
wisdom,  and  righteousness,  and  sanccification,  and  redemption."  Gloiy 
be  to  his  name  for  this  double  fulness. 

Turn  the  thought  round  again,  and  remember  that  all  fulness  dwells 
in  Christ  towards  Ood  and  towards  mm.  All  fulness  towards  God— I 
mean  all  that  God  requires  of  man ;  all  that  contents  and  delights  the 
eternal  mind,  so  that  once  again  with  complacency  he  may  look  down 
on  his  creature  and  pronounce  him  **  very  good."  The  Lord  looked  for 
grapes  in  his  vineyard,  and  it  brought  forth  wild  grapes,  but  now  in 
Christ  Jesus  the  great  Husbandman  beholds  the  true  vine  which  bringeth 
forth  much  fruit.  The  Creator  required  obedience,  and  he  beholds  in 
Christ  Jesus  the  servant  who  has  never  failed  to  do  the  Master^s  will 
Justice  demanded  that  the  law  should  be  kept,  and,  lo,  Christ  is  the 
end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  everyone  that  believeth.  Seeing 
that  we  had  broken  the  law,  justice  required  the  endurance  of  the 
righteous  penalty,  and  Jesus  has  borne  it  to  the  full,  for  he  bowed  his 
head  to  death,  even  the  death  of  the, cross.  When  God  made  man  a 
little  lower  than  the  angels,  and  breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of 
life,  and  so  made  him  immortal,  he  had  a  right  to  expect  singular 
service  from  so  favoured  a  being — a  service  perfect,  joyful,  continuous ; 
and  our  Saviour  has  rendered  unto  the  Father  that  which  perfectly 
contents  hkn ;  for  he  cries,  '*  This  is  my  beloved  Son  in  whom  I  am 
well  pleased."  God  is  more  glorified  in  the  person  of  his  Son  than  he 
would  have  been  by  an  unfallen  world.  There  shines  out  through 
the  entire  universe  a  display  of  infinite  mercy,  justice,  and  wisdom, 
such  as  neither  the  majesty  of  nature  nor  the  excellence  of  providence 
could  have  revealed.  His  work  in  God's  esteem  is  honourable  and 
precious ;  for  his  righteousness  sake,  God  is  well  pleased.  The  Eternal 
mind  is  satisfied  with  the  Bedeemer*s  person,  work,  and  sacrifice ;  for 
"unto  the  Son,  he  saith,  Thy  throne,  0  God,  is  for  ever  and  ever:  a 
Bceptre  of  righteousness  is  the  sceptre  of  thy  kingdom.  Thou  hast  loved 
righteousness,  and  hated  iniquity ;  therefore  God,  even  thy  God,  hath 
anointed  thee  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above  thy  fellows."  Hebrews 
i.^  9. 


ALL  FULNESS  IK  CHRIST.  125 

What  unspeakable  consolations  arise  from  this  tmtb,  for,  dear 
brethren,  if  we  had  to  render  to  God  something  by  which  we  should 
be  accepted,  we  should  be  always  in  jeopardy ;  but  now  since  we  are 
''accepted  in  the  Beloved,"  we  are  safe  beyond  all  hazard.  Had 
we  to  find  wherewithal  we  should  appear  before  the  Most  High 
God,  we  mi^ht  still  be  asking,  ''  Shall  1  come  before  him  with  burnt- 
offerings,  with  calves  of  a  year  old  ?  Will  the  Lord  be  pleased  with 
thonsands  of  rams,  or  with  ten  thousands  of  rivers  of  oil  ?"  But  now 
hear  the  voice  which  saith,  ''  Sacrifice  and  offering  and  burnt  offerings 
and  offering  for  sin  thou  wouldest  not,  neither  hadst  pleasure  therein  :" 
we  hear  the  same  divine  voice  add,  "  Lo,  I  come  to  do  thy  will,"  and  we 
rejoice  as  we  receive  the  witness  of  the  Spirit,  saying,  "  By  the  which 
will  ye  are  sanctified  through  the  offering  of  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ 
once  for  aU,"  for  henceforth  is  it  said,  ''  Their  sins  and  iniquities  will  I 
remember  no  more  for  ever." 

The  all-fulness  of  Christ  is  also  man-ivard,  and  that  in  respect  of  both 
the  sinner  and  the  saint.  There  is  a  fulness  in  Christ  Jesus  which 
the  seeking  sinner  should  behold  with  joyfulness.  What  dost  thou 
want,  sinner  ?  Thou  wantest  all  things,  but  Christ  is  all.  Thou  wantest 
power  to  believe  in  him — he  giveth  power  to  the  faint.  Thou  wantest 
repentance — he  was  exalted  on  high  to  give  repentance  as  well  as  remis- 
sion of  sin.  Thou  wantest  a  new  heart :  the  covenant  runs  thus, "  A  new 
heart  also  will  I  give  them,  and  a  right  spirit  will  I  put  within  them."  Thou 
wantest  pardon — ^behold  his  streaming  wounds,  wash  thou  and  be  clean. 
Thou  wantest  healing :  he  is  "  the  Lord  that  healeth  thee."  Thou  wantest 
clothing — his  righteousness  shall  become  thy  drees.  Thou  wantest  pre- 
servation— thou  shalt  be  preserved  in  him.  Thou  wantest  life,  and  he 
has  said,  *'  Awake,  thou  that  sleepest,  and  arise  from  the  dead,  and 
Christ  shall  give  thee  life."  He  is  come  that  we  might  have  life. 
Thou  wantest — but  indeed,  the  catalogue  were  much  too  long  for  us  to 
read  it  through  at  this  present,  vet  be  assured  though  thou  pile  up  thy 
necessities  till  they  rise  like  Alps  before  thee,  yet  the  all-sufiieient  Saviour 
can  remove  all  thy  needs.    You  may  confidently  sing — 

"  Thou,  O  Christ,  art  all  I  want, 
More  than  all  in  thee  I  find.** 

This  is  true  also  of  the  saint  as  well  as  the  sinner.  0  child  of 
God,  thou  art  now  saved,  but  thy  wants  are  not  therefore  removed. 
Are  they  not  as  continuous  as  thy  heart-beats  ?  When  are  we  not  in 
want,  my  brethren  ?  The  more  alive  we  are  to  God,  the  more  are  we 
aware  of  our  spiritual  necessities.  He  who  is  "  blind  and  naked,"  tkinks 
himself  to  be  **  rich  and  increased  in  goods,"  but  let  the  mind  be  truly 
enlightened,  and  we  feel  that  we  are  completely  dependent  upon 
the  charity  of  God.  Let  us  be  glad,  then,  as  we  learn  that  there  is  no 
necessity  in  our  spirit  but  what  is  abundantly  provided  for  in  the  all- 
fulness  of  Jesus  Christ.  You  seek  for  a  higher  platform  of  spiritual 
attainments,  you  aim  to  conquer  sin,  you  desire  to  be  plentiful  in 
fruit  unto  his  glory,  you  arc  longing  to  be  useful,  you  are  anxious  to 
subdue  the  hearts  of  others  u-nto  Cbrist ;  behold  the  needful  grace  for 
all  this.  In  the  sacred  armoury  of  the  Son  of  David  behold  your  battle- 
axe  and  your  weapons  of  war;  in  the  stores  of  him  who  is  greater  than 


12G  HETBOFOLITAH  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Aaron  sec  the  robes  iu  whxh  to  fulfil  your  priesthood;  in  the  wounds  of 
JesLiS  uehold  the  power  with  which  joii  may  become  a  living  sacrifice. 
If  }'uu  would  |(low  like  a  seraph,  and  serve  like  an  apostle,  behold  thd 
grace  awaiting  you  in  Jesus.  If  you  would  go  from  strength  to  starengtb, 
climbing  the  loftiest  summits  of  hob'ness,  behold  grace  upon  grace 
prei)ared  for  vou.  If  you  are  straitened,  it  will  not  be  in  Christ ;  if 
tlicre  be  any  Dound  to  your  holy  attainments,  it  is  set  by  yourself  The 
infinite  God  himself  gives  himself  to  you  in  the  persofi  of  his  dear 
Son,  and  he  saith  to  you,  *^  All  things  are  yours."  ''The  Lord  is  the 
portion  of  your  inherit  nee  and  of  your  cup."  Infinity  is  ours.  He 
who  gave  us  his  own  Son  has  in  that  verj'  deed  given  ns  all  things. 
Hath  he  not  said,  ^^  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God,  which  brought  thee  out  of 
the  land  of  Egypt ;   open  thy  mouth  wide,  and  I  will  fill  it "  ? 

Let  me  remark  that  this  is  not  only  true  of  saints  on  earth,  but  it  is 
true  also  of  saints  in  heaven,  for  all  the  fulness  of  the  church  tri- 
umphant is  in  Christ  as  well  as  that  of  the  church  militant  They  are 
nothing  even  in  heaven  without  him.  The  pure  river  of  the  water  of 
life  of  which  they  drink,  proeeedeth  out  of  the  throne  of  God  and  of 
the  Lumb.  Ho  liath  made  them  priests  and  kings,  and  in  his  power 
they  reign.  Those  snowy  robes  were  washed  and  made  white  in  his 
blood.  Tlie  Lamb  is  the  temple  of  heaven  (Rev.  xxi.  22),  the  light  of 
heaven  (Rev.  xxi.  23),  his  marringe  is  the  joy  of  heaven  (Rev.  xix.  7), 
and  tlie  s^ong  of  Moses,  the  servant  of  God,  and  the  song  of  the  Lamb, 
is  the  song  of  heaven  (Rev.  xv.  3).  Not  all  the  harps  above  could 
make  a  heavenly  place  if  Christ  were  gone ;  for  he  is  the  heaven  of 
heaven,  and  filleth  all  in  all.  It  pleased  the  Father  that  for  all  saints 
and  sinners  all  fulness  should  be  treasured  up  in  Christ  Jesus. 

I  feel  that  my  text  overwhelms  me.  Men  may  rail  round  the  world, 
but  who  can  circumnavigate  so  vast  a  subject  as  tliis?  As  far  as  the 
east  is  from  the  west  so  wide  is  its  reach  of  blessii:^. 

"Philosophers  have  measured  mountains, 
Fathom'd  the  depths  of  seas,  of  states,  an*  I  kings, 
Walked  with  a  staff  to  heaven,  and  traced  fountains: 

But  there  are  two  vast  spacious  things. 
The  which  to  measure  it  dotn  more  behove : 
Yet  few  there  are  that  sound  them :  Grace  and  Iiove." 

Who  is  he  that  shall  be  able  to  express  all  that  is  meant  by  our  text  ? 
for  here  wc  have  "  all "  and  "  fulness  *' — all  in  fulness  and  a  ftilness  in 
all.  The  words  are  both  exclusive  and  inclusive.  They  deny  that 
there  is  any  fulness  ehewhere,  for  they  claim  all  for  Christ.  They  shut 
out  all  others.  "  It  pleased  the  Father  that  in  him  should  all  fulness 
dwell."  Not  in  you,  ye  pretended  successors  of  the  apostles,  can  anything 
dwell  that  I  need.  I  can  do  well  enough  without  you ;  nay,  I  would  not 
insult  my  Saviour  by  tiading  with  you,  for  since  "all  fulness"  is  in 
him,  what  can  there  be  in  you  that  I  can  require  ?  Go  to  your  dupes  who 
know  not  Christ,  but  those  who  possess  the  exceeding  riches  of  Christ's 
grace  bow  not  to  yon.  AVe  are  "complete  in  Christ"  without  you,  0 
hierarchy  of  bishops ;  without  you,  ye  conclave  of  cardinals;  and 
without  you,  0  fallible  Infallible,  unholy  Holiness  of  Rome.  He  who 
has  all  in  Christ  would  be  insane  indeed  if  he  looked  for  more,  or  having 
inJness  craved  for  emptiness.    This  text  drives  us  from  all  confidence  in 


ALL  FULNESS  IN  CHRIST.  127 

men,  ay,  or  even  in  angels,  by  making  ns  see  that  eyerythin?  is  treasured 
up  in  Jesus  Christ.  Brethren,  if  there  be  any  good  in  what  is  called 
Catholicism,  or  in  ritualism,  or  in  the  modern  philosophical  novelties,  let 
lehgionists  have  what  they  find  there  ;  we  shall  not  envy  them,  for  they 
can  find  nothing  worth  having  in  their  forms  of  worship  or  belief  but  what 
we  mast  have  already  in  the  person  of  the  all-sufficient  Saviour.  What  if 
their  candles  bum  brightly,  the  sun  itself  is  ours  I  What  if  they  are 
Boccessors  of  the  apostles,  we  follow  the  Lamb  himself  whithersoever 
he  goeth  !  What  if  they  be  exceeding  wise,  we  dwell  with  the  Incar- 
nate Wisdom  himself!  Let  them  go  to  their  cisterns,  we  will  abide  by 
the  fountain  of  living  water.  But  indeed  there  is  no  light  in  their 
lominaries,  they  do  but  increase  the  darkness  ;  they  are  blind  leaders 
of  the  blind.  They  put  their  sounding  emptinesses  into  competition 
with  the  all-fulness  of  Jesus,  and  preach  another  gospel  which  is  not 
another.  The  imprecation  of  the  apostle  be  upon  them.  They  add 
unto  the  words  of  God,  and  he  shall  add  to  them  its  plagues. 

While  the  text  is  exclusive  it  is  also  inclusive.  It  shuts  in  every- 
thing that  is  required  for  time  and  for  eternity  for  all  the  blood-bought. 
It  ifl  an  ark  containing  all  good  things  conceivable,  yea,  and  many  that 
are  as  yet  inconceivable;  for  by  reason  of  our  weakness  we  have 
not  yet  conceived  the  fulness  of  Christ.  Things  which  ye  yet  have 
not  asked  nor  even  thought,  he  is  able  to  give  you  abundantly. 
If  yon  should  arrive  at  the  consecration  of  martyrs,  the  piety  of 
apostles,  the  purity  of  angels,  yet  should  you  never  have  seen  or  be 
able  to  think  of  anything  pure,  lovely,  and  of  good  report,  that  was 
not  already  treasured  up  in  Christ  Jesus.  All  the  rivers  flow  into  this 
sea,  for  from  this  sea  they  came.  As  the  atmosphere  surrounds  all 
the  earth,  and  all  things  five  in  that  sea  of  air,  so  all  good  things  are 
contained  in  the  blessed  person  of  our  dear  Redeemer.  Let  us  join  to  praise 
him.  Let  us  extol  him  with  heart  and  voice,  and  let  sinners  be  recon- 
ciled unto  God  by  him.  If  all  the  good  things  are  in  him  which  a 
sinner  can  require  to  make  him  acceptable  with  God,  then  let  the  sinner 
come  at  once  through  such  a  mediator.  Let  doubts  and  fears  vanish  at 
the  sight  of  the  mediatorial  fulness.  Jesus  must  be  able  to  save  to  the 
uttermost,  since  all  fulness  dwells  in  him.  Come,  sinner,  come  and 
receive  him.  Believe  thou  in  him  and  thou  shalt  find  thyself  made 
perfect  in  Christ  Jesus. 

"  The  moment  a  sinner  believes, 
And  trusts  in  his  cruci6ed  God, 
His  pardon  at  once  he  receives, 
Redemption  in  full  through  his  hlood." 

II.  Having  thus  spoken  of  what,  we  now  turn  to  consider  where. 

"  It  pleased  the  Father  that  in  him  should  all  fulness  dwell.'*  Wliere 
else  could  all  fulness  have  beenplaced  ?  There  was  wanted  a  vast  ccipa- 
eiiy  io  contain  *^  all  fulness."     Where  dwells  there  a  being  with  nature 

aacions  enough  to  compass  within  himself  all  fulness?  As  well  might  we 
,  "Who  hath  measurea  the  waters  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand,  and  meted 
oat  heaven  with  the  span,  and  comprehended  the  dust  of  the  earth  in  a 
measnre,  and  weighed  the  mountains  in  scales,  and  the  hills  in  a 
balance  7"  To  him  only  could  it  belong  to  contain  "  all  fulness,"  for  he 
Bust  be  eqnal  with  God,  the  Infinite.    How  suitable  was  the  Son  of  the 


128  METBOPOLTTAN  TABEBNAOLE  FULPIT. 

Highest,  who  "  was  by  him,  as  one  bronght  up  with  him,"  to  becomr 
the  ^and  storehouse  of  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom,  and  knowledge, 
and  grace,  and  salvation.  Moreover,  there  was  wanted  not  only  capaci^ 
to  contain,  but  immutability  to  retain  the  fulness,  for  the  text  says,  *'  It 
pleased  the  Father  that  in  him  should  all  fulness  dwell^'*  that  is,  abidei 
and  remain,  for  ever.  Now  if  any  kind  of  fulness  could  be  put  into  as 
mutable  creatures,  yet  by  reason  of  our  frailty  we  should  prove  but 
broken  cisterns  that  can  hold  no  water.  The  Redeemer  is  Jesns 
Christ,  the  same  yesterday,  to>day,  and  for  ever :  therefore  was  it  meet 
that  all  fulness  should  be  placed  in  him.  '^  The  Son  abideth  ever.*^ 
"  He  is  a  priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchisedec.''  ''Being  nun^ 
perfect  he  became  the  author  of  eternal  salvation  unto  all  them  that 
obey  him."  '*  His  name  shall  endure  for  ever :  his  name  shall  be 
continued  as  long  as  the  sun :  and  men  shall  be  blessed  in  him :  aU 
nations  shall  call  him  blessed." 

Perhaps  the  sweetest  thought  is,  that  the  "  all  fulness  "  is  fitly  placed 
in  Christ  Jesus,  because  in  him  there  is  a  suitability  to  distribiu»  U,  so 
that  we  may  obtain  it  from  him.  How  could  we  come  to  Ood  himself 
for  grace  ?  for  "  even  our  God  is  a  consuming  fire."  But  Jesus  Christ 
while  God  is  also  man  like  ourselves,  truly  man,  of  a  meek  lowly  spirit^ 
and  therefore  easily  approachable.  They  who  know  him,  delight  in  near- 
ncss  to  him.  Is  it  not  sweet  that  all  fulness  should  be  treasured  up  in 
him  who  was  the  friend  of  publicans  and  sinners  :  and  who  came  into  the 
world  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost  ?  The  Man  who  took  the 
child  up  on  his  knee  and  said,  "Suffer  the  little  children  to  come  unto  me," 
tlie  Man  who  was  tempted  in  all  points  like  as  we  are,  the  Man  who  touched 
the  sick,  nay,  who  '*  bore  their  sicknesses,"  the  Man  who  gave  his  hands 
to  the  nails,  and  his  heart  to  the  spear ;  that  blessed  Man,  into  the 
print  of  whose  nails  his  disciple  Thomas  put  his  finger,  and  into  whose 
side  he  tHirust  his  hand  ;  it  is  he,  the  incarnate  God,  in  whom  all  ful- 
ness dwells.  Come,  then,  and  receive  of  him,  ye  who  are  the  weakest^ 
the  most  mean,  and  most  sinftd  of  men.  Come  at  once,  0  sinner^  and 
fear  not. 

**  Why  art  thou  afraid  to  come, 

And  tell  him  all  thy  case  ? 
He  will  not  pronounce  thy  doom. 

Nor  frown  thee  from  his  face. 
Wilt  thou  fear  Immanuel  ? 

Or  dread  the  Lamb  of  God, 
Who,  to  save  thy  soul  from  hell. 

Has  shed  his  precious  blood  ?" 

Let  it  be  noted  here,  however,  very  carefully,  that  while  fhlness  is 
treasured  up  in  Christ,  it  is  not  said  to  be  treasured  up  in  the  doctrines 
of  Christ ;  though  they  are  full  and  complete,  and  we  need  no  other 
teaching  when  the  Spirit  reveals  the  Son  in  us ;  nor  is  it  said  to  be- 
treasured  up  in  the  commands  of  Christ,  although  they  are  amply  sufficient 
for  our  guidance ;  but  it  is  said,  *'  It  pleased  the  Father  that  m  Atm,*^ 
in  his  person,  *'  should  all  fulness  dwell."  In  him,  as  God  incarnate, 
dwelletn  '^  all  the  fulness  of  the  godhead  bodily ; "  not  as  a  myth,  a- 
dream,  a  thought,  a  fiction,  but  as  a  living,  real  prsonality.  We  must 
Jaf  bold  of  this.    I  know  that  the  fulness  dweOs  in  him  officially  as^ 


ALL  FULNESS  IN  CHRIST.  129 

Prophet,  Priesty  and  King — ^bnt  the  fulness  lies  not  in  the  prophetic 
mantle,  nor  in  the  priestly  ephod,  nor  in  the  royal  vesture,  but  in  the 
person  that  wears  all  these.  ''It  pleased  the  Father  that  in  him 
should  ^  fulness  dwell."  You  must  get  to  the  very  Christ  in  your 
fidth,  and  rest  alone  in  him,  or  else  you  have  not  reached  the  treasuiy 
wherein  all  fulness  is  stored  up.  All  fulness  is  in  him  radically ;  if 
there  be  fUness  in  his  work,  or  his  gifts,  or  his  promises,  all  is  derived 
firom  his  person,  which  gives  weight  and  value  to  all.  All  the  promises 
are  yea  and  amen  in  Christ  Jesus,  The  merit  of  his  death  lies  mainly 
in  ms  person,  because  he  was  God  who  gave  himself  for  us,  and  his  own 
self  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree.  The  excellence  of  his 
person  gave  fulness  to  his  sacrifice.  Hebrews  i.  3.  His  power  to  save 
at  this  very  day  lies  in  his  person,  for ''he  is  able  to  save  to  the  utter- 
most them  that  come  unto  God  by  him,  seeing  he  ever  liveth  to  make 
intercession  far  them.'*  I  desire  you  to  see  this,  and  feel  it;  for  when 
your  soul  clasps  the  pierced  feet  of  Jesus,  and  looks  up  into  the  face 
more  marred  than  that  of  any  man,  even  if  you  cannot  understand  all 
his  works  and  offices,  yet  if  you  believe  in  him,  you  have  reached  the 
place  wherein  all  fulness  dwells,  and  of  his  fulness  you  shall  receive. 

Beloved,  remember  our  practical  aim.  Praise  his  person,  ye  saints ! 
Be  ye  reconciled  to  God  through  his  person,  ye  sinners  !  Ye  angels, 
lead  ns  in  the  song !  Ye  spirits  redeemed  by  blood,  sing,  "  Worthy 
is  tlie  Lamb  that  was  slain,**  and  our  hearts  shall  keep  tune  with 
yours,  for  we  owe  the  same  debt  to  him.  Gloir  be  unto  the  person 
«f  the  blessed  Lamb.  "  Blessing,  and  glory,  and  wisdom,  and  thanks- 
giving, and  honour,  and  power,  and  might,  be  unto  our  Ged  for  ever 
and  ever."  Would  God  we  could  see  him  face  to  face,  and  adore  him 
«8  we  would.  0  sinners,  will  you  not  be  reconciled  to  God  through 
him,  since  all  fulness  is  in  him,  and  he  stoops  to  your  weakness,  and 
holds  forth  his  pierced  hands  to  greet  you  ?  Sec  him  stretching  out 
both  his  hands  to  receive  you,  while  he  sweetly  woos  you  to  come  to 
<3od  through  him.  Come  unto  him.  0  come  with  hasty  steps,  ye 
penitents;  come  at  once,  ye  guilty  ones !  Who  would  not  be  reconciled 
onto  Ood  by  such  a  one  as  this,  in  whom  all  fulness  of  grace  is  made  to 
dwell? 

III.  Tlie  third  question  is,  why?  "  //  pleased  the  Father."  That 
is  answer  enough.  He  is  a  sovereign,  let  him  do  as  he  wills.  Ask  the 
reason  for  election,  you  shall  receive  no  other  than  this,  '^  Even  so. 
Father,  for  so  it  seemed  good  in  thy  sight."  That  one  answer  may 
reply  to  ten  thousand  questions,  "  It  is  the  Lord,  let  him  do  what 
seemeth  him  good."  Once  ^'  it  pleased  the  Father  to  bruise  him,"  and  now 
**  it  pleased  the  Father  that  in  nim  should  all  fulness  dwell."  Sovereignty 
may  answer  the  question  sufficiently,  but  hearken  I  I  hear  justice  speak, 
ahe  cannot  be  silent  Justice  saith  there  was  no  person  in  heaven  or 
mider  heaven  so  meet  to  contain  the  fulness  of  grace  as  Jesus. 

None  so  meet  to  be  glorified  as  the  Saviour,  who  '^made  himself  of 
so  reputation,  and  took  upon  himself  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  being 
foima  in  fashion  as  a  man,  humbled  himself,  and  became  obedient  to 
death,  e^ren  the  death  of  the  cross."  It  is  but  justice  that  the  grace 
which  he  has  brought  to  us  should  be  treasured  up  in  him.  And  while 
jaitice    speaks    wisdom    will   not    withhold  her    voice.     Wise    art 


130  METEOPOLITAN  TABERNAOLB  PULPIT. 

thon,  0  Johovah,  to  treasure  up  grace  in  Christ,  for  to  him  men 
can  cotnc;  and  to  him  coming,  as  unto  a  living  etone,  chosen  of 
God  and  precious,  men  find  him  precious  also  to  their  souls.  The 
Lord  has  laid  our  help  in  the  right  place,  for  he  has  laid  it  upon 
one  that  is  mighty,  and  who  is  as  loving  as  he  is  mighty,  as  ready 
as  he  is  able  to  save.  Moreover,  in  the  fitness  of  things  the  Father^s 
pleasure  is  the  first  point  to  be  considered,  for  all  things  ought  to  be  to 
the  good  pleasure  of  God.  It  is  a  great  underlying  rule  of  the 
universe  that  all  thinprs  were  created  for  God's  pleasure.  God  is  the 
source  and  fountain  of  eternal  love,  and  it  is  but  meet  that  he  should 
convey  it  to  us  by  what  channel  he  may  elect.  Bowing,  therefore,  in 
lowly  worship  at  his  throne,  we  are  glad  that  in  this  matter  the  fukiess 
dwells  where  it  perpetually  satisfies  the  decree  of  heaven.  It  is  well 
that  "  it  pleased  the  Father." 

Now,  brethren,  if  it  jjleased  the  Father  to  place  all  grace  in  Christ, 
let  us  praise  the  elect  Saviour.  What  pleases  God  pleases  us.  Where 
would  you  desire  to  have  prace  placed,  my  brethren,  but  in  the  WeU- 
belovcd  ?  *  The  whole  church  of  God  is  unanimous  about  this.  If  I 
could  save  mvsclf  I  would  not;  I  would  think  salvation  to  be  no  sal- 
ration  if  it  did  not  glorify  Jesus.  This  is  the  very  crown  and  gloiy  of 
being  saved,  that  our  being  saved  will  bring  honour  to  Christ.  It  is 
dcli<j:htliil  to  think  that  Christ  will  have  the  glory  of  all  God's  grace; 
it  wore  shocking  if  it  were  not  so.  Who  could  bear  to  see  Jesus  robbed 
of  his  reward  ?  We  fire  indignant  that  any  should  usurp  his  place, 
and  ashamed  of  ourselves  that  we  do  not  glorify  him  more,  ho  jof 
ever  visits  my  soul  like  that  of  knowing  that  Jesus  is  highly  exsJted, 
and  that  to  him  "  ever}'  knee  shall  bow  and  every  tongue  confess  that 
Jesus  Chrii-f  is  Lord,  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father."  A  sister  in 
Christ,  in  lior  kindness  and  gratitude,  used  hmguage  to  me  the  other 
day  which  brouirht  a  blush  to  my  cheek,  for  I  felt  ashamed  to  be  so 
undeserving  of  the  praise.  She  said,  "  Your  ministry  profits  me  l»e- 
causc  you  jrlorify  Christ  so  much."  Ah,  I  thouj^ht,  if  you  knew  how  I 
woiffd  glorify  him  if  I  could,  and  how  far  I  fall  below  what  I  fain  would 
do  for  him,  you  would  not  commend  me.  I  could  weep  over  the  best 
sermons  I  have  ever  preached  because  I  cannot  extol  my  Lord  enough, 
and  my  conceptions  arc  so  low,  and  my  words  so  poor.  Oh,  if  one  could 
but  attain  really  to  honour  him,  and  put  another  crown  upon  his  head, 
it  were  heaven  indeed  !  AVe  are  in  tnis  agreed  with  the  Father,  for  if 
it  pleases  him  to  glorify  his  Son,  we  sincerely  feel  that  it  pleases  ns. 

Ought  not  those  who  arc  yet  unrenewed,  to  hasten  to  be  reconciled 
to  God  by  such  a  Redeemer  ?  If  it  pleases  the  Father  to  put  all  grace 
in  Christ,  0  sinner,  does  it  not  please  you  to  come  and  receive  it 
through  Christ  ?  Christ  is  the  meeting-place  for  a  sinner  and  his  God. 
God  is  in  Christ,  and  when  you  come  to  Christ,  God  meets  you,  and  a 
treaty  of  jxiacc  is  made  between  you  and  the  Most  High.  Are  you  not 
agreed  with  God  in  this — that  Christ  shall  be  glorified  ?  Do  you  not 
say,  "  I  would  glorify  him  by  accepting  this  morning  all  his  grace, 
love,  and  mercy "  ?  Well,  if  you  are  willing  to  receive  Jesus,  God 
has  made  you  willing,  and  therein  proved  his  willingness  to  save  yoo. 
He  is  pleased  with  Christ;  are  you  pleased  with  Christ?  If  so,  there 
JB  already  peace  between  you  and  God,  for  Jesus  "  is  our  peace." 


ALL  F9LNES8  IN  CHBIST.  131 

lY.  We  must  close  by  dwelling  upon  the  when.  When  is  all  fdlncss 
in  JesoB  ?  It  is  there  in  all  time,  past,  present,  and  to  come.  <'It 
pleased  the  Father  that  in  him  should  all  fulness  dwelV  Fulness,  then, 
was  in  Christ  of  old,  is  in  Christ  to-day,  will  be  in  Christ  for  ever. 
PerpetuUy  is  here  indicated;  all  fnlness  was,  is,  shall  be  in  the  person 
of  JesoB  Christ.  Every  saint  sayed  under  the  old  dispensation  found 
the  ftilness  of  his  salvation  in  the  coming  Redeemer  ;  every  saint  saved 
since  the  advent  is  saved  through  the  scl&ame  fulness.  From  the 
streaming  fount  of  the  wounds  of  Chrifit  on  Calvary,  redemption  flows 
evermore ;  and  as  long  as  there  is  a  sinner  to  be  saved,  or  one  elect 
soul  to  be  ingathered,  Christ's  blood  shall  never  lose  its  power,  the  ful- 
ness of  merit  and  grace  shall  abide  the  same. 

While  the  expression  ^^  dwell"  indicates  perpetuity,  does  not  it 
indicate  constancy  and  accessibility  ?  A  man  who  dwells  in  a  house  is 
always  to  be  found  there,  it  is  his  home.  The  text  seems  to  me 
to  say  that  this  fhlness  of  grace  is  always  to  be  found  in  Christ, 
ever  abiding  in  him.  Knock  at  this  door  by  prayer,  and  you  shall 
find  it  at  nome.  If  a  sinner  anywhere  is  saying,  *'  God  be  mer- 
ciful to  me  I"  mercy  has  not  gone  out  on  travel,  it  dwells  in  Christ 
both  night  and  day ;  it  is  there  now  at  this  moment.  There 
is  life  in  a  look  at  the  crucified  .One,  not  at  certain  canonical  hours, 
l)ut  at  any  hour,  in  any  place,  by  any  man  who  looks.  ^'  From  the  end 
of  the  earth  will  I  cry  unto  thee,  when  my  heart  is  overwhelmed,"  and 
my  prayer  shall  not  be  rejected.  There  is  fulness  of  mercy  in  Christ  to 
he  had  at  any  time,  at  any  season,  from  any  place.  It  pleased  the 
Father  that  M  fulness  should  permanently  abide  in  him  as  in  a  house 
whose  door  is  never  shut. 

Above  all,  we  see  here  immutability.  All  falness  dwells  in  Christ — 
that  is  to  say,  it  is  never  exhausted  nor  diminished.  On  the  last  day 
wherein  this  world  shall  stand  before  it  is  given  up  to  be  devoured 
with  fervent  heat,  there  shall  be  found  as  much  fulness  in  Christ  as  in 
the  hour  when  the  first  sinner  looked  unto  him  and  was  lightened.  0 
sinner,  the  bath  that  cleanses  is  as  efficacious  to  take  out  spots  to-day 
as  it  was  when  the  dying  thief  washed  therein.  0  thou  despairing 
sinner,  there  is  as  much  consolation  in  Christ  to-day  as  when  he  said  to 
the  woman,  "  Thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee,  go  in  peace."  His  grace  has 
not  diminished.  He  is  to-day  as  great  a  Saviour  as  when  Magdalen 
was  delivered  from  seven  devils.  Till  time  shall  l)e  no  more  he  will 
-exercise  the  same  infinite  power  to  forgive,  to  renew,  to  deliver,  to 
sanctify,  to  perfectly  save  souls. 

Shall  not  all  this  make  us  praise  Christ,  since  all  fulness  is  permanent 
in  him  7  Let  our  praises  abide  where  the  fulness  abides.  '*  All  thy 
works  praise  thee,  0  God,  but  thy  saints  shall  bless  thee ;  "  yea,  they 
Aall  never  cease  their  worship,  because  thou  shalt  never  abate  thy  fid- 
ness.  This  is  a  topic  upon  which  we  who  love  Christ,  are  all  agreed. 
We  can  dispute  about  aoctrines,  and  we  have  different  views  upon 
ordinances  ;  but  we  have  all  one  view  concerning  our  Lord  Jesus. 
Let  him  sit  on  a  glorious  high  throne.  When  shall  the  day  dawn  that 
he  shall  riSe  thsough  our  streets  in  triumph  ?  When  shall  England 
and  Scotland,  and  all  the  nations  become  truly  the  dominions  of  the 
great  King  ?    Our  prayer  is  that  he  may  hasten  the  spread  of  the 


182  HETROPOLITAK  TABERNACLE  FULPIT. 

goBpel,  and  his  own  coming,  as  seemeth  p'ood  in  his  sight.    O  that  he 
weie  j]^loriouB  in  the  eyes  of  men  ! 

And  surely  if  all  falness  abides  perpetually  in  Christ,  there  is  good 
ren^on  why  the  unreconciled  should  this  morning  aTail  themselyes  of  it 
Mi'v  the  blessed  Spirit  show  thee,  0  sinner,  that  there  is  enough  in 
JeFUS  Ohrist  to  meet  thy  wants,  that  thy  weakness  need  not  keep  thee 
back,  nor  even  the  hardness  of  thy  heart,  nor  the  inveteracy  of  thy 
will ;  for  Christ  is  able  even  to  subdue  all  things  to  himself.  If  you 
seek  him  he  will  be  found  of  you.  Seek  him  while  he  may  be  found. 
Leave  not  the  seat  until  vour  soul  is  bowed  at  his  feet.  I  think  I  see 
him  ;  cannot  your  hearts  picture  him,  glorious  to-day,  bnt  yet  the  same 
Saviour  who  was  nailed  like  a  felon  to  the  cross  for  guilty  ones  ?  Reach 
forth  thy  hand  and  touch  the  silver  sceptre  of  mercy  which  he  holds  out  to 
thee,  for  those  who  touch  it  live.  Look  into  that  dear  fiwe  where  tears 
once  made  their  furrows,  and  grief  its  lines  ;  look,  I  say,  and  live.  Look 
at  that  brow  radiant  with  many  a  glitterinjr  gem,  it  once  wore  a  crown  of 
thorns;  let  his  love  melt  you  to  repentance.  Throw  yourself  into  h\A 
arms  now,  feeling,  "  If  I  perish  I  will  j^erish  there.  He  shall  be  my 
only  hope.**  A&  the  Lord  liveth,  before  whom  I  stand,  there  shall  never 
be  a  soul  of  you  lost  who  will  come  and  trust  in  Jesus.  Heaven  and 
eartli  shall  ])as8  away,  but  this  word  of  God  shall  never  pass  away. 
"  He  that  belicveth  and  is  baptised  shall  be  saved.*'  God  has  said  it ; 
will  he  not  do  it  ?  He  has  declared  it,  it  must  stand  fast.  "  "Whosoever 
belicveth  in  him  shall  not  perish,  but  have  everliisting  life."     0. trust 

5e  him  !     I  implore  you  by  the  mercy  of  God,  and  by  the  fulness  of 
esus,  trust  him  now,  this  day  I    God  grant  you  may,  for  Christ's  sake. 
Am  on. 


Portion  of  Scrii^tuuk  read  before  Sermon — Colossiansi 


The  attention  of  nil  our  friends  is  earnestly  directed  to  the  Sksies  of 
Special  Services  at  the  Tadernacle.  In  order  that  London  friends  may 
unite  with  us  we  publish  the  meetings  week  by  week,  and  at  the  same  time 
our  country  friends  can  join  with  us  in  spirit: — 

Ltmrs-^ay,  Mmrrh  ^th.—A  deputation  will  address  Mrs.  Bartlett*a  claw  and  the  senior  claasn 
of  the  Siibbath  School ;  as  also  Mrs.  Bartlelfs  children's  meeting  at  the  Almshouaes, 

Afombiy,  Manh  6/A.— I^rajer-meetinfr  for  females  only,  at  six.  For  young  people  at  tlie  same 
tim*.'.  Speciiil  iiroytT-meetings  at  seven  for  the  various  agencies  of  the  chun-h.  Meetings  for 
enquirers  at  half-pant  eight. 

Tuf»ilay,  March  7«ft.— The  Pastor  and  others  will  meet  the  parents  of  the  Sabbalh  School 
childn.!!  to  too,  and  speak  with  them  upon  heavenly  things. 

Wtdneaday,  March  Rf  A.— Annual  Meeting  of  Mrs.  Bartletfs  class. 

Thursday,  March  Wh  — f'h^iuK  gathering.  M«y  our  hearts  be  filled  with  adoring  praue.  We 
shall  meet  to  couiUicmoralo  our  Lord's  death.  Members  will  please  shew  their  tickets. 
Sj)ectators  will  find  room  in  the  gallery. 


Pctrflpflfitan  Wematk  §n\0. 


FAITH   AND    KEGEXERATION. 


Dbuvebesd  on  Lobd's-day  Morning,  March  dxH,  1871,  by 

C.  H.  SPUROEON, 

AT     THB    MBTROPOLITAN     TABERNACLE,     NBWINGTON. 


"Whofloever  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  bom  of  God:  and  every  one 
that  loyeth  l^m.  that  begat  loreth  him  also  that  is  begotten  of  him." — 1  John  v.  1. 

Fob  the  preacher  of  the  gospel  to  make  fall  proof  of  his  ministry  will 
be  a  task  requiring  much  divine  teaching.  iBesides  much  care  in  the 
manner  and  spirit,  he  will  need  guidance  as  to  his  matter.  One  point  of 
difl&cnltj  will  be  to  preach  the  whole  truth  in  fair  proportion,  never 
exaggerating  one  doctrine,  never  enforcing  one  point,  at  the  expense  of 
anoth^y  never  keeping  back  any  part,  nor  yet  allowing  it  undue 
prominence.  For  practical  result  much  will  depend  upon  an  equal 
balance,  and  a  right  dividing  of  the  word.  In  one  case  this  matter 
assumes  immense  importance  because  it  affects  vital  truths,  and  may 
lead  to  very  serious  results  unless  rightly  attended  to;  I  refer  to  the 
elementary  facts  involved  in  the  work  of  Christ  for  us,  and  the 
operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  us.  Justification  by  faith  is  a  matter 
about  which  there  must  be  no  obscurity  much  less  equivocation ;  and 
at  the  same  time  we  must  distinctly  and  determinately  insist  upon  it 
that  regeneration  is  necessary  to  every  soul  that  shall  enter  heaven. 
'*  Ye  most  be  bom  again "  is  as  much  a  truth  as  that  clear  gospel 
statement,  ''He  that  believeth  and  is  baptised  shall  be  saved."  It  is  to 
be  feared  that  some  zealous  brethren  have  preached  the  doctrine  of 
justification  by  faith  not  only  so  boldlv  and  so  plainlv,  but  also  so 
baldly  and  so  out  of  all  connection  with  other  truth,  that  they  have 
led  men  into  presumptuous  confidences,  and  have  appeared  to  lend 
their  countenance  to  a  species  of  Antinomianism  very  much  to  be 
dreaded.  From  a  dead,  fruitless,  inoperative  faith  we  may  earnestly 
pray,  "  Good  Lord,  deliver  us,"  yet  may  we  be  unconsciously  fostering 
It.  Moreover,  to  stand  up  and  cry,  "  feelieve,  believe,  believe,"  without 
explaining  what  is  to  be  believed,  to  lay  the  whole  stress  of  salvation 
upon  faith  without  explaining  what  salvation  is,  and  showing  that  it 
meana  deliverance  from  the  power  as  well  as  from  the  guilt  of  sin,  may 
aeem  to  a  fervent  revivalist  to  be  the  proper  thing  for  the  occasion, 
but  those  who  have  watched  the  result  of  such  teaching  have  had  grave 
cause  to  question  whether  as  much  hurt  may  not  be  done  by  it  as 
Xo.  979. 


134  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

good.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  onr  idncere  conyiction  that  there  ii 
equal  danger  in  the  other  extreme.  We  are  mott  certain  that  a  maa 
must  be  made  a  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesns,  or  he  is  not  saved ; 
but  some  have  seen  so  clearly  the  importance,  of  this  tmth  that  they 
are  for  ever  and  always  dwelling  upon  the  great  change  of  conversion, 
its  fruits,  and  its  conseouences,  and  they  hardly  appear  to  remember 
the  glad  tidings  that  whosoever  believeth  on  Christ  Jesus  hath  ever- 
lasting life.  Such  teachers  are  apt  to  set  up  so  high  a  standard  of 
experience,  and  to  be  so  exacting  as  to  the  marks  and  signs  of  a  true 
bom  child  of  God,  that  they  greatly  discourage  sincere  seekers,  and  fall 
into  a  species  of  legality  from  which  we  may  again  say,  '*  Good  Lord, 
deliver  us."  Never  let  us  fail  most  plainly  to  t^tify  to  the  undoubted 
truth  that  true  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  saves  the  soul,  for  if  we  do  not  we 
shall  hold  in  legal  bondage  many  who  ought  long  afio  to  have  enjoyed 
peace,  and  to  have  enter^  into  the  libertv  of  the  children  of  God. 

It  may  not  be  easy  to  keep  these  two  thin^  in  their  proper  position, 
but  we  must  aim  at  it  if  we  would  be  wise  bmlders.  John  did  so  in  his 
teaching.  If  you  turn  to  the  third  chapter  of  his  gospel  it  is  very  sig- 
nificant that  while  he  records  at  length  our  Savioiur's  exposition  of  the 
new  birth  to  Nicodemns,  yet  in  that  very  same  chapter  he  gives  us  what  is 
perhaps  the  plainest  piece  of  gospel  in  all  the  Scriptures :  ^  And  as 
Moses  lifted  up  the  serpent  in  the  wilderness,  even  so  must  the  Son  of 
man  be  lifted  up :  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  not  perish, 
but  have  eternal  life."  So,  too,  in  the  chapter  before  us  he  insists  upon 
a  man's  beiug  bom  of  God ;  he  brings  that  up  again  and  again,  out 
evermore  does  he  ascribe  wondrous  efScacy  to  flEiith;  he  mentions 
faith  as  the  index  of  our  being  bom  again,  faith  as  overcoming  the 
world,  faith  as  possessing  the  inward  witness,  faith  as  having  eternal 
life — indeed,  he  seems  as  if  he  could  not  heap  honour  enongfa  upon 
believing,  while  at  the  same  time  he  insists  upon  the  grave  importuice 
of  the  inward  experience  connected  with  the  new  birth. 

Now,  if  such  adifliculty  occurs  to  the  preacher,  we  need  not  wonder  that 
it  al8o  arises  with  the  hearer,  and  causes  him  much  questioning.  We 
have  known  many  who,  by  hearing  continually  the  most  precious 
doctrine  that  belief  in  Clirist  Jesus  is  saving,  have  forgotten  other 
tmths,  and  have  concluded  that  they  were  saved  when  they  were  not, 
have  fancied  they  believed  when  as  yet  they  were  total  strangers  to 
the  experience  which  always  attends  tme  faith.  They  have  imagined  fiftith 
to  be  the  same  thing  as  a  presumptuous  confidence  of  safety  in  Christ, 
not  grounded  upon  the  divine  word  when  rightly  understood,  nor  proved 
by  any  facts  in  their  own  souls.  Whenever  self-examination  has  been 
proposed  to  them  they  have  avoided  it  as  an  assault  upon  their 
assurance,  and  when  they  have  been  urged  to  try  themselves  by  gospel 
tests,  they  have  defended  their  false  peace  by  the  notion  that  to 
raise  a  question  about  their  certain  salvation  would  be  unbelief. 
Thus,  I  fear,  the  conceit  of  supposed  faith  in  Christ  has  placed  them  in 
an  almost  hopeless  position,  since  the  warnings  and  admonitions  of 
the  gospel  have  been  set  aside  by  their  fatal  persuasion  that  it  is  needless 
to  attend  to  them,  and  only  necessary  to  cbng  tenaciously  to  the  belief 
that  all  has  been  done  long  ago  for  us  by  Christ  Jesus,  and  that  godly  fear 
and  careful  walking  are  superfluities,  if  not  actually  an  offence  against 


FAITH  AND  BEGENERATION.  185 

the  goBpeL  On  the  other  hand,  we  have  known  others  who  hare  received 
the  doctrine  of  justification  bj  faith  as  a  part  of  their  creed,  ondyet 
have  not  accept^  it  as  a  practical  fact  that  the  believer  is  saved.  They 
80  much  feel  that  they  must  be  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  their  minds, 
that  they  are  always  looking  within  themselves  for  evidences,  and  are  the 
subjects  of  perpetual  donbts.    Their  natural  and  frequent  song  is — 

"  *Ti8  a  point  I  long  to  know, 
Oft  it  causes  anxious  thought ; 
Do  I  love  the  Lord,  or  no  ? 
Am  I  his,  or  am  I  not  ?  ** 

These  are  a  class  of  people  to  be  much  more  pitied  than  condemned. 
Thongh  I  would  be  the  very  last  to  spread  unbelief,  I  would  be  the 
very  first  to  inculcate  holy  anxiety.  It  is  one  thing  for  a  person  to  be 
carefol  to  Imow  that  he  is  really  in  Christ,  and  quite  another  thing  for 
him  to  doubt  the  promises  of  Christ,  supposing  that  thev  are  really 
made  to  him.  There  is  a  tendency  in  some  hearts  to  look  too  mucn 
within,  and  spend  more  time  in  studying  their  outward  evidences  and 
their  inward  feelings,  than  in  learning  the  fulness,  ireeness,  and  all- 
sufficiency  of  the  grace  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  They  too  much 
obscure  the  grand  evangelical  truth  that  the  believer*s  acceptance  with 
■God  is  not  in  himself,  but  in  Christ  Jesus,  that  we  are  cleansed  through 
the  blood  of  Jesus,  that  we  are  clothed  in  the  righteousness  of  Jesus, 
and  are,  in  a  word, "  accepted  in  the  Beloved."  I  earnestly  long  that 
these  two  doctrines  may  be  well  balanced  in  your  souls.  Only  the 
Soly  Spirit  can  teach  you  this.  This  is  a  narrow  path  which  the  eagle's 
«ye  has  not  seen,  and  the  lion's  whelp  has  not  trodden.  He  whom  the 
Holy  Ghost  shall  instruct  will  not  give  way  to  presumption  and  despise 
the  Spirit's  work  within,  neither  will  he  forget  that  salvation  is  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christy  ''who  of  God  is  made  unto  us  wisdom,  and 
righteousness,  and  sanctification,  and  redemption."  The  text  appears 
to  me  to  blend  these  two  truths  in  a  very  delightful  harmony,  and  we 
will  try  to  speak  of  them,  God  helping  us. 

"  He  that  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  bom  of  God."  We 
shall  consider  this  morning,  first  of  all,  the  helieving  which  i^  here 
inimded;  and  then,  secondly,  Ji&iv  U  is  a  sure  proof  of  regeneration; 
and  then,  thirdly,  dwelling  for  awhile  upon  the  closing  part  of  the 
▼erse  we  shall  show  how  it  becomes  an  argument  for  Christian  Jove*: 
**  Every  one  that  loveth  him  that  begat  loveth  him  also  that  is  begotten 
of  him." 

I.  What  is  the  bblibvino  entended  in  the  text  ?  We  are 
persuaded,  first  of  all,  that  i?ie  believing  here  intetided  is  that  which  our 
Lord  and  his  apostles  exhorted  men  to  exercise^  and  to  which  the  promise 
of  salvation  is  always  appended  in  the  word  of  God;  as  for  instance  that 
faith  which  Peter  inculcated  when  he  said  to  Cornelius,  "  To  him  give 
all  the  prophets  witness,  that  through  his  name  whosoever  believeth  in 
him  shall  receive  remission  of  sins  ; "  and  which  our  Lord  commanded 
when  he  came  into  Galilee,  saying  to  men,  ''  Bepent  ye,  and  believe 
the  gospel"  (Hark  i.  15).  Certain  persons  have  been  obliged  to  admit 
that  the  apostles  commanded,  and  exhorted,  and  besought  men  to  believe, 
hut  they  teU  us  that  the  kind  of  believing  which  the  apostles  bade  men 


186  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

exercise  was  not  a  saving  faith.  Now,  Ood  forbid  we  should  e?er  in 
our  zeal  to  defend  a  fayourite  position,  be  driyen  to  an  assertion  so 
monstrons.  Can  we  imagine  for  a  moment  apostles  with  burmng  zeal 
and  ardour,  inspired  by  tJbe  Spirit  of  Ood  within  them,  going  about  the 
world  exhorting  men  to  exercise  a  faith  which  after  all  woud  not  saye 
them?  To  what  purpose  did  they  run  on  so  fruitless  an  errand,  so 
tantalising  to  human  need,  so  barren  of  results?  When  our  Lord  bade 
his  disciples  go  into  all  the  world  and  preach  the  gospel  to  eyery 
creature,  and  ^ded,  ''he  that  belieyeth  and  is  baptised  shall  be  sayed, ' 
the  faith  which  was  to  be  preached  was  e?idently  none  other  than  a 
saying  faith,  and  it  is  friyolous  to  say  otherwise.  I  must  confess  that  I 
felt  shocked  the  other  dajr  to  read  in  a  certain  sermon  the  remark  that 
the  words  of  Paul  to  the  jailor  ''  were  spoken  in  a  conyersation  held  at 
Eiidnight  under  peculiar  circumstances,  and  the  eyangelist  who  wrote 
them  was  not  present  at  the  interyiew."  Why,  had  it  been  at  high  noon, 
and  had  the  whole  world  been  present,  the  apostle  could  haye  giyen  no 
fitter  answer  to  the  question,  ''What  muBt  I  do  to  be  sayed?"  than,  the 
one  he  did  giye,  "  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christy  and  thou  shalt  be 
sayed."  It  is,  I  repeat,  a  mere  friyolity  or  worse,  to  say  that  the  fiaith 
enjoined  by  the  apostles  was  a  mere  human  faith  which  does  not  saye, 
and  that  there  is  no  certainty  that  such  faith  saves  the  souL  That 
cause  must  be  desperate  whicn  calls  for  such  a  defence. 

Furthermore,  Vi/^  faith  here  intended  m  ihe  duty  of  all  men.  Bead  the 
text  again :  "  Whosoever  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  bom  of 
God."  It  can  never  be  less  than  man's  duty  to  believe  the  truth  ;  that 
Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  the  truth,  and  it  is  the  duty  of  every  man  to 
believe  it.  I  understand  here  by  "  believing,"  confiiunce  in  Christ,  and 
it  is  surely  the  duty  of  men  to  confide  in  that  which  is  worthy  of  confi- 
dence, and  that  Jesus  Christ  is  worthy  of  the  confidence  of  all  men  is 
certain,  it  is  therefore  the  duty  of  men  to  confide  in  him. 

Inasmuch  as  the  gospel  command, "  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
and  thou  shalt  be  saved,"  is  addressed  by  divine  authority  to  eveiy 
creature,  it  is  the  duty  of  every  man  so  to  do.  What  saith  John :  "  This 
is  his  commandment.  That  we  should  believe  on  the  name  of  his  Son 
Jesus  Christy"  and  our  Lord  himself  assures  us,  "  He  that  believeth 
on  him  is  not  condemned:  but  he  that  believeth  not  is  condemned 
already,  because  he  hath  not  believed  in  the  name  of  the  only-begotten 
Son  of  God."  I  know  there  are  some  who  will  deny  ttiis,  and  deny  it 
upon  the  ground  that  man  has  not  the  spiritual  ability  to  believe  in 
Jesus,  to  which  I  reply  that  it  is  altogether  an  error  to  imagine  that 
the  measure  of  the  sinner's  moral  ability  is  the  measure  of  his  duty. 
There  are  many  things  which  men  ought  to  do  which  they  haye  now 
lost  the  moral  and  spiritual,  though  not  the  physical,  power  to  do.  A 
man  ought  to  be  chaste,  but  if  he  has  been  so  lone;  immoral  that  he 
cannot  restrain  his  passions,  he  is  not  thereby  free  from  the  obligation. 
It  is  the  duty  of  a  debtor  to  pay  his  debts,  but  if  he  has  been  such  a 
spendthrift  that  he  has  brought  himself  into  hopeless  poverty,  he 
is  not  elonerated  from  his  debts  thereby.  Every  man  ouffht  to  believe 
that  which  is  true,  but  if  his  mind  has  oecome  so  depraved  that  he  loves 
a  lie  and  will  not  receive  the  truth,  is  he  thereby  excused  ?  If  die  law  of 
God  is  to  be  lowered  according  to  the  moral  condition  oi  siimersi  you 


FAITH  ASD  REGENERATION.  l^T 

If  onld  haTe  a  law  graduated  upon  a  sliding-scale  to  suit  the  degrees  of 
haman  sinfalness ;  in  fact,  the  worst  man  would  then  be  under  the  least 
law,  and  become  consequently  the  least  guilty.  God's  reauirements 
would  be  a  yariable  quantity,  and,  in  truth,  we  should  be  unaer  no  rule 
at  all.  The  command  of  Christ  stands  good  howerer  bad  men  may  be, 
and  when  he  commands  all  men  ererywhere  to  repent,  they  are 
bound  to  repent,  whether  their  sinfulness  renders  it  impossible  for  them 
to  be  willing  to  do  so  or  not.  In  every  case  it  is  man's  duty  to  do 
what  God  bids  him. 

At  the  same  time,  ihia  faith,  ivlierever  it  exists^  is  in  every  case,  wiihouu 
exeeptionj  the  gift  of  Ood  and  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Never  yet  did 
a  man  believe  in  Jesus  with  the  faith  here  intended,  except  the  Holy 
Spirit  led  him  to  do  so.  He  has  wrought  all  our  works  in  us,  and  our 
faith  too.  Faith  is  too  celestial  a  grace  to  spring  up  in  human  nature 
till  it  is  renewed:  feith  is  in  every  believer  "  the  gift  of  God."  You 
will  say  to  me,  "Are  these  two  things  consistent  ?"  I  reply,  "  Certainly, 
for  they  are  both  true."  "How  consistent?"  say  you.  "How  in- 
consistent?" say  I,  and  you  shall  have  as  much  difficulty  to  prove 
them  inconsistent  as  I  to  prove  them  consistent.  Experience  makes 
them  consistent,  if  theory  does  not.  Men  are  convinc^  by  the  Holy 
Spirit  of  sin — **  of  sin,"  saith  Christ,  "  because  they  believe  not  ou 
me; "  here  is  one  of  the  truths ;  but  the  selfsame  hearts  are  taught  by 
t^e  same  Spirit  that  faith  is  of  the  operation  of  God.  (Col.  ii.  12.) 
Brethren,  be  vnlling  to  see  both  sides  of  the  shield  of  truth.  Eise 
above  the  babyhooa  which  cannot  believe  two  doctrines  until  it  sees 
the  connecting  link.  Have  you  not  two  eyes,  man  ?  Must  you  needs 
put  one  of  them  out  in  order  to  see  clearly  ?  Is  it  impossible  to  vou 
to  use  a  spiritual  stereoscope,  and  look  at  two  views  of  truth  until  tney 
melt  into  one,  and  that  one  becomes  more  real  and  actual  because  it  is 
made  up  of  two?  Many  men  refuse  to  see  more  than  one  side  of  a 
doctrine,  and  persistently  fight  against  anything  which  is  not  on  its  very 
surface  consistent  with  their  own  idea.  In  the  present  case  I  do  not 
find  it  difficult  to  believe  faith  to  be  at  the  same  time  the  duty  of  man 
and  the  epfb  of  God ;  and  if  others  cannot  accept  the  two  truths,  1  am  not 
responsiDle  for  their  rejection  of  them ;  my  duty  is  performed  when 
I  have  honestly  borne  witness  to  them. 

Hitherto  we  have  only  been  clearing  the  way.  Let  us  advance. 
Hie  faith  intended  in  the  text  evidently  rests  upon  a  person — upon 
Jesus.  "  Whosoever  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  bom  of  God." 
It  is  not  belief  about  a  doctrine,  nor  an  opinion,  nor  a  formula,  but 
belief  coneeming  a  person.  Translate  the  words,  "Whosoever  believeth 
that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,"  and  they  stand  thus :  "  Whosoever  believeth 
that  the  Sayiour  is  the  Anointed  is  bom  of  God."  By  which  is 
assuredly  not  meant,  whosoever  professes  to  believe  that  he  is  so,  for 
many  do  that  whose  lives  prove  that  they  are  not  regenerate  ;  but, 
whosoerer  so  believes  it  to  be  the  fact,  as  truly  and  in  very  deed  to 
receive  Jesus  as  God  has  set  him  forth  and  anointed  him,  is  a  regenerate 
man.  What  is  meant  by  "Jesus  is  the  Christ,"  or,  Jesus  is  the 
Anointed?  First,  that  he  is  the  Prophet;  secondly,  that  he  is  the 
Priest ;  thirdly,  that  he  is  the  King  of  the  chiltch,  for  in  all  these 
thiM  senses  he  is  the  Anointed.    Now,  I  may  ask  myself  this  question : 


138  METAOFOUTAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Do  I  this  day  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  great  Prophet  anointed  of  God 
to  reveal  to  me  the  way  of  salvation  ?  Do  I  accept  him  as  my  teacher, 
and  admit  that  he  has  the  words  of  eternal  life  ?  If  I  so  oelieve,  I 
shall  obey  his  gospel  and  possess  eternal  life.  Do  I  accept  him  to  be 
henceforth  the  revealer  of  God  to  my  soul,  the  messenger  of  the 
covenant^  the  anointed  Prophet  of  the  Most  High  ?  Bat  he  is  also  a 
priest.  Now,  a  priest  is  ordained  from  among  men  to  offer  sacrifices ; 
do  I  firmly  believe  that  Jesus  was  ordained  to  offer  his  one  sacrifice  for 
the  sins  of  mankind,  by  the  offering  of  which  sacrifice  once  for  all  he 
has  finished  atonement  and  made  complete  expiation  ?  Do  I  accq»t 
his  atonement  as  an  atonement  for  me,  and  receive  his  death  as  aa 
expiation  upon  which  I  rest  my  hope  for  forgiveness  of  all  my  trans^ 
gressions  ?  Do  I  in  fact  believe  Jesus  to  be  the  one  sole^  only  pro- 
pitiating Priest,  and  accept  him  to  act  as  priest  for  me  ?  If  so,  then  I 
nave  in  part  believed  that  Jesus  is  the  Anointed.  Bat  he  is  also  King, 
and  if  i  desire  to  know  whether  I  possess  Uie  right  faith,  I  farther 
must  ask  myself,  *'  Is  Jesus,  who  is  now  exalted  in  heaven,  who  once 
bled  on  the  cross,  is  he  King  to  me  ?  Is  his  law  my  law  7  Do  I  desire 
entirely  to  submit  myself  to  his  government  ?  Do  I  hate  what  he 
hates,  and  love  what  he  loves  ?  Do  I  live  to  praise  him  7  Do  I, 
as  a  loyal  subject,  desire  to  see  his  kingdom  come  and  his  wfll 
done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven  7 "  My  dear  friend,  if  then  canst 
heartily  and  earnestly  say,  **I  accept  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth  to  be 
Pro])liot,  Priest,  and  King  to  me,  because  God  has  anointed  liim  to 
exercise  those  three  offices;  and  in  each  of  these  three  characters  I 
unfcigncdiy  trust  him,''  then,  dear  friend,  you  have  the  faith  of  God's 
elect,  for  it  is  written,  '^  He  that  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is 
born  of  God." 

Now  we  will  go  a  little  further.  True  faith  is  reliance.  Look  at  any 
Greek  lexicon  you  like,  and  you  will  find  that  the  word  wwrevtiy  does 
not  merely  mean  to  believe,  but  to  trust,  to  confide  in,  to  conmiit  to, 
entrust  with,  and  so  forth;  and  the  marrow  of  the  meaning  of  &iih  ia 
confidence  in,  reliance  upon.  Let  me  ask,  then,  ever}'  professor  here 
wlio  professes  to  have  faith,  is  your  faith  the  faith  of  reliance  ?  You 
give  credit  to  certain  statements,  do  you  also  place  trust  in  the  one 
glorious  person  who  alone  can  redeem  ?  Have  you  confidence  as  well 
as  credence  ?  A  creed  will  not  save  you,  but  reliance  upon  tihe  anointed 
Saviour  is  the  way  of  salvation.  Eemember,  I  beseech  yoo,  that  if  yon 
could  be  taught  an  orthodoxy  unadulterated  with  error,  and  coidd  learn 
a  creed  written  by  the  ][)en  of  the  Eternal  God  himself,  yet  a  mere 
notional  faith,  such  as  men  exercise  when  they  believe  in  the  existence 
of  men  in  the  moon,  or  nebulae  in  space,  could  not  save  your  aouL  Of 
this  we  are  sure,  because  ^ve  see  around  us  many  who  have  sach  a  faith, 
and  yet  evidently  are  not  children  of  God. 

Moreover,  true  faith  is  not  a  flattermg  presumption,  by  which  a  man 
says,  "  I  believe  I  am  saved,  for  I  have  such  delightfiil  leelingg,  I  have 
had  a  marvellous  dream,  I  have  felt  very  wonderful  sensations ;"  for  all 
such  confidence  may  be  nothing  but  sheer  assumption.  Preaamptioiv 
instead  of  being  faith,  is  the  reverse  of  hitii;  instead  of  being  the 
substance  of  things  hoped  for,  it  is  a  mere  mirage.  Faith,  is  as  correct 
as  reason,  and  if  Jber  arguments  are  considered,  stie  is  as  aecnre  in  her 


FAITH  AlTD  SBQENSRATION.  139 

sonclnBioiiB  as  though  she  drew  them  by  mathematical  raleB.  Beware, 
[  nvBj  joa,  of  a  flEiith  which  has  no  basis  but  yoar  own  fancy. 

Faith,  again,  is  not  the  assurance  that  Jesns  died  for  me.    I  some- 
kimea  feel  myself  a  little  at  yariance  with  that  yerse — 

''Just  as  I  am— without  one  plea 
But  that  thy  blood  was  shed  for  me.** 

It  is  eminently  suitable  for  a  child  of  God,  but  I  am  not  so  snre  as  to 
its  being  the  precise  way  for  putting  the  matter  for  a  sinner.  I  do  not 
belieye  in  Jesus  because  I  am  persuaded  that  his  blood  was  shed  for 
me,  but  rather  I  discoyer  that  his  blood  was  shed  especially  for  me 
from  the  fact  that  I  haye  been  led  to  belieye  in  him.  I  fear  me  there 
are  thousands  of  people  who  belieye  that  Jesus  died  for  them,  who  are 
not  bom  of  Ood,  but  rather  are  hardened  in  their  sin  by  their  ground- 
less hop€»  of  mercj.  There  is  no  particular  efficacy  in  a  man's  assuming 
that  Christ  has  died  for  him ;  for  it  is  a  mere  truism,  if  it  be  true  as 
some  teach,  that  Jesus  died  for  eyerybody.  On  such  a  theory  eyeiy 
belieyer  in  a  uniyersal  atonement  would  necessarily  be  bom  of  6oa, 
which  is  yery  far  from  being  the  case.  When  the  Holy  Spirit  leads  us 
to  rely  upon  the  Lord  Jeeas,  then  the  truth  that  God  gaye  his  only 
begotten  Son  that  whosoeyer  belieyeth  in  him  might  be  sayed,  is  opened 
up  to  our  souls,  and  we  see  that  for  us  who  are  belieyers,  Jesus  died 
with  the  special  intent  that  we  should  be  sayed.  For  the  Holy  Spirit 
to  assure  us  that  Jesus  shed  his  blood  for  us  in  particular  is  one  thing, 
but  merely  to  conclude  that  Jesus  died  for  us  on  the  notion  that  he 
died  for  eyerybody  is  as  far  as  the  east  is  from  the  west,  from  being 
real  faith  in  Jesus  Christ. 

Neither  is  it  faith  for  me  to  be  confident  that  I  am  sayed,  for  it  may 
be  the  case  that  I  am  not  sayed,  and  it  can  neyer  be  faith  to  belieye  a 
lie.  Many  haye  concluded  rashly  that  they  were  sayed  when  they  were 
still  in  the  gall  of  bitterness.  That  was  not  the  exhibition  of  con- 
fidence in  Christ  but  the  exhibition  of  a  base  presumption  destmctiye 
to  the  last  degree.  To  c#me  back  to  where  we  started  from,  faith,  in  a 
word,  is  reliance  upon  Jesus  Christ.  Whether  the  Redeemer  died  in 
special  and  particular  for  me  or  not,  is  not  the  question  to  be  raised  in 
tne  first  place;  I  find  that  he  came  into  the  world  to  saye  sinners,^ 
unier  that  general  character  I  come  to  him,  I  find  that  whosoever 
tmsteth  him  shall  be  saved,  I  therefore  trust  him,  and  having  done 
80, 1  leam  from  his  word  that  I  am  the  object  of  his  special  love,  and 
that  I  am  bom  of  God. 

In  my  first  coming  to  Jesus  I  can  haye  no  knowledge  of  any  personal 
and  special  interest  in  the  blood  of  Jesus ;  but  since  it  is  written,  "God 
hath  set  him  forth  to  be  a  propitiation  for  our  sins :  and  not  for  ours 
only,  but  also  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world,"  I  come  and  trust  myself 
to  that  propitiation ;  sink  or  swim  I  cast  myself  on  the  Saviour.  Great 
Son  of  God,  thou  hast  lived  and  died,  thou  hast  bled  and  suffered,  and 
made  atononent  for  sin  for  all  such  as  tmst  thee,  and  I  trust  thee,  I  lean 
Jifon  thee,  I  cast  myself  upon  thee.  Now,  whoever  has  such  faith  as 
this  is  bora  of  Gk)d,  he  has  tme  faith  which  is  proof  positive  of  the  new 
birth.    Judge  ye,  therefore,  whether  ye  have  tnis  faith  or  no. 

Let  me  tany  just  one  minute  longer  over  this.    The  tme  faith  is  set 


140  METROPOLITAN  TABKBKACLX  FULPTT. 

forth  in  Scripture  by  figures,  and  one  or  two  of  these  we  wQl  mention. 
It  was  an  eminent  type  of  Mtk  when  the  Hebrew  father  in  Er^pt  dew 
the  lamb  and  caught  the  warm  blood  in  the  basin,  then  took  a  onndi  of 
hyssop  and  dipped  it  in  the  blood  and  marked  the  two  posts  of  his 
door,  and  then  struck  a  red  mark  across  the  lintel.  That  smearing  of 
tlie  door  represented  faith.  The  deliverance  was  wrought  bj  the 
blood  ;  and  the  blood  availed  through  the  householder's  own  personally 
Rtrikiug  it  upon  his  door.  Faith  does  that ;  it  takes  of  the  things  of 
Christ,  makes  them  its  own,  sprinkles  the  soul,  as  it  were,  with  the 
precious  blood,  accepts  the  way  of  mercy  by  which  the  Lord  passes 
over  us  and  exempts  his  people  from  destruction.  Faith  wag  riiown  to 
the  Jews  in  another  way.  When  a  beast  was  offered  in  sacrifice  for 
sin,  the  priest  and  sometimes  the  representatives  of  the  tribes  or  the 
iuilividual  laid  their  hands  upon  the  victim  in  token  that  they  desiied 
their  sins  to  be  transferred  to  it,  that  it  might  suffer  for  them  as  a  type 
of  tlie  great  substitute.  Faith  lays  her  hands  on  Jesns,  desiring  to 
receive  the  benefit  of  his  substitutionary  death. 

A  still  more  remarkable  representation  of  faith  was  that  of  the 
healing  look  of  the  serpent-bitten  Israelites.  On  the  great  standard  in 
the  midst  of  the  camp  Moses  lifted  up  a  serpent  of  brass;  high  oYerhead 
above  all  the  tents  this  serpent  gleamed  in  the  sun,  and  whoeyerof  all 
the  dying  host  would  but  look  to  it  was  made  to  live.  Looking  was  a 
very  simple  act,  but  it  indicated  that  the  person  was  obedient  to  God's 
eouimana.  He  looked  as  he  was  bidden,  and  the  rirtue  of  heding  came 
from  the  brazen  serpent  through  a  look.  Such  is  faith.  It  is  the 
simplest  thing  in  the  world,  but  it  indicates  a  great  deal  more  than  is 
seen  upon  its  surface : 

"  There  is  life  for  a  look  at  the  Crucified  One." 

To  believe  in  Jesus  is  but  to  glance  the  eye  of  faith  to  him,  to  trust 
liim  with  thy  soul. 

That  poor  woman  who  came  behind  our  Saviour  in  the  press  offers  us 
anotlrcr  figure  of  what  faith  is.  She  said,  '^  If  I  may  but  touch  the  hem 
of  his  garment  I  shall  be  made  whole.*'  Taking  no  medicines,  making 
no  profession,  and  performing  no  ceremonies,  she  simply  touched  the 
ravelling  of  the  Saviour's  robe,  and  she  was  healed  at  once.  0  soul,  if 
thou  canst  get  into  contact  with  Christ  bv  simply  trusting  him,  tiiough 
that  trust  ^  ever  so  feeble,  thou  hast  the  faith  of  God's  elect ;  thou 
hast  the  faith  which  is  in  every  case  the  token  of  the  new  birth. 

II.  We  must  now  pass  on  to  show  that  wherever  it  busts  it 
IS  THE  PROOF  OF  REGENERATION.  There  ncver  was  a  grain  of  such 
faith  as  this  in  this  world,  except  in  a  regenerate  soul,  and  there  never 
will  be  while  the  world  standctb.  It  is  so  according  to  the  text,  and  if 
we  had  no  other  testimony  this  one  passage  would  be  quite  enongfa  to 

Srove  it.  ''  Whosoever  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  bom  of 
od.*'  "  Ah!  "  I  hear  thee  say,  poor  soul,  "the  new  birth  is  a  great 
mystery;  I  do  not  understand  it;  I  am  afraid  I  am  not  a  partaker  in  it" 
You  are  bom  again  if  you  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Ohnst,  if  you  are 
relying  upon  a  cracified  Sairiour  you  are  assuredly  begotten  a|;am  unto 
a  lively  hope.  Mystery  or  no  mystery,  the  new  birth  is  yonrs  if  yon  are 
a  believer.    Have  you  never  noticed  that  the  greatest  mysteries  in  the 


FAITH  AND  REGENERATION.  141 

rorld  reyeal  ihemselTeB  by  the  Bimplest  indications.  The  simplicity 
md  apparent  eadnesa  of  faith  is  no  rea^p.  why  I  should  not  regard  its 
existence  as  an  infallible  indication  of  the  new  birth  within.  How  know 
ire  ttiat  the  new-bom  duld  lives  except  by  its  cry  7  Yet  a  child's  cry — 
irhat  a  simple  sonnd  it  is!  how  readily  oonld  it  be  unitated!  a  clever  work- 
man could  with  pipes  and  string  easily  deceive  us  ;  yet  was  there  never 
a  child's  cry  in  the  world  but  what  it  indicated  the  mysteries  of  breath- 
ing, heart-beating,  blood-flowing,  and  all  the  other  wonders  which 
come  with  life  itsd^  Do  you  see  ponder  person  just  drawn  out  of  the 
river?  Does  she  live 7  xes,  life  is  there.  Why  7  Because  the  lungs 
Btill  heave.  But  does  it  not  seem  an  easy  thing  to  make  lungs  heave  ? 
A.  pair  of  bellows  blown  into  them,  might  not  that  produce  the  motion  7 
Ah,  yes,  the  thing  is  easily  imitated  after  a  sort ;  but  no  lunp:8  heave 
except  where  life  is,  no  blood  is  pumped  to  and  fro  from  the  heart 
except  where  life  is.  Take  another  illustration.  Oo  into  a  telegraph 
oiBce  at  any  time,  and  you  will  see  certain  needles  moving  right  and 
left  with  unceasing  click.  Electricity  is  a  great  mystery,  and  you 
cannot  see  or  feel  it;  but  the  operator  tells  you  that  the  electric 
current  is  moving  along  the  wire.  How  does  he  know 7  ''I  know 
it  by  the  needle."  How  is  that  ?  I  could  move  your  needles  easily. 
''Yes;  but  do  not  you  see  the  needle  has  made  two  motions  to  the 
right,  one  to  the  left,  and  two  to  the  right  again  7  I  am  reading  a 
messa^"  '*  But,"  say  you,  **  I  can  see  nothing  in  it ;  I  could  imitate 
that  dickin^  and  moving  veiy  easily."  Yet  he  who  is  taught  the  art  sees 
brfore  him  m  those  needles,  not  only  electric  action,  but  a  deeper  mystery 
■tOl ;  he  perceives  that  a  mind  is  directing  the  invisible  force,  and  speak- 
ing by  means  of  it  Not  to  all,  but  to  the  initiated  is  it  given  to  see  the 
znjrstery  hidden  within  the  simplicity.  The  believer  sees  in  the  faith, 
whidi  IS  simple  as  the  movements  of  the  needle,  an  indication  that 
Ood  is  operating  on  the  human  mind,  and  the  spiritual  man  discerns 
that  diere  is  an  inner  secret  intimated  thereby,  which  the  carnal  eye 
cannot  decipher.  To  believe  in  Jesus  is  a  better  indicator  of  regenera- 
tion than  anything  else,  and  in  no  case  did  it  ever  mislead.  Fatth  in 
the  living  God  and  his  Son  Jesus  Christ  is  always  the  result  of  the  new 
birth,  and  can  never  exist  except  in  the  regenerate.  Whoever  has 
fidth  is  a  saved  man. 

I  beg  you  to  foHow  me  a  little  in  this  argument.  A  certain  divine 
has  lately  said,  *'  A  man's  act  of  believing  is  not  the  same  as  his  being 
saved :  it  is  only  in  the  direction  of  being  saved."  This  is  tantamount 
to  a  denial  that  every  believer  in  Christ  is  at  once  saved ;  and  the 
inference  is  that  a  man  may  not  conclude  that  he  ia  saved  because  he 
bdieves  in  Jesus.  Now,  observe  how  opposed  this  is  to  Scripture.  It 
is  certain  from  the  Word  of  Ood  that  the  man  who  beUevea  in  Jesus  is 
nU  eondemmd.  Bead  John  iii.  18,  and  many  other  passages.  '^  He 
that  believeth  on  Him  is  not  condenmed."  Now  is  not  every  un- 
legenerate  man  condemned  ?  Is  not  a  man  who  is  not  condemned  a 
ttved  man?  When  you  are  sure  on  divine  authority  that  the  believer 
is  not  condemned,  how  in  the  name  of  everything  that  is  rational  can 

ri  deny  that  the  believer  is  saved  ?   If  he  is  not  condemned,  what  has 
to  fear  ?    Will  he  not  rightly  conclude  that  being  justified  by  faith, 
he  has  peace  with  Gtoi  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ? 


142  MKTBOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Note,  secondly,  that  faith  in  the  fourth  verse  of  the  chapter  before  ns 
is  said  to  ^*  overcome  the  ^*(f^'*  '"This  is  the  victoij  that  oTer- 
Cometh  the  world,  even  our  faiUL"  What,  then,  does  faith  OTeroome 
the  world  in  i>ersons  who  are  not  saved  ?  How  can  this  be  possible  when 
the  apostle  saith  that  that  which  overcomes  the  world  is  twm  of  Godf 
Read  the  fourth  verse  :  ''  Whatsoever  is  bom  of  Ood  overcometh  the 
world:"  but  faith  overcomes  the  world,  therefore  the  man  who  has 
faith  is  regenerate;  and  what  means  that  but  that  he  is  saved,  and  that 
his  faith  is  the  instrument  by  which  he  achieves  victories. 

Further,  faith  accepts  the  witness  of  God,  and  more,  he  that  hath  fidth 
Jias  the  taitnees  in  himself  to  the  truth  of  God.  Bead  the  tenth  vene  of 
the  chapter :  "  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  of  Grod  hath  the  witness  in 
himself."  It  is  not  said,  ''  He  that  does  this  or  feels  thaV  bat  ''He 
that  believeth  hath  the  witness  in  himself/*  his  heart  bears  witness 
to  the  truth  of  God.  Has  any  unsaved  man  an  experimental  witness 
within  ?  Will  you  tell  me  that  a  man's  inner  experience  bears  witness 
to  God's  gospel  and  yet  the  man  is  in  a  lost  state,  or  only  hopeflil  of 
being  saved  ultimately  ?  No,  sir,  it  is  impossible.  He  that  believeth 
has  that  change  wrought  in  him  which  enables  him  by  his  own  con- 
sciousness to  confirm  the  witness  of  God,  and  snch  a  man  must  be  in  a 
state  of  salvation.  It  is  not  possible  to  say  of  him  that  he  is  an  on- 
saved  man. 

Again,  note  in  this  chapter,  at  the  thirteenth  verse,  that  wherever 
there  is  faith  there  is  eternal  life  ;  so  run  the  words,  *'  these  things  have 
I  written  unto  you  that  believe  on  the  nameof  the  Son  of  God;  that  ye  may 
know  that  ye  have  eternal  life."  Our  Lord  himself,  and  his  apostles,  in 
several  places  have  declared,  '^  He  that  believeth  on  him  hath  everlasting 
life."  Do  not  tell  me  that  a  sinner  who  believes  in  Jesns  is  to  make 
an  advance  before  he  can  say  he  is  saved,  that  a  man  who  tmsts  Ghrist 
is  only  on  the  way  to  salvation,  and  must  wait  until  he  has  used  the 
ordinances,  and  has  grown  in  grace,  before  he  may  know  that  he 
is  saved.  No,  the  moment  that  the  sinner's  trust  is  placed  on  the 
finished  work  of  Jesus  he  is  saved.  Heaven  and  earth  may  pass 
away,  but  that  man  shall  never  perish.  If  only  one  second  ago  I 
trusted  the  Saviour  I  am  safe;  just  as  safe  as  the  man  who  has  believed 
in  Jesus  fifty  vears,  and  who  has  all  that  while  walked  uprightly.  I  do 
not  say  that  the  new  bom  convert  is  as  happy,  nor  as  useml,  nor  as  holy, 
nor  as  ripe  for  heaven,  but  I  do  say  that  the  words, ''  he  that  believeth 
on  him  hath  everlasting  life,"  is  a  truth  with  general  bearings,  and  relates 
as  much  to  the  babe  in  faith  as  it  does  to  the  man  who  has  attained  to 
fulness  of  stature  in  Jesus  Christ. 

As  if  this  chapter  were  written  on  purpose  to  meet  the  gross  error 
that  faith  does  not  bring  immediate  salvation,  it  extols  faith  again 
imd  again,  yea,  and  I  may  add,  our  Lord  himself  crowns  faith,  because 
fuith  never  wears  the  crown,  but  brings  all  the  glory  to  the  dear 
Redeemer. 

Now,  let  me  say  a  word  or  two  in  reply  to  certain  oncstionB.  But 
must  not  a  man  repent  as  well  as  believe  7  Eeph' :  No  man  ever  be- 
lieved but  what  he  re])ented  at  the  same  time.  Faith  and  repentance 
go  together.  They  must.  If  I  trust  Christ  to  save  me  firom  sin,  I  am 
at  the  same  time  repenting  of  sin,  and  my  mind  is  changed  in  relation 


FAITH  ASD  RBGENEBATIOir.  143 

to  sill,  and  ererything  else  that  baa  to  do  with  its  state.  All  the  fruits 
meet  for  repentance  are  contained  in  failh  itself.  You  shall  never  find 
tluit  a  man  who  trusts  C9irist  remains  an  enemy  to  God,  or  a  lover  of 
sin.  Tbe  fact  that  he  accepts  the  atonement  provided  is  proof  positive 
that  he  loathes  sin,  and  that  his  mind  is  thoroughly  changed  in 
reference  to  Qoi.  Moreover,  as  to  all  the  ^aces  which  are  produced 
in  the  Christian  afterwards,  are  they  not  cdl  to  be  found  in  embryo 
in  faith?  "  Only  believe,  and  von  shall  be  saved,**  is  the  cry  which 
many  sneer  at,  and  others  misunderstand ;  but  do  you  know  what  "  only 
beliere  **  means  ?  Do  you  know  what  a  world  of  meaning  lies  in  that 
word?  Bead  that  fiamous  chapter  to  the  Hebrews,  and  see  what  faith 
has  done  and  is  still  able  to  do,  and  you  will  see  that  it  is  no  trifle. 
Wherever  there  is  faith  in  a  man  let  it  but  develop  itself  and  there 
wfll  be  a  purging  of  himself  from  sin,  a  sepaniting  himself  from  the 
world,  a  conflict  with  evil,  and  a  warring  for  the  glory  of  Christ,  which 
noUiing  else  could  produce.  Faith  is  in  itself  one  of  the  noblest  of 
graces  ;  it  is  the  compendium  of  all  virtues ;  and  as  sometimes  there 
will  lie  within  one  single  ear  enough  seed  to  make  a  whole  garden 
fertile,  so,  within  that  one  word  ''faith,*'  there  lies  enough  of 
virtue  to  make  earth  blessed;  enough  of  grace,  if  the  Spirit  make 
it  to  grow,  to  tjoji  the  fallen  into  the  perfect.  Faith  is  not  the 
easy  and  li^ht  thing  men  think.  Far  are  we  from  ascribing  salvation  to 
the  profession  of  a  mere  creed,  we  loathe  the  idea ;  neither  do  we  ascribe 
salvation  to  a  fond  persuasion,  but  we  do  ascribe  salvation  to  Jesus 
Christ,  and  the  obtaining  of  it  to  that  simple,  child-like  confi- 
dence which  lovingly  casts  itself  into  the  arms  of  him  who  gave  both 
his  hands  to  the  nail  and  suffered  to  the  death  for  the  sins  of  his  people. 
He  who  believes,  then,  is  saved — ^rest  assured  of  that  '' Whoso  ver 
believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  bom  of  God." 

III.  Now  what  flows  out  of  this?  Love  is  the  legitimate  issue!  Wc 
must  love  if  we  are  b^otten  of  God  all  those  who  are  also  bom  of 
God.  It  would  be  an  insult  to  you  if  I  were  to  prove  that  a  brother 
should  loYC  his  brother.  Doth  not  nature  herself  teach  us  that  ?  Those, 
then,  who  are  bom  of  God  ought  to  love  all  those  of  the  same  house- 
hold. And  who  are  they  ?  Why,  all  those  who  have  believed  that  Jesus 
is  the  Christ,  and  are  resting  their  hopes  where  we  rest  ours,  namely, 
on  Christ  the  Anointed  One  of  God.  We  are  to  love  all  such.  We 
are  to  do  this  because  we  are  of  the  family.  We  believe,  and  therefore 
we  have  been  begotten  of  God.  Let  us  act  as  those  who  arc  of  the 
divine  family  ;  let  us  count  it  our  privilege  that  we  are  received  into 
the  household,  and  rejoice  to  porform  the  lovely  obligations  of  our 
high  position.  We  look  around  us  and  see  many  others  who  have  believed 
in  Jesus  Christ;  let  us  love  them  because  they  arc  of  the  same  kindred. 
"But  they  are  some  of  them  unsound  in  doctrine,  they  make  gross 
mistakes  as  to  the  Master's  ordinances.**  We  are  not  to  love  their 
faults,  neither  ought  we  to  expect  them  to  love  ours,  but  wc  are  never- 
theless to  love  their  persons,  for  "  whosoever  believeth  that  Jesus  is 
the  Christ  is  bom  of  God,"  and  therefore  lie  is  one  of  the  family,  and 
as  we  love  the  Father  who  begat  we  are  to  love  all  those  that  arc  be- 
gotten of  him.  First,  I  love  God,  and  therefore  I  desire  to  promote 
God's  trath  and  to  keep  God's  gospel  free  from  taint.    But  then  I  am 


144  METROPOLITAN  TABEBNAGLB  FULPTT. 

to  love  all  those  whom  Otoi  has  beg:otten,  despite  the  infinnittes  and 
errors  I  see  in  them,  being  also  myself  compassed  abont  with  infirmities. 
Life  is  the  reason  for  lore,  the  common  life  which  is  indicated  by  the 
common  faith  in  the  dear  Redeemer  is  to  bind  ns  to  each  other.  I  mmt 
confess,  tbongh  I  wonld  pay  every  deference  to  eveiy  brother's  con- 
Bcientions  judgment,  I  do  not  know  how  I  could  bring  my  soul  as  a 
child  of  God  to  refhse  any  man  communion  at  my  Master^s  table,  who 
belieyed  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ.  I  hare  proof  in  his  doing  so,  if  he  be 
sincere  (and  I  can  only  judge  of  that  by  his  life),  that  he  is  bcnn  of 
Ood;  and  has  not  every  child  a  right  to  come  to  tiie  Father's  tiAle?  I 
know  in  the  olden  times,  parents  ujsed  to  make  children  go  without  their 
meals  as  a  punishment,  but  everybody  tells  us  now  that  this  is  cruel  and 
unwise,  for  it  injures  the  child's  constitution  to  deprive  it  of  necessary 
food.  There  are  rods  in  the  Lord's  house,  and  there  is  no  need  to  keep 
disobedient  children  away  from  the  supper.  Let  them  come  to  the 
Lord's  table,  and  eat  and  drink  with  the  Lord  Jesus  and  with  all  his 
saints,  in  the  hope  that  when  their  constitution  bestows  stronger  they 
vnll  throw  out  the  disease  which  now  they  labour  under,  and  come  to 
be  obedient  to  the  whole  gospel,  which  saith,  "  He  that  beliereth  and 
is  baptised  shall  be  saved." 

Let  me  beg  the  members  of  this  church  to  exhibit  mutual  love  to 
one  another.  Are  there  any  feeble  among  you  ?  Comfort  them.  Are 
there  any  who  want  instruction?  Bring  your  knowledge  to  their 
help.  Arc  there  any  in  distress  ?  Assist  them.  Are  they  backsliding? 
Eestore  them.  "  Little  children,  love  one  another,"  is  the  rule  of  Christ's 
family,  may  we  observe  it.  May  the  love  of  Ood  which  has  been  shed 
abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost  which  is  given  unto  us,  reveal 
itself  by  our  love  to  all  the  saints.  And,  remember,  other  sheep  he  has 
which  are  not  yet  of  his  fold ;  them  also  he  must  bring  in.  Let  us  love 
those  who  are  yet  to  be  brought  in,  and  lovingly  go  forth  at  once  to 
seek  them ;  in  whatever  other  form  of  service  ^d  has  given  us,  let  us 
with  loving  eyes  look  after  our  prodigal  brothers,  and  who  knows, 
we  may  brmg  into  the  family  this  very  day  some  for  whom  there  will  be 
joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God,  because  the  lost  one  has  been 
found.    God  bless  and  comfort  you,  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake.    Amen. 


PoRTTON  OF  Scripture  Read  before  Sermon — 1  John  v. 


NEW  WORK  15Y  C  II.  SPURGEON.— Second  Edition,  Twentieth  Thousand. 

Price  Two  Shillings  and  Sixpence. 

<'T7<EATHERS  FOR  ARROWS;"  Or,  Illustrations  for  Preachcra 

J.  and  Teachers,  from  my  Note  Book. 

"Riry  an«l  poiiittMl.  Dc'sijmcd  to  hilt  and  marvellously  culcnlatod  to  BCCOtnpli!?h  the  piiipoac. 
AVc  turbc-ar  to  multc  a  single  quotation;    but  urge  our  readers  to   {nrocuro  the   book.** 

The  WaUkiMm, 

*'  A  new  supply  of  lllustmtions<  remarkable  for  froshncs*  and  force,  racincffi  and  robu»tno:>5i.  To 
men  wlio  lack  imagination  the  book  will  prove  a  RtimuluN  of  no  common  kind,  partly  by  srapplying 
inatiTial,  but  chiL'tly  by  (^ugi^oHtiug  the  manifold  ways  in  which  the  events  of  dailv  lifo  may  illur^uuttt 
and  cnf  'rcc  the  teachiiiii:  of  the  Bible."  General  BaptUt  JtnffazitUm 

Loudon:  r.vssMORF.  &  Alabaster,  ir,  Patomoster  Row. 


P«tt[ii$oGtan  §ab«niatte  ittlpt. 


HIDDEN  MANNA. 


DXUYEMSD  QN  L0BD'S*DAY  MobNIKG,  MaACH   I2TH,   1871,  BY 

C.  H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THS  lOETROFOLITAK  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


"  Thy  words  were  found,  and  I  did  eat  them ;  and  thy  word  was  unto  mo  tho  joy 
and  rejoicing  of  mine  heart :  for  I  am  called  by  thy  name,  O  Lord  God  of  hosts.  — 
JtremiAh  xr.  10. 

Jebemiah  was  a  man  of  exceedingly  sensitive  temperament ;  the  Terr 
reTerse  of  Elijah.  Yet  he  was  sent  of  God  to  execute  a  duty  which 
ai^)arently  required  a  person  of  great  sternness  and  slender  sensibility. 
It  was  his  unhappy  duty  to  denounce  the  judgments  of  God  upon  a 
people  whom  he  dearly  loved,  but  whom  it  was  impossible  to  save  ;  for 
eyen  bis  deep  anguish  of  heart  and  melting  pathos  were  poweorlcss  with 
them,  and  rather  excited  their  ridicule  than  their  attention.  Either 
thc^  did  not  believe  that  he  was  sent  of  God  at  all,  or  else  they  neither 
cared  for  Jehovah  nor  for  his  prophet.  Naturally  mild  and  retiring, 
his  strong  sense  of  allegiance  to  God  and  love  to  Israel  mad^e  him  bear 
a  fearless  testimony  for  the  truth  ;  but  the  reproaches,  insults,  and 
thieato,  which  were  heaped  upon  him,  sorely  wounded  his  soul ;  and 
even  deeper  was  his  anguish,  because  he  well  knew  that  his  rejected 
warnings  were  terribly  true.  He  carried  before  his  mind's  eye  at  all 
times  the  picture  of  Jerusalem  captured  by  her  foes,  and  her  wretched 
sons  and  daughters  given  up  to  the  sword.  There  i^  no  line  in  the  whole  of 
his  prophecy  more  characteristic  of  him  than  that  exclamation,  ^'  0  that 
my  need  w^e  waters,  and  mine  eyes  a  fountain  of  tears,  that  I  might 
weep  day  and  night  fov  the  slain  of  the  daughter  of  my  people.'* 

He  was  eminently  the  man  that  had  seen  affliction,  and  yet  in  the 
midst  of  a  wilderness  of  woe  he  discovered  fountains  of  joy.  Like  that 
Blessed  One,  who  was  "  the  man  of  sorrows  "  and  the  acquaintance  of 
fnief,  he  sometimes  rejoiced  in  spirit  and  blessed  the  name  of  the  Lord. 
It  will  be  both  interesting  and  profitable  to  note  the  root  of  the  joy 
which  grew  up  in  Jeremiah's  hesf  t,  like  a  lone  palm  tree  in  the  desert. 
Here  was  its  substance.  It  was  an  intense  delight  to  him  to  have 
been  chosen  to  the  prophetic  office;  and  when  the  words  of  God  came 
to  him,  he  fed  upon  them  as  dainty  food.  They  were  often  very  bitter 
m  themselves,  for  they  mainly  consisted  of  denunciations,  yet  being 
God's  words,  such  was  the  prophet's  love  to  his  God,  that  he  ate  every 
fljrllable,  bitter  Qr  not*    This  also  was  evermore  a  consQlatiop  to  him — 

No.  980. 


146  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

that  he  was  known  by  the  people  to  be  a  prophefc  of  Jehoyao.  Thi8 
distinction,  whatever  persecution  it  brongnt  npon  him,  was  bis  joy 
''  I  am  called  by  thy  name."  God's  word  received,  God's  name  i  tuned 
upon  liim,  and  God's  work  entrusted  to  him,  these  were  stars  which 
cheered  the  midnight  of  his  grief.  However  hard  his  lot  might  be, 
and  none  seem  to  have  fallen  upon  worse  times,  there  were  secret 
sweetnesses  of  which  none  could  deprive  him.  When  he  was  "  filled 
with  bitterness,  and  drunken  with  wormwood,"  he  still  drank  of  that 
ever-flowing  river,  the  streams  whereof  make  glad  the  city  of  our  Qd, 
The  basis  of  faith's  joy  lies  deeper  than  the  water-floods  of  affliction; 
no  torrents  of  misery  can  remove  the  flrm  foundations  of  our  peace. 

May  our  hearts  be  so  moulded  by  divine  grace  that  the  woras  of  the 
weeping  prophet  in  this  verse  may  be  proper  language  for  us  to  use. 
Especially  do  I  speak  to  those  who  during  the  last  few  weeks  have 
found  a  Saviour  ;  my  prayer  and  cry  to  God  for  you,  beloved  friends,  is 
that  you  may  say  sincerely,  '*Thy  words  were  found,  and  I  did  eat  them; 
and  thy  word  was  unto  'me  the  joy  and  rejoicing  of  mine  heart :  for 
I  am  called  by  thy  name,  0  Lord  God  of  hosts." 

I.  In  consider mg  these  words,  we  shall  begin  by  dwelling  upon  A 
MEMORABLE  DisoovERY — "  Thy  words  Were  found,''  As  Jeremi^  meant 
them,  they  signifled  this :  that  certain  messages  came  to  him  most 
clearly  from  God,  and  he  recognised  them  as  such ;  he  ascertained  how 
far  the  thoughts  which  passed  through  his  mind  were  originated  by  the 
Spirit  of  God,  and  how  far  they  were  merely  his  own  imaginings ;  he 
separated  between  the  precious  and  the  vile,  and  when  he  had  fnmdy 
discovered,  and  discerned  God's  word,  then  it  was  that  he  fed  upon  it 

But  the  words,  as  we  may  use  them,  may  signify  something  more. 
Beloved,  it  is  a  great  thing  to  find  God's  word,  and  discern  it  for  our- 
selves. Many  have  heard  it  for  years  and  yet  have  never /(M/w^f  it  I 
may  say  of  them  as  of  the  heathen  gods,  "  Eyes  have  they,  but  they 
see  not :  ears  have  they,  but  they  hear  not"  Content  with  the  outward 
letter  of  the  Scriptures,  the  inner  meaning  is  hid  from  their  eyes.  0  that 
they  had  known  the  life-giving;  truth !  0  that  they  had  found  the 
**  treasure  hid  in  the  field ! "  The  word  of  God  to  them  might  as  well 
be  the  word  of  King  James  the  First,  whose  name  dishonours  our 
authorised  version,  for  they  have  never  felt  that  its  truths  proceed 
immediately  A'om  the  throne  of  God,  and  bear  the  si^ -manual  of  the 
King  of  kings.  Hence  they  have  never  felt  the  weight  of  authority 
with  which  its  authorship  impresses  holy  writ  What  is  meant  \>j  finding 
God's  words  ?  The  expression  suggests  the  mode.  A  thing  found  has 
usually  been  eougfit  for,  Happy  is  that  man  who  reads  the  Scriptures 
and  hears  the  word— searchmg  all  the  while  for  the  hidden  spiritual 
sense,  which  is  indeed  the  voice  of  God.  The  letter  of  the  truth  contains 
a  kernel,  which  is  the  inner  life  of  it  Like  some  tropical  firuits,  which 
are  very  large,  but  in  which  the  actual  life-germ  is  a  comparatively  small 
thing  ;  so  within  the  sacred  volume  are  many  words  and  books,  out  the 
living  secret  may  be  summed  up  in  a  few  syllables.  The  mystery  which 
was  hid  from  ages,  is  a  secret  something  which  flesh  and  blood  cannot 
reveal  unto  us.  "  Understandest  thou  what  thou  readest  ?  "  is  a  yital 
and  heartsearching  question,  meaning  more  than  appears  at  once.  The 
chosen  of  God  dig  into  the  mines  of  revelation,  believing  that  "  Surely 


HIDDEK  MANKA.  147 

there  is  a  Tein  for  the  silver,  and  a  place  for  gold  where  they  iSne  it;** 
therefore  they  give  their  hearts  to  meditation,  and  cry  mightily  unto 
God  to  reveal  himself  unto  them.  Such  seekers  winnow  sermons  as 
the  husbandman  winnows  his  com;  tliey  care  little  for  the  chaff  of  fair 
speeches ;  they  desire  only  the  fine  wheat  of  the  Lord's  own  truth. 
Solomon  tells  us  the  method  of  findinj^  the  true  wisdom,  in  that 
cheering  word  at  the  commencement  of  the  second  chapter  of  the 
Proverbs,  "My  son,  if  thou  wilt  incline  thine  ear  to  wisdom,  and  apply 
thine  heart  to  understanding;  yea,  if  thou  crieat  after  knowledge, 
and  liftest  up  thy  voice  for  understanding:  if  thou  seekest  her  as  silver, 
and  searchest  for  her  as  for  hid  treasures  ;  then  shalt  thou  understand 
the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  find  the  knowledge  of  God."  Though  occa- 
sionally the  Lord  in  his  infinite  sovereignty  has  been  pleased  to  reveal 
his  salvation  to  those  who  songht  it  not,  according  to  his  own  word, 
**  I  am  found  of  them  that  sought  me  not,"  yet  there  is  no  promise  to 
this  effect ;  the  promise  is  to  those  who  seek. 

To  find  God's  words,  means  that  we  have  been  made  to  understand 
them,  A  man  may  be  well  versed  in  Scripture,  both  in  the  English  and 
in  the  original  tongue ;  he  may  be  accustomed  to  read  the  best  of  com- 
mentaries, and  be  acquainted  with  Eastern  manners,  and  yet  he  may  be 
quite  ignorant  as  to  the  word  of  God.  For  the  understanding  of  this 
Book,  as  to  its  depth  of  meaning,  does  not  lie  within  the  range  of 
natural  learning  and  human  research  ;  reason  alone  is  blinded  by  the 
excess  of  light,  and  wanders  in  darkness  at  noon  day;  fbr  "f^e  natural 
man  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God :  for  they  are  foolish- 
ness unto  him :  neither  can  he  know  them,  because  they  are  spiritually 
discerned."  Before  my  conversion  I  was  accustomed  to  read  the  Scrip- 
tures, to  admire  their  gi-andeur,  to  ffeel  the  charm  of  their  history,  and 
wonder  at  the  majesty  of  their  language  ;  but  I  altogether  missed  the 
Lord's  intent  therein;  but  when  the  Spirit  came  with  his  divine  life,  and 
quickened  all  the  page  to  my  newly-enlightened  eoul,  the  inner  meaning 
snone  forth  with  quickening  glory.  The  Bible  is  to  many  carnal  minds 
almost  as  duU  a  book  for  reading  as  an  untranslated  Latin  work  would 
be  to  an  ignorant  ploughman,  because  they  cannot  get  at  the  internal 
sense,  which  is  to  the  words  as  juice  to  the  grape,  or  the  kernel  to  the 
nut.  It  is  a  tantalising  riddle  till  you  get  the  key;  but  the  clue  once 
found,  the  volume  of  our  Father's  grace  absorbs  onr  attention,  delights 
our  intellect,  and  enriches  our  heart. 

To  find  the  word  of  God  means  not  only  to  understand  it,  but  to 
appropriate  it  a^  belonging  to  yourself.  To  read  a  will  is  not  an 
interesting  occupation — repetitions,  legal  phrases,  tautologies  multiplied 
to  utter  weariness;  but  if  there  be  a  legacy  left  to  you  in  that  will, 
no  writing  will  be  more  fascinating;  you  will  trip  lightly  over  the 
lawyer^B  fences  and  five-barred  gates,  and  rejoice  as  one  that  findeth 
apod  when  you  reach  those  clauses  which  leave  certain  **  messuages, 
tenements,  and  hereditaments  "  to  yourself  and  heirs.  In  such  a  case 
every  repetition  becomes  musical,  and  technical  phrases  sound  har- 
moniously. After  this  manner  we  learn  to  enjoy  tlie  word  of  God  by 
discovering  that  we  have  a  pai't  and  lot  in  it.  When  we  perceive  that 
the  Lord  is  calling  «5  and  blessing  w*,  then  have  we  found  his  word. 
When  the  divine  promise  assures  us  personally  that  our  sin  is  forgiveu^ 


148  METROPOLITAN  TABERXaCLE  PULPTT. 

that  our  spirit  is  clothed  in  the  rightconsncps  of  Christ,  thnt  heayen 
is  for  OS,  that  we  are  accepted  in  tlie  Beloved,  then  the  word 
is  found  indeed.  I  will  ask  each  hearer  here,  whether  in  this 
respect  he  has  found  God's  word.  Have  vou  an  ear  to  hear  gospel 
truth  as  the  voice  of  the  Infinite  God  addressed  to  your  own  soul  ? 
The  Dutch  farmers  at  the  Gape,  at  no  very  distant  period,  considered 
the  Hottentots  around  them  to  be  little  better  tnan  beasts,  quite 
incapable  of  anything  beyoud  mere  eatin^r,  drinking,  stealing,  and  lying. 
Afcer  our  missionaries  had  laboured  amon^  the  natives  for  a  time,  one 
of  them  was  found  reading  the  Bible  by  the  roadside.  The  Dutchman 
enquired  of  him,  "  What  book  are  you  reading  ?" — "  The  Bible." 
"  The  Bible !  Why  that  book  was  nevt-r  intended  for  you!" — "  Indeed  it 
was,"  said  the  black  man,  "  for  I  see  my  name  here."  "  Tour  name  I 
Where?"  cried  the  farmer.  **Show  it  to  me."— " There,"  said  the 
Hottentot,  putting  his  finger  on  the  word  '^svwers/'  "That's  my  name; 
I  am  a  sinner,  and  Jesus  Christ  came  to  save  me."  It  were  well  indeed 
if  men  would  but  read  the  Bible,  saying,  **  In  this  volume  the  great  God 
condescends  to  speak  to  me,  and  bids  me  come  and  reason  with  him  that 
my  scarlet  sins  may  become  white ;  therein  he  appeals  to  my  weakness 
that  he  may  remove  it,  to  my  wilfulness  that  he  may  subdue  it,  to  my  dis- 
tance from  him  that  he  may  bring  me  near ! "  Happy  is  that  man  who 
hears  or  reads  the  word  of  God  for  himself,  feeling  evermore  a  living 
power  witnessing  within  his  soul,  and  operating  mightily  upon  him.  Un- 
applied truth  is  useless.  Unappropriated  truth  may  condemn  but  cannot 
save*  The  word  of  God  to  an  uuregeucrate  heart  is  like  a  trumpet  at 
the  car  of  a  corpse :  the  sound  is  lost.  Beloved,  I  pray  that  you  may 
discern  the  truth,  and  then  may  grasp  it  as  your  own.  May  your 
interest  and  title  to  the  promises  be  clearly  made  out,  so  that  not  pre- 
sumptuously, but  with  the  full  approbation  of  your  conscience,  you 
may  know  yourself  to  be  beloved  oi  the  Lord. 

**  Thy  word  was  found."  Yes,  indeed,  it  has  been  fojind  by  many  of  us, 
and  a  blessed  find  it  was!  Recollect,  my  brethren,  tiie  time  when  you 
first  found  God's  word.  Recall  the  period  of  your  conversion; 
let  the  remembrance  kindle  in  you  anew  the  flame  of  gratitude. 
Magnify  the  divine  grace  which  revealed  the  heavenly  word  to  you. 
What  a  removal  of  darkness,  and  bursting  in  of  glory  you  then  felt !  It 
was  a  discovery  far  more  memorable  than  the  finding  of  a  new  continent 
by  Columbus,  or  the  discovery  of  gold  mines  in  the  southern  conti- 
nent— you  found  eternal  life  in  God's  word.  May  you  who  have  never 
found  the  life-giving  word,  be  led  to  desire  it.  We  pray  for  you,  that 
the  Lord  may  open  your  eyes  to  see  wondrous  things  in  his  law. 

II.  Secondly,  our  text  testifies  to  an  eager  keception,  "  Thy  words 
were  found,  and  I  did  eat  them  J* 

It  is  not  "  I  did  hear  them,"  for  that  he  might  have  done,  and  yet 
have  perished.  Herod  heard  John  gladly,  and  yet  became  his  murderer. 
He  does  not  say,  **  I  did  learn  them  by  heart  " — hundreds  have  committed 
chapters  to  memor}*,  and  were  rather  wearied  than  benefited  thereby. 
The  Scribes  fought  over  the  jots  and  titles  of  the  law,  but  were  blind 
leaders  of  the  blind  notwithstanding.  It  is  not  **Thy  words  were 
found,  and  I  did  repeat  them,"  for  that  he  might  have  done  as 
a  parrot  repeats  language  it  is  taught:  nor  is* it  even,  "Thy  words 


HIDDEN  HANKA.  149 

werefonnd,  and  I  remembered  them;"  for  though  it  is  an  excellent 
thing  to  store  truth  in  the  memoiy,  yet  the  blessed  effect  of  the  divine 
words  comes  rather  to  those  who  ponder  them  in  their  hearts.  '*Thy 
words  were  found,  und  I  did  eal  them."  What  is  meant  by  eating  6od*s 
words  ?  The  phrase  signifies  more  than  any  other  word  conld  express. 
It  implies  an  eager  study — "  I  did  eat  them."  I  could  not  have  too  much 
of  them,  conld  not  enter  too  thoroughly  into  their  consideration.  He 
who  loves  the  Saviour  desires  to  grow  in  knowledge  of  him ;  he  cannot 
read  or  hear  too  much  or  too  often  concerning  his  great  Redeemer. 
He  turns  to  the  holy  page  with  ever  new  delight;  he  seeks  the 
blessing  of  the  man  wno  meditates  in  God's  law,  both  day  and  night. 
It  is  pleasing  to  notice  the  sharp-set,  spiritual  appetite  of  a  new 
convert;  he  hungers  and  thirsts  after  righteousness;  he  will  hear  a 
sermon  without  fatigue,  though  he  may  have  to  stand  in  an  uncomfortable 
position;  and  when  one  discourse  is  over,  he  is  ready  for  another.  0  that  we 
allhadourfirstappetitesbackagaini  Someprofessorsgrow  very  squeamish 
and  proudly  delicate;  they  cannot  feed  on  heavenly  truth,  because  for- 
sooth they  see  defects  in  the  style  of  the  preacher,  or  in  the  manner  of 
the  sendee.  Some  of  you  need  a  dose  of  bitters  to  keep  you  f^om 
Quarrelling  with  your  food.  When  the  word  was  found  by  my  soul  I 
aid  not  stand  to  remark  upon  an  inelegant  expression  or  a  misplaced 
word,  but  I  seized  at  once  the  marrow  of  the  truth,  and  left  the  bones  to 
the  dogs.  I  drank  in  the  expressed  juice  of  the  sacred  clusters,  and  left 
the  Jiusks  to  the  swine.  I  was  greedy  for  the  tfuth.  My  soul  hungered 
even  to  ravenousness  to  be  fed  upon  the  bread  of  heaven. 

The  expression  also  implies  clieerful  reception.  "  I  did  eat  them."  I 
was  so  in  love  with  thy  word  that  I  not  merely  held  it,  rejoiced  in  it, 
and  embraced  it,  but  I  received  it  into  my  inner  man.  I  was  not  in  a 
frame  of  mind  to  judge  6od*s  word,  but  I  accepted  all  without  demur ; 
I  did  not  venture  to  sit  in  jud>rment  upon  my  judge,  and  become  the 
reviser  of  the  unerring  God.  Whatever  I  found  to  be  in  his  word  I 
received  with  intense  joy.  The  stamp  of  divine  authority  upon  any 
teaching  is  enough  for  the  believer.  Proud  self-will  demands  to  have 
doctrines  proved  by  reasonincr,  but  faith  lets  the  declaration  of  Jehovah 
stand  in  the  place  of  ar^^nmcnt.  Others  may  cry,  '*  Let  us  spin  our 
creed  out  of  our  own  bowels  like  the  spiders ;  let  us  find  in  the  sayings 
of  the  great  the  grounds  of  our  beliefs,  or  let  us  remain  in  a  state  of 
suspense,  to  be  moulded  by  fresh  discoveries ;  "  but  we  are  committed  to 
revelation,  our  minds  are  made  up  ;  we  confess  that  we  have  eaten  God's 
word  and  intend  still  to  feed  upon  it— upon  the  whole  of  it,  and  upon 
nothing  else.  Open  your  mouths,  ye  wild  asses  of  the  wilderness,  and 
snuff  up  wind ;  our  food  is  more  substantial,  and  we  will  not  leave  it 
to  wander  with  you. 

The  expression  signifies  also  an  intense  belief,  **  Thy  words  were 
found,  and  I  did  eat  them."  He  did  not  say,  **  Perhaps  it  is  true,  and  if 
it  be  so  it  is  of  no  great  consequence,"  but  he  made  practical  use  of  it  at 
once.  He  set  about  testing  the  power  of  the  word  to  nourish  his  soul ; 
he  brought  it  into  the  most  intimate  contact  with  his  being,  and  allowed 
it  to  operate  upon  his  vital  parts.  We  have  heard  that  God's  word  is 
life;  be  it  ours  to  possess  that  life  abundantly.  The  truth  makes 
Jnen  strong,  free,  pure,  god-like.    Let  us  then  eat  it,  that  it  may  purify  ^ 


150  METROFOLlTAIf  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

streQ<::then,  liberate  and  elevate  ns.  Whatever  God's  word  by  his  &)irk 
can  do  for  man,  it  should  be  oar  desire  to  experience  for  oorselret. 
Blessed  is  that  man  who  is  so  humbled  as  to  become  like  a  little  child 
in  the  submission  of  his  mind,  his  judgment,  and  all  his  fiskcalties  to 
the  o[)eration  of  the  word  of  divine  truth ;  he  has  eaten  it,  and  ahall 
live  by  it. 

Tlie  lanj^n^age  before  us  means  besides  both  the  dtUffeni  treasuruig  up 
of  the  truth  and  the  inward  diffesiion  of  the  same.  Food  eaten  does  not 
long  continue  as  it  was  ;  the  juices  of  tlie  body  operate  upon  it,  and 
the  substance  is  dissolved  and  absorbed,  so  that  it  becomes  a  part  of 
tlie  man's  body.  So  when  we  find  God's  truth,  we  delight  to  meditate^ 
contemplate,  and  consider.  We  let  it  dwell  in  our  hearts  richly  Ull  at 
last  its  sustaining,  upbuilding,  nourishing  influence  is  felt,  and  we  grow 
thereby.  It  is  not  a  hasty  swallowing  of  the  word  which  is  blessed  to 
us,  but  a  deliberate  eating  of  it.  Our  inward  life  acts  upon  the  truth, 
and  the  truth  acts  upon  our  life  We  become  one  with  the  truth,  and 
tlie  truth  one  with  us.  I  would  to  God  we  were  all  more  given  to  feeding 
and  lying  down  in  the  green  pastures  of  God's  word  ;  the  sheep  fattens  as 
it  chews  the  cud  at  peace,  and  so  do  we.  Establishment  in  the  gospel 
is  the  result  of  meditation,  and  nothing  is  more  desirable  at  this  preset 
crisis  than  that  all  believers  should  more  constantly  study  and  weigh 
the  word  of  God.  Neglect  in  this  matter  has  w^eakened,  is  weakening, 
and  will  weaken  the  church.  We  want  at  this  time  not  merely  persons 
who  have  been  aroused  by  solemn  exhortation,  and  led  to  give  their 
hearts  to  Christ  under  the  influence  of  deep  emotion,  but  GhristiaQB 
well  instructed  in  the  things  which  are  verily  believed  among  us,  rooted 
and  grounded  in  gospel  doctrines.  Many  professing  Christians  think 
very  lightly  of  Scriptural  knowledge,  and  especially  of  an  experimental 
acquaintance  with  divine  truth.  Few  nowadays  have  studied  the  doc- 
trines of  grace  so  as  to  be  able  to  give  a  reason  for  the  hope  that  is  in 
them.  Too  often  converts  are  made  by  excitement,  and,  as  a  consequence, 
Avhen  the  excitement  is  gone,  they  grow  cold ;  some  of  them  go  hack  to 
the  world,  and  prove  that  they  were  never  taught  of  God,  and  others 
linger  on  in  a  half-starved  condition,  because  soul-sustaining  truth  is 
hidden  from  them.  The  man  who  knows  the  truth,  and  feels  that  the 
truth  has  made  him  free,  is  the  man  who  will  continue  a  free  man  at  all 
hazards.  TJicre  are  enemies  of  the  faith  about  nowadays ;  error  is 
put  in  ver}'  tempting  forms.  Those  who  try  to  subvert  the  gospel  are 
exceedingly  dextrous,  and  know  how  to  make  every  falsehood  fascinating. 
These  will  rend  and  devour,  but  who  will  be  their  victims  ?  Not  the 
instructed  saints,  not  those  who  can  say  "  Tliy  words  were  found,  and  I 
did  eat  them,"  but  the  mixed  multitude  in  nominal  union  with  the 
church,  who  scarce  know  what  they  believe,  or  knowing  it  merdy 
in  the  letter  have  no  inward  vital  acquaintance  therewith.  We 
read  in  the  word  of  God  of  certain  deceivers  who  would,  if  it  were 
possible,  deceive  the  very  elect,  from  which  we  gather  that  the  elect  can- 
not be  deceived,  and  that  for  this  reason — that  the  truth  is  not  held  in 
the  hand  of  the  elect  man  as  a  staiF  which  can  be  wrenched  from  him, 
but  he  has  eaten  it :  it  has  entered  into  his  vital  substance.  You  cannot 
tear  away  from  a  man  what  has  become  assimilated  to  himself.  You 
~  t  draw  the  silken  thread  out  of  a  piece  of  tapestry,  and  in  so  doing 


HIDDEN  HAKNA.  151 

injure  the  material,  but  you  cannot  remove  the  trath  which  is  inter- 
woven  into  the  fabric  of  our  new-born  nature  by  the  Holy  S])irit. 
A  Chriatian  is  dyed  ingrain  with  the  truth— he  wears  no  flying  nor 
fading  colours  ;  he  can  as  Eoon  cease  to  be  as  cease  to  believe  what  he 
has  learned  by  the  Spirit's  teaching.  In  olden  times,  the  fury  of  per- 
aecators  has  iailed  to  make  the  servants  of  Ciirist  deny  the  faith.  The 
saints  were  taken  to  the  stake,  but  the  fires  which  devoured  their  bodies 
only  burned  their  testimonies  into  tlic  hearts  of  other  witnesses.  They 
were  faithful  even  unto  death.  This  glorious  firmness  in  the  faith  is 
greatly  needed  now  to  resist  the  iusidiousness  of  error.  Besides, 
dear  frieiuls,  it  nxay  in  the  providence  of  God  happen  that  some  of 
yon  will  be  taken  away  firom  the  ministry  whicn  now  feeds  you, 
and  what  will  you  do  if  the  word  of  God  be  not  in  your  inmost 
souls  ?  I  have  observed  many  who  did  run  well  when  under  a 
gospel  ministry,  who,  when  they  have  been  removed  into  a  bancn 
region,  have  lagged  and  loitered  in  the  race.  Some  whose  prin- 
dples  were  never  very  deep  have  given  them  up  when  placed  in  society 
which  demised  them.  1  pray  you  get  such  a  hold  of  the  gospel, 
that  yon  need  not  be  dependent  upon  the  preacher  or  upon  earnest 
oompauions.  Let  not  your  faith  stand  in  the  wisdom  of  man,  but 
in  tne  power  of  God.  No  truth  will  be  of  any  use  to  you  unless 
it  is  branded  into  you;  yea,  and  made  to  penetrate  the  marrow  of 
TOUT  being.  If  you  could  give  up  truth  you  have  never  received  it. 
He  only  has  the  truth  of  God  who  so  holds  it  that  he  could  never  part 
with  it  A  person  takes  a  piece  of  bread  and  eats  it.  He  who  gave  it 
to  him  demands  it  back.  If  he  had  put  that  bread  upon  a  shelf,  or 
laid  it  in  a  cupboard,  he  can  hand  it  down;  but  if  he  can  reply, 
"I  have  eaten  it,"  there  is  an  end  to  the  request;  no  human  power  can 
reproduce  what  is  already  eaten.  "Give  up  justification  by  faith  and 
tarust  in  sacraments,*'  says  the  Ritualist.  ^^Give  up  faith  and  follow 
reason,"  cries  the  Infidel.  We  are  utterly  unable  to  do  either.  And 
why  ?  Because  our  spiritual  nature  has  absorbed  the  truth  into  itself, 
and  none  can  separate  it  from  us,  or-us  from  it.  To  live  u|X)n  the  truth 
is  the  sure  method  to  prevent  apostacy.  "  Be  not  carried  about  with 
divers  and  strange  doctrines.  For  it  is  a  good  thing  that  the  heart  be 
established  with  grace;  not  with  meats,  which  have  not  profited  them 
that  have  been  occupied  therein.'*  May  you  all  be  rooted  and  built  up 
in  Christ  Jesus,  and  established  in  the  faith  as  ye  have  been  taught, 
abounding  therein  with  thanksgiving. 

Besides,  good  friend,  you  cannot  be  y^vy  useful  to  others  if  you  are  au 
unintelligent  Christian.  To  do  much  good,  we  must  have  truth  ready 
to  hand,  and  be  apt  to  teacli.  I  desire  that  you  may  grow  up,  you  who 
are  new-bom  into  the  Christian  familv,  to  become  fathers  and  mothers 
in  Israel ;  but  this  cannot  be,  unless  you  as  new-born  babes  desire  the 
unadulterated  milk  of  the  word,  that  you  may  grow  thereby.  0  for  a 
race  of  Bible-reading  Christians !  We  have  long  had  a  society  for 
selling  the  Bible,  but  who  shall  found  a  society  for  getting  the  Bible 
read  ?  A  young  man  who  never  had  read  his  Bible  was  tempted  to  do 
80,  and  led  to  conversion  by  the  gift  of  a  bookmarker,  presented  to  him 
by  a  relative.  The  gift  was  made  upon  the  condition  that  it  should  be 
put  into  his  Bible,  but  should  never  stop  two  days  in  a  place.    He 


ir)2  MKTU01*0LITAN'  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

meant  to  Khitt  it,  and  not  to  read  the  book,  but  his  eye  glanced  (m  a 
text;  allor  awhile  he  became  interested,  by-and-bye  he  became  con- 
verti'il  and  then  tlic  bookmarker  was  moved  with  growing  pleasnre. 
I  am  afraid  thai  even  some  professors  cannot  say  that  they  shift  their 
I>(H)kmark  every  day.  Probably  of  all  the  books  printed,  the  most 
wiilely  I'ireulat'ed,  and  the  least  read  volume,  is  the  word  of  God. 
liooks  about  the  Bible  are  read,  I  fear,  more  than  the  Book  itself.  Do 
you  believe  we  sliould  see  all  these  parties  and  sects  if  people  stadionsly 
followed  the  teaehinL^  of  inspiration  ?  Tiie  Word  is  one  ;  whence  these 
many  oreeds  ?  We  cry,  **  the  Bible,  and  the  Bible  alone,  is  the  religion 
of  rroiestunts;  "  but  it  is  not  true  of  half  the  Protestants.  Some  over- 
lay tlie  BiMe  wi(h  the  Prayer- lKK)k.  and  kill  its  living  meaning;  othen 
read  tliroujrh  the  sfKvtaeles  of  a  reli,:riou5  leader,  and  rather  follow 
man's  irloss  than  (lod's  text.  Few  indeed  come  to  the  pure  fount  of 
irospil  uiui(.tiled.  A  second-hand  reliirion  :>uics  most,  for  it  spares  them 
I  lie  trouble  of  thinkintr,  wiiii-h  to  many  is  a  labour  too  severe  ;  while  to 
be  iau;;ht  of  man  is  so  much  eai^ier  than  to  wait  upon  the  Holy  Spirit 
\W  iusirueiion.  IKmemKr  ve.  mv  beloved  children  in  Christ,  the 
wonis  o(  \h\\u\,  and  maki-  iliem  your  own.  •*  I  will  delight  myself  in 
tl'.v  >:;i;u:i> :  1  will  not  fori^n  ihv  wonl.'*  "  How  sweet  are  thv  words 
uu:o  IV. V  lasiel  voa.  swocUt  tliau  houi'v  to  mv  mouth."  ''Thv  te^tirooniee 
l5a\e  I  ::ikvu  as  an  litriiaiTo  lor  evtr :  for  they  are  the  rcj.ncini:  of  my 
lie..v;."  "  Miiio  eves  j-ri  vi-:::  ilu  nii:ht  watcho?,  that  I  misht  meditate  in 
tliv  \\v'.v..'"  "Mv  svul  ha:l:  koK  thv  testimonies;  and  I  love  them 
e\vv.\i:r.u">  1  i;avo  kcv:  ::'.y  pn\'ep:s  an!  thy  tvsrimonies:  for  all  my 
\\a\>  ;'.v;  I  it'*  re  :hix\'* 

ill.  r.  rv;*}.  ihv  tex:  tills  *.;>  of  K.vlTY  o  •N-'iKgrENCES,  "  Thy  tcard 
.;>  .  ...:•■:.::.;'•:  ■  ;'. .  :  .  '*:  .i "f  V '  :."  He  who  has  spiritnallv 
:.  ;;:.vi  u  ".s  w* Tv'..  :'.v..:  .. r.s.*q-.:r-:'.y  fcis  uivn  it.  is  the  happv 
r.-,:;v..  !•;.:  -v.  vr^ur  :o  .:•::  ^  v  fro'^  Gcvi's  w\rd  we  must  receive  it 
;;v .\  V :  s.i*  • .  J c ri :;*.:. ih  r.rs:  s: \  .^ks  of  G vi's  -  wcrds."  then  he  changes 
;":..  r.;::r.:v.'  j»v..;  sviiks  *.:  i •.•.-'<  "Wvt.:."  We  are  not  only  to 
V,  .i.«;  :■.,::>  ef  ::.i  c  >:^.'.  i'.::  :V.-:  "w :;:*•:  ::  ::.  and  then  it  vill 
;.:\.,-.  ;>  ^r:..:  .\.  T: .»:  :■.■.:*::*>  V.cir:  :>  r;c.:  with  God  who  can 
v..  :■..>; '.X  >./.  :.;/  :/.".  ::■.-:  ::>:.:v.:r.::s  c:"  Ct:-.:  j*-  i-;ar  lo  him.  *"Bat," 
>;.;..  .•  .,  **;:  ..:  .<  •,:";■-><•./.■.  :  :  -.r.s  vf  ::..  IV-'.c  are  full  of  terrible 

;  Y  ;.:*.  ,:  ;.*  • .  -.    ■•    I-  : :.:s  wiv.  brv:-:hren-    If  God 
.' :  ':■.   :  "'.v.s.  ■:.:. -^i  ;.?:  z::  :o  rcV.l  ajainst  his 
v.,r  :.■   .  :<:   .  .-.r  :■..•■.  -.s  ::   ::.-:  o:::? "deration  of 
'■•,■■  ^  <^  i*\    •■■  ■    ■".■••<    •-%»   —   '■■  •      i- •   «■'••»?   i*    ri<'ht    we 

iv.v>.  .,  >'■.,.«;:.  I     :>;    ::.r:-v::v.  vj^  ::  :h-;  word  many 

.■ir.    . .-.  ..  ■  :s.s.  :   .  "  >  ■;    .*.".:  :":    >  :: .  •■  .■,:v.:v::  ::*-:'f  is  a  means  of 
^•. . .-.       V.    i-.v..!,"-:  ,.;"::•■.  »* .  7;     ...:.  '.    ^  ".  v:  i :-'::::  "was  a  trial  to 

..       \  *-.     r   ,^-.  .,         . ..  .  ^   ■--  •.     -  .--     -  -  ^ -.— •  'Vii  ilrpn  will 

.«.  ^  .  .        .  ...  ^    ;...;.-..>  .;:•.', >. ..  -,  ...  ^.  .  .1  .-.•- 1-.-  rir»L-Titancc 

■  ■  *■  ■  «»  "  ^     *  "j. 

.  ..'  -. ;   .•;.  ,':"ri:v  ^-  ,-.:-:  i-ij  :V:  falMngtear, 
•  s    .     ..;.;■.•'  -  : ::.:.  ....:....>  iji-i  fzz  whi-n  hi  sjx^ke 


^«>. 


«-»**>> 


HIDDEN  IIAKNA.  153 

vhich  can  make  oar  hearts  leap  for  joy,  it  is  the  part  of  it  which  touches 
apon  the  Io?elj  person  and  finished  work  of  onr  adorable  Redeemer,  to 
wQom  be  honour  and  glory  for  ever.  Receive  the  whole  of  (Sods  word. 
Do  not  cnt  a  single  text  out  of  Scripture  or  desire  to  pervert  its  mean- 
ing. Hold  the  truth  in  its  entirety  and  harmony,  and  then  as  a  matter 
of  certainty  it  will  become  to  you  the  joy  and  rejoicing  of  your  spirit. 

Allow  me  to  interject  another  thought.  No  word  of  God  to  Jeremiah 
would  have  given  him  joy  if  he  had  not  been  obedient  to  it.  If  he 
had  kept  back  a  part  of  his  Master's  message,  it  would  have  been  a 
burden  intolerable  to  his  conscience.  What  a  wound  it  makes  in  the 
heart  if  we  have  inwardly  to  confess,  ''  I  have  been  unfaithful.  I  have 
neglected  a  command  of  the  Most  High.*'  Never,  I  beseech  you,  allow 
any  text  of  Scripture  to  accuse  you  of  having  neglected  its  teaching  or 
denied  its  obvious  meaning.  There  are  ordinances  to  which  some  of 
you  have  not  submitted  yourselves  which  you  know  to  be  the  will 
of  Jesus  Christ.  How  can  the  Scriptures  be  a  joy  and  rejoicing 
to  you  when  their  pages  accuse  you  of  disobedience  to  your  Master's 
will  ?  In  order  to  have  the  full  joy  of  the  testimony  of  God,  your 
mind  must  yield  itself  to  what  God  reveals  as  the  plastic  clay  to  the 
potter's  touch,  your  willing  spirit  must  be  prompt  to  run  as  with  winged 
net  in  the  ways  of  obedience  to  all  that  Christ  commands.  Then  the 
vord  being  found,  and  you  having  eaten  it,  it  will  be  to  you  a  song  in 
ibe  house  of  your  pilgrimage. 

Let  me  refresh  your  memories  for  a  moment  by  reminding  you  of 
certain  choice  truths  in  God's  word  which  are  brimming  with  comfort. 
There  is  the  doctrine  of  election :  the  Lord  has  a  people  whom  he  has 
chosen,  and  whom  he  loved  before  the  foundations  of  the  world.  I  will 
suppose  that  you  have  found  it  out  foryourself,  and  have  read  the  riddle, 
and  like  the  apostle  Paul,  can  say,  '^  Whom  he  did  foreknow,  he  also  did 
predestinate  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  his  Son ;  and  whom  he  did 
predestinate, them  he  also  called:  and  whom  he  called,  them  he  al^o  justi- 
ned."  I  will  suppose  that  you  know  yourself  to  be  called,  and  therefore 
know  yourself  to  De  predestinated.  Is  not  this  the  joy  and  rejoi  :mg  of  your 
heart?  Is  it  not  to  you  a  very  heaven  below  to  believe  thac  ere  the  hills 
were  made  God  loved  you,  ere  sin  was  born  or  Satan  fell,  your  name  was 
in  his  book,  and  he  regarded  you  with  infinite  affection  ?  Could  any 
doctrine  be  a  more  abundant  table,  spread  for  you  in  the  presence  of 
your  enemies  ?  Take  the  other  doctrine,  the  doctrine  of  the  immutability 
of  divine  love.  Before  you  knew  the  secret  of  it,  it  was  a  mere  dogma ; 
but  now  you  understand  that  Jesus  never  changes,  and  therefore  the 
promises  are  yea  and  amen,  you  will,  you  must  rejoice.  Having  loved 
ois  own,  he  loved  them  to  the  end.  Is  not  this  music  to  your  ear  ?  "I 
have  loved  thcc  with  an  everlasting  love,"  is  not  this  a  heavenly 
iSBurance?  As  you  sit  down  and  consider  for  yourself,  "God  has 
loved  me,  for  he  has  given  me  salvation  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  the 
tnountains  may  depart,  and  the  hills  be  removed,  but  the  covenant  of 
lis  grace  cannot  depart  from  me ;  "  will  not  your  cup  rnn  over,  and 
four  soul  dance  before  the  ark  of  God  ?  Of  course  it  will  not  be  so 
;fll  you  have  found  the  word  for  yourself,  and  have  eaten  it,  but  then 
t  shall  be  marrow  and  fatness  to  you.  Thousands  of  God's  people  live 
n  doubts  and  fears,  because  they  have  not  eaten  God's  word  as  they 


IM  METKOrOUTAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

should  ;  they  do  not  know  the  fulness  of  the  blessings  of  the  goepelof 
)K.'ace.  How  many  arc  in  bond;v::e  through  the  rear  that  after  all 
thfui^h  they  have  betn  for  yoars  btWevers  they  are  not  yet  sared, 
whi-reiis  if  they  road  the  Si-niituiv*.  and  received  their  meaning,  the? 
wuuld  know  that  the  moment  the  >innLT  believes  in  Christ  he  is  saredt 
in  iliat  very  instant  lie  has  j»as«ed  fp-m  doath  into  life,  and  shall  never 
ionu'  into condemnaiion.  If  they  read  ti.e  Svrij«turcs,  would  they  cndnre 
sulIi  di.'ul'ts  ubuuc  bcinu^  Kfc  t«>  jx-rith  ai:er  haviujj  believed  ?  The  thing 
is  innn»<>iMo.  Ti.e  peoji-o  uf  \\:<  c'.i-  ;.e  Jehovah  cannot  cast  away. 
.\i»  '.ueiiibci's  of  Christ's  bL-dy  shall  1  c  >iitV-.:yd  to  ivrish,  or  else  the  body 
of  i'hrist  would  be  manirkii.  and  he  hi::.>i'lf  would  be  the  head  of  a  dis- 
im  lii'nerod  frame.  To  liavo  a  Lie.ir  un•.^.r.<:an^.Ung  of  the  gospel,  to 
kiii'W  ilu'  kVveiKint  whieli  like  a  :.;i^;i:y  rovk  underlies  all  ijos[>cl  bless- 
iiiL;>.  tv>  iviiow  Ciuis:  iiud  our  u:;!  -n  wi:h  him,  to  know  his  righteoas- 
m».  iiis  'H'ltV.-.irn  a!:d  our  iK-riV-.iijn  in  lii::!.  to  know  the  indwelling 
\i'i\:v  Holv  iihi»s:.  ill-.. >e  r:u:ii:s  i»i'.:>:  i::'.v:::-.i:v  make  ns  stroni?  in  the 
jiv  K'l  iho  Lovd.  Ui.A  •  ur  lioub.s  and  tl.irs  would  Aaui&h  if  we  liad 
:ni':\' av''.:;:ii:::.r.ue  ^^  ::h  :  lie  Loral's  >t  a:  u.'js.  Other  knowledge  brings 
-i.  "."vw.  In:  ;:'.:>  v.isv".-  ::i  i<  ih'j  j  ov  :.::  I  ri.  •■:■■:  riiz  of  the  heart. 

IMovf.:,  if  f:uie  i-^  a  '[uarp.!  t»vtw^..:i  yi.'-.i  and  any  text  of  Scripture, 
Kiil  :::e  .:i<*.:::o  1  v  lMh.:  v. av  :.:  •. i:  '\  f  r  the  word  of  God  is  riirht, 
av.a  }  .u  :  :v  w:.  lu.  1>  i  n.':  <Liy,  "  W.-  Lavo  always  Ix^en  of  one  way 
r:  ■...ir.'.v'.: ,:.  :.iil  v'-i"  ^..v-Lti.s  w.:.  s-.^  !'.:«.■  re  us.*'  Have  respect  unto 
i.iv  .1,  an  1  s.:  :::  .K >■.:-'  :'...:.  'Y\\:  Lv»:  l"'*  ua.hiuL:  is  in  this  Book,  and 
:•...;■;■  Iv  ^.i . ::  d  : .»  \  -a '.  v  !•.!>  Si:  it.  T^s:  cvervihirL:  bv  the  word; 
II.-..'  :::.•  si::;:s  v."  ::'..r  i::.y  •  t'  <t'1.  Do  no:  l>e  sudi  fools 
L.s  :■»  :.,'^-  v.. -.-.r  \\'.\j::  :i  :':.::;  i"..!!:.  !i  irxn  when  you  mav  have  it 
::■  •: .  c:.-,*  i". :"..!!.!•  .  lio.i.  S.::.o  u!  ^  »!'^  s!'  arc  not  fools  in  other 
::../..:<.  ' '.::  i:i  :!.:>  ^as'.-  i-  i:::.y  it  s  .id  vf  I  hem  as  it  was  once 
5»i..I'.:  :1.-.'  jv.^;':.  «  :*  u::  Ii.i".:  l!i  \.::v.  ''Tiivv  were  not  fools,  but  thev 
L;..'. ias  if  :Ley  w.iv."  L'iVs  ii<  wi."  w.u"d  not  take  the  opinion  of 
a::;. '.vcy  t".<'.  as  :o  ::;v.-  l:«  •'!:•.■  -^^  '•■  "i  :  s.'.t'-orov.  n,  will  leave  their  religion 
:.^  I.  s^"  •.'■-■:  lyaiiA.ii.:  iV.  !. . :  ii:.  or  '.  y  convovition,  or  by  con- 
;'.r.::«j.  \V!:.l:  arv  i  im;:!-!  --^  u  :  :>  ;:•  *  Are  we  for  ever  to  be  the 
*\i  .>  o:  :;■.  ■«. ri:  '.-  an.;  :."a».v  .l  ::.:■.',  "./.'lo  :o  'lo  evil?  God  forbid! 
.>:..:.:  i;»^:i^'.::.  0  »,*..r:>::«r.  iii:;:-.  :t:.  i  ■  •■  .'.  irari.  God  h-.'s  given  you 
■J.  J .:  Lii^vii:,  aiid  !  is  Sr  ;:■::  w.:i:>  :l'  -.^''^hcL;::  ir.  Se:ir'.-ii  the  Scrip- 
:"..:.< :  Stc  wli^'il.vr  .::v  L!.:!:j:>i  i:.-*  Iv  ii  v\:.  '^y  tr.idiiion  came  from  the 
•i.v. ..  :•  ii".  Ill  ii'\L  lor  ::\..;.  a::  vl-..:  .*::  -ixi-.n  -uay  bo  traced  to  the 
iL'.r:..!  t  i:.  To  ir.o  '.a.v  a::  i  :■.  :  :.  :  -:•■.•■  v. v.  :f  they  #i>eak  not 
ij-.  "  i:::  J  :o  C;::s  word  I:  is  l-j. ■;•:<<:  :!:  r;  :<  i:.'  V;j:::  iu  chtni.  May  we 
L.iV:-  ^-rj..e  ^ivcn  ".s  lik?  K. :•!■.,•...  1  :o  rv.  ■. :  v-.-  :*.i...  n  il  from  the  Lord's 
L..:\ ',  :■■  '.u:  ::.  uli  :o  ::::■.;  :i  ;ii  ovr  vv  •.::•.  as  ':■.  r-.-.-y  :or  swootnvss. 

L'.'.  T".^  :'  \:v:  .  ;•.■:.:  is  v  Pi-r:N  :v:<:-:n  :   vr:r£.     -/;:/>*  t-affeJ  by 

....  '.'':.'.'■■:•.':•:      '..->"     T:.i;s  "luv  no:  .w  *.-^t  :o  soi:\e  of  voua 

: :  ■■:  ••":::.  ::.!:::: — :o  .I-.:m:;:  h  ::  :vas  •::-.:■■  ::i.r'lv  s\    In  Jeremiah's 

mm  ha 

■Ly  :;.-.  :ia:ut;  .ji"  ::.-j  L- "..i  *j«  ■■[  o:  Vo<:>  w-s  :A.s;.  •"v-.i.    Th)  liod  of  hosts 

tiie  su:  j^u:  ..:'  o^ris:.  :i  a^L-  ■  .:  :!.-.   :-a  ■  1:  ■  :^  .'i.'-isa-eni.  and  the 

gpr'.piiiiC  rL  :i:  .iiiiii'-.I-jol::  :■  :■ .:     *'.  w!*-  s;-   '  .■■,  i.-vir  mirth,  came 

is  full  ?IiaL'»f  «. f  slV'-i.     No'v  .\:\::::.u-.   ■-..-t-ai  of  feolinp  it 

thiai:  zo    i:e  as«4.e:a:Ld  v.i:::  the   Lord    :n  rliis  contempt  of 


HIDDBX  HANNA.  155 

wicked,  ^as  glad  to  be  so  honoured.  The  reproaches  of  them 
t  reviled  the  Lord  ifell  npon  his  poor  servant,  and  he  was  content  to 
e  it  80.  0  JOQ  who  love  Jesus  Christ,  never  shun  the  scandal  of  his 
B8 !  Count  it  glory  to  be  despised  for  his  sake.  Let  fear  be  far 
n  yon.      Remember  Moses,  of  whom  it  is  written,  *'  he  esteemed 

reproach  of  Christ  to  be  greater  riches  than  all  the  treasures  of 
ypt."  It  does  not  say  he  esteemed  Christ  to  be  greater  riches,  an 
inary  believer  would  do  that ;  but  he  reckoned  the  worst  thing  cou- 
nted with  Christ  to  be  better  than  the  best  thing  about  the  world. 
e  reproach  of  Christ  he  esteemed  above  Pharaoh*s  crown.  Disciples 
Jesus,  be  willing  to  bear  all  the  contumely  the  wicked  pour  upon 
1  for  your  Lord's  sake,  for  in  so  doing  they  help  to  make  you 
ssed.  Through  the  mire,  and  through  the  slough,  march  side  by 
e  with  truth,  for  those  who  share  her  pilgrimage  shall  share  her 
dtation.  Be  content  to  abide  with  Christ  in  his  humiliation,  for  only 
may  you  be  sure  that  you  shall  be  with  him  in  his  glory.  It  was  a 
nfort  to  Jeremiah  that  he  bore  the  name  of  the  despised  God.  It 
ide  him  the  object  of  very  much  persecution  as  well  as  contempt ; 
s  king  put  him  in  the  dungeon ;  he  was  made  to  eat  the  bread  of 
liction,  and  was  in  tribulations  oft,  but  he  took  it  all  joyfully  for  the 
rd's  sake.  And  if  to  serve  Christ  to-day,  and  bear  his  name,  should 
^1  suffering  extreme,  as  in  the  days  of  Rome's  tyranny,  yet,  my 
,'thren,  we  ought  to  be  cheerful  in  the  bearing  of  it,  and  glad  that  we 
)  ooonted  worthy  to  suffer  for  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ. 
Yet  I  am  afraid  I  am  speaking  to  some  who  do  not  count  it  a  fair 
ng  to  bear  the  name  of  the  Most  High.  I  gather  this  from  their 
idact  They  have  a  belief  in  Jesus,  they  hope  they  have,  but  they 
re  never  afowed  Christ's  name.  You  have  missed,  then,  that  which 
B  a  comfort  to  the  prophet.  Why  have  you  missed  it?  Because  you 
agined  that  it  would  be  a  source  of  discomfort  to  you.  Are  you 
ler  than  the  prophet  ?  To  him  it  was  consolation  that  he  was  called 
God's  name.  Do  you  think  it  would  be  a  sorrow  to  you?  "  Oh! " 
th  one,  "  I  could  not  bear  the  world's  rebuke."  Can  you  bear 
riBt's  rebuke,  when  he  will  say  to  those  who  did  not  confess  him 
Tore  men,  **  I  never  knew  you  "?  But  you  say  you  could  not  live  up 
a  profession  ;  you  are  afraid  your  life  might  fall  short  of  what  it 
mid  be — a  very  salutary  fear ;  but  do  vou  hope  to  improve  your 
)  by  beginning  with  disobedience?  If  f  own  my  Saviour's  name, 
ia  Christ's  business  to  keep  me ;  but  if  I  am  so  overwise  that  I 
nk  I  am  safer  in  the  path  of  disobedience,  then  I  cannot  reckon 
on  grace  to  preserve  me.  The  warfare  is  arduous,  but  we  do  enter 
on  it  at  our  own  charges ;  there  is  one  who  has  promised  to  help 
Well,  if  yof*  will  be  cowards,  I  will  part  company  with  you. 
yon  were  every  one  of  you  this  day  enemies  of  Christ,  or  if  vou  were 

of  yon  lovers  of  Christ  in  secret,  and  none  of  you  gloried  in  him, 
for  my  part,  could  not  live  a  moment  without  being  an  avowed 
iristian.  I  say  not  this  in  egotism,  but  as  fact  My  heart  might 
oner  cease  to  beat  than  cease  to  own  the  Lord.  It  is  a  sneaking  thing, 
d  ntterly  demding  that  mv  Lord  should  die  upon  the  cross  for  me 
save  my  soul  from  hell,  and  I  should  be  ashamed  to  wear  his  livery; 
at  he  should  honour  me  by  redeeming  me  with  his  blood,  and  I  should 


156  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

deny  to  him  the  little  honour  that  my  ijoot  name  ooald  gi^e  when  it  is 
enrolled  with  his  people.  Nay,  thou^rh  least  of  all  his  followers^  pnt 
down  ray  name,  0  recording  angel,  and  there  let  it  stand,  and  if  all  men 
revile  and  devils  rage  so  let  it  be.  It  shall  be  my  heaven  to  suffer  hell 
for  Christ,  if  such  must  needs  l>e.  I  cannot  comprehend  how  so  many 
belivers  remain  outside  the  visible  church  of  Christ.  I  would  not 
question  the  safety  of  any  man  who  has  believed  in  Jesus,  but  I  do  avow 
that  I  would  not  run  the  risk  that  non-confessors  run.  For  what  is 
the  gospel  ?  "  He  that  with  his  heart  believeth,  and  with  his  mouth 
maketh  confession  of  him  should  be  saved."  How  dare  you  leave 
out  one  half  of  the  gospel  command?  What  was  the  gospel  which 
according  to  the  Evangelist  Mark  is  to  be  preached  to  every  creature? 
It  runs  thus :  "  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptised  shall  be  saved."  I 
do  not  question  the  safety  of  the  soul  that  has  believed,  but  I  do  say 
again,  I  would  not  run  the  risk  of  the  man  who,  having  believed,  refuses 
to  be  baptised.  It  is  plainlv  his  Master's  will.  I  question  the  genuine- 
ness of  his  faith  if  he  starts  back  from  obedience  to  the  known  command 
of  Jesus  Clirist.  My  dear  brother,  to  confess  Christ  is  so  easy  a  burden, 
it  involves  so  temporary  a  loss,  and  so  real  a  gain,  that  I  would  have 
you  say,  ''I  have  found  God's  word,  and  I  have  eaten  it:  it  is  the 
joy  and  rejoicing  of  iny  soul ;  and  now  from  this  dev  let  others  do  as 
they  will,  but  I  will  serve  the  Lord.  I  bow  my  willing  back  to  his 
cross.  I  will  be  buried  with  him  in  baptism  nnto  death,  I  would  die 
to  the  world,  and  rise  to  newness  of  life  throngh  liis  Spirit.*'  Blessed 
are  they  who  go  to  their  Lord  without  the  camp,  leaving  the  world's 
i*eligion  as  well  as  its  sin,  in  obedience  to  that  sacred  oall :  ''  Come 
out  from  among  them,  and  be  ye  separate,  and  touch  not  the  ondeaii 
thing;  and  I  will  receive  you,  and  will  be  a  Father  unto  you,  and 
ye  shall  be  my  sons  and  daughters."  The  Lord  deal  gracioinly  with 
you,  beloved,  and  lead  you  in  a  plain  path,  because  of  your  enemies, 
for  his  name's  sake.    Amen. 


Portion  op  Scripture  read  before  SBBMON-^Jeremiah  xr. 


Just  FublLshed.    A  Memorial  of  the  Marriage  of  the  PrinceiB  Louise,  entitled^ 

THE    110 YAL    WEDDING:   the   Banquet  and  the   Guests.     By 
C.  n.  SPUKGEOX.    Price  One  Shilling,  beautif\illy  bound;  or  Sixpence,  m 

paper  wrapper. 

London:  Passmobe  &  Aulbastkb,  IS,  Paternoster  Row. 


^^ti[D5^Klan;  W^natk 


CARRIED  BY  FOUR. 


^  pennon 

Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  March  IOth,  1871,  by 

C.  H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NBWINGTON. 


**  And  he  withdrew  himself  into  tho  wilderness,  and  prayed.  And  it  cnmo  to  pass 
on  a  certain  day,  as  ho  was  teaching,  that  there  were  Pharisees  and  doctors  of  tlie 
law  sitting  by,  which  were  come  out  of  every  town  of  Galileo,  and  Judma,  and  Jeru- 
salem :  and  the  power  of  the  Lord  was  present  to  heal  them.  And,  Ixjhold,  men 
hronght  in  a  bed  a  man  which  was  taken  with  a  palsy :  and  they  sought  means  to 
bring  him  in,  and  to  lay  him  before  him.  And  when  they  could  not  find  by  what 
way  they  might  bring  him  in  because  of  the  multitude,  they  went  upon  tJio*  house- 
top, and  let  him  down  through  the  tiling  with  his  couch  into  the  midst  before  Jesus. 
And  when  he  saw  their  faith,  he  said  unto  him,  Man,  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee. 
And  the  scribes  and  the  Pharisees  began  to  reason,  saying.  Who  is  tliis  wliich 
epoaketh  blasphemies  ?    Who  can  forgiare  sins,  but  God  alone  ?    But  wlien  Jesus 

gerceived  their  thoughts,  he  answering  said  unto  them.  What  reason  yo  in  your 
carts  ?  Whether  is  easier,  to"  say.  Thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee ;  or  to  say,  Kise  uji  and 
walk  ?  But  that  ye  may  know  that  the  Son  of  man  hath  power  upon  eai-tli  to  forgive 
sins  (ho  said  unto  tho  sick  of  the  palsy),  I  say  unto  thee.  Arise,  and  take  up  thy 
couch,  and  go  into  thine  house.  And  immediately  he  rose  up  bcfora  them,  and  took 
up  that  whereon  he  lay,  and  departed  to  his  own  house,  glorifying  Gtid.  And  they 
were  all  amazed,  and  they  glorified  God,  and  were  filled  witli  fear,  saying,  Wc  have 
seen  strange  things  to-day." — Luke  v.  16 — 26. 

You  have  this  same  narrative  in  the  ninth  chapter  of  Matthew,  and  ia 
the  second  chapter  of  Mark.  What  is  three  times  recorded  by  inspired 
pens  must  be  regarded  as  trebly  important,  and  well  worthy  of  oar 
earnest  consideration.  Observe  the  instructive  fact,  that  our  Saviour 
retired  and  spent  a  special  time  in  prayer  when  he  saw  unusual  crowds 
assembling.  He  withdrew  into  the  wilderness  to  hold  communion  with 
his  Father,  and,  as  a  consequence,  to  come  forth  clothed  with  an 
abundance  of  healing  and  saving  power.  Not  but  that  in  himself  as 
God  he  always  had  that  power  without  measure ;  but  for  our  gakes  he 
did  it>  that  we  might  learn  that  the  power  of  God  will  only  rest  upon 
us  in  proportion  as  we  draw  near  to  God.  Neglect  of  private  prayer  is 
the  locust  which  devours  the  strength  of  the  church. 

When  our  Lord  left  his  retirement  he  found  the  crowd  around  him 
exceeding  great,  and  it  was  as  motley  as  it  was  grent ;  for  while  here  were 
many  sincere  believers,  there  were  still  more  sceptical  observers  ;  some 
were  anxious  to  receive  his  healing  power,  others  equally  desirous  to  find 
occasion  against  him.    So  in  all  congregations,  however  the  preacher  may 

No.  981. 


158  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

be  clothed  with  his  Master's  spirit  and  his  Master's  might,  there  will  he 
a  mixed  fi;atherin<r;  there  will  come  together  your  Pharisees  and  doctors 
of  the  law,  your  sharp  critics  ready  to  pick  holes,  your  cold-blooded 
cavillers  searching  for  faults ;  at  the  same  time,  chosen  of  God  and 
drawn  by  his  grace,  there  will  be  present  some  devout  believers  who 
rejoice  iu  the  power  that  is  revealed  among  men,*  and  earnest  seekers 
who  wish  to  feel  in  themselves  the  healing  energy.  It  seems  to  have 
been  a  rule  with  our  Saviour  to  supply  each  hearer  with  food  aTter  his 
kind.  The  Pharisees  soon  found  the  matters  to  cavil  at  for  which  they 
were  looking;  the  Saviour  so  worded  his  expressions  that  they  caught 
at  them  eagerly,  and  charged  him  with  blaspnemy ;  the  enmity  of  their 
hearts  was  thus  thrown  out  upon  the  surface  that  the  Lord  might  have 
an  opportunity  of  rebuking  it ;  and  had  they  been  but  willing,  the 
power  of  the  Lord  was  present  to  heal  even  them.  Meanwhile,  those 
poor  tremblers  who  were  praying  for  healing  were  not  disappointed ; 
the  Good  Physician  passed  not  by  a  single  case,  and  at  the  same  time 
his  disciples  who  were  looking  for  opportunities  of  praising  him  anew, 
were  also  fully  gratified,  for  with  glad  eyes  they  saw  the  paralytic 
restored,  and  heard  sins  forgiven. 

The  case  which  the  narrative  brings  before  us,  is  that  of  a  man 
stricken  down  with  paralysis.  This  sad  disease  may  have  been  of  long 
continuance.  There  is  a  paralysis  which  gradually  kills  the  body,  binding 
it  more  and  more  surely  in  utter  helplessness.  The  nerve  power  is 
almost  destroyed  ;  the  power  of  motion  is  entirely  suspended ;  and  yet 
the  faculties  of  the  mind  remain,  though  greatly  weakened,  and  some 
of  them  almost  extinguished.  Some  have  thought  that  this  man  may 
have  been  stricken  with  what  is  called  the  universal  paralysis,  which 
very  speedily  brings  on  death,  which  may  account  for  the  extreme  haste 
of  the  four  bearers  to  bring  him  near  the  Saviour.  We  do  not  know 
the  details  of  his  case,  but  certain  is  it  that  he  was  paralyzed  ;  and,  as 
I  look  at  the  case,  and  study  the  three  records,  I  think  1  perceive  with 
•equal  clearness  that  this  paralysis  was  in  some  way  or  other,  at  least  in 
the  man's  own  judgment,  connected  with  his  sin.  He  was  evidently 
penitent,  as  well  as  paralytic.  His  mind  was  as  much  oppressed  as  his 
bodily  frame.  I  do  not  know  that  he  could  be  altogether  called  a 
believer,  but  it  is  most  probable  that  being  burdened  with  a  sense  of 
sin  he  had  a  feeble  hope  in  divine  mercy,  which,  like  a  soark  in  smoking 
flax,  had  hard  work  to  exist,  but  yet  was  truly  there.  The  affliction  for 
which  his  friends  ])iticd  him  was  in  his  body,  but  he  himself  felt  a  far 
severer  trouble  in  his  soul,  and  probably  it  wos  not  so  much  with  the 
view  of  being  healed  bodily,  as  in  the  hope  of  spiritual  blereing,  that 
he  was  willing  to  be  subjected  to  any  process  by  which  he  might  come 
under  the  Saviour's  eye.  I  gather  that  from  the  fact  that  our  Saviour 
addressed  him  in  these  words, ''  Be  of  good  cheer ; "  intimating  that  he 
was  desponding,  that  his  spirit  sunk  within  him,  and,  therefore,  instead 
of  saying  to  him  at  once,  "  Rise,  take  up  thy  bed,"  our  tender-hearted 
Lord  said,  **  Son,  thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee."  He  gave  him  at  the 
outset  a  blessing  for  which  the  patient's  friends  had  not  asked,  but 
which  the  man,  though  speechless,  was  seeking  for  in  the  silence  of  his 
soul.  He  was  a  ''  son,"  though  an  afflicted  one:  he  was  ready  to  obey 
the  Lord'B  bidding  when  power  was  given,  though  as  yet  he  could 


CABRI£D  BY  FOUR.  159 

neither  lift  hand  nor  foot.  Ho  was  lonping  for  the  pardon  of  sin,  yet 
could  not  stretch  ont  his  hand  to  lay  hold  upon  the  Saviour. 

I  intend  to  use  this  narrative  for  practical  purposes;  niiiy  the  Holy 
Spirit  make  it  really  useful.    Our  first  remark  will  be  this : 

I.  Theke  abb  cases  which  will  need  the  aid  of  a  little  band 

OF  WORKERS  BEFORE  THEY  WILL  BE  FULLY  SAVED. 

This  man  must  needs  be  borne  of  four,  so  the  evaupelist,  Mark,  tells 
D8  ;  there  must  bo  a  bearer  at  each  corner  of  the  couch  whereon  he  lay. 
The  great  mass  of  persons  who  are  brought  into  the  kingdom  of  Christ 
are  converted  through  the  general  prayers  of  the  church  by  the  means 
of  her  ministry.  Probably  three  out  of  four  of  the  members  of  any 
d)urch  will  owe  their  conversion  to  the  church's  regular  teaching  in 
some  form  or  other ;  her  school,  her  pulpit,  her  press  have  been  the 
nets  in  which  they  were  taken.  Private  personal  prayer  has,  of  course, 
in  many  instances  been  mingled  with  all  this ;  but  still  the  most  of 
cases  could  not  be  so  distinctly  traced  out  as  to  be  attributable  mainly 
to  individual  prayers  or  exertions.  This  is  the  rule,  I  think,  that  the 
Lord  will  have  the  many  brought  to  himself  by  the  soimding  of  the 
great  trumpet  of  jubilee  in  the  dispensation  of  the  gospel  by  his 
ministers.  There  are  some,  again,  who  are  led  to  Jesus  by  the  indi- 
vidual efforts  of  one  person ;  just  as  Andrew  found  his  own  brother  Simon, 
so  one  believer  by  his  private  communication  of  the  truth  to  another 
person  becomes  instrumental,  by  the  power  of  God's  Spirit,  in  his  con- 
version. One  convert  will  bring  anoiher,  and  that  other  a  third.  But 
this  narrative  seems  to  show  that  there  are  cases  which  will  neither  be 
brought  by  the  general  preaching  of  the  word,  nor  yet  by  the  instru- 
mentality of  one ;  they  require  that  there  should  be  two,  or  three,  or 
four  in  holy  combination,  who,  with  one  consent,  feeling  one  common 
agony  of  soul,  shall  resolve  to  band  themselves  together  as  a  company 
for  this  one  object,  and  never  to  cease  from  their  holy  confederatiou 
until  this  object  is  gained  and  their  friend  is  saved.  This  man  could 
not  be  brought  to  Christ  by  one,  he  must  have  four  to  lend  their  strength 
for  his  canning,  or  he  cannot  reach  the  place  of  healing.  Let  us  apply 
the  principle.  Yonder  is  a  householder  as  yet  unt^aved :  his  wife  has 
prayed  for  him  long;  her  prayers  are  yet  unanswered.  Good  wife,  God 
has  blessed  thee  with  a  son  who  with  thee  rejoices  in  the  fear  of  God. 
Hast  thou  not  two  Christian  daughters  also  ?  O  ye  four,  take  each  a 
comer  of  this  sick  man's  couch  and  bring  your  husband,  bring  your 
father,  to  the  Saviour.  A  husband  and  a  wife  are  here,  both  happily 
brought  to  Christ ;  you  are  praying  for  your  children  ;  never  cease  from 
that  supplication:  pray  on.  Perhaps  one  of  your  beloved  family  is 
unusually  stubborn.  Extra  help  is  needed.  Well,  to  you  the  Sabbath- 
Bchool  teacher  will  make  a  third ;  he  will  take  one  comer  of  the  bed  ; 
and  happv  shall  I  be  if  I  may  joiu  the  blessed  quaternion,  and  make 
the  fourth.  Perhaps,  when  home  discipline,  the  school's  teaching,  and 
the  minister's  preaching  shall  go  together,  the  Lord  will  look  down  in 
love  and  save  your  child.  Dear  brother,  you  are  thinking  of  one  whom 
you  have  long  prayed  for  ;  you  have  spoken  to  him  also,  and  used  all 
proper  means,  but  as  yet  without  effect.  Perhaps  you  speak  too  com- 
fortingly to  him:  it  may  be  you  have  not  brought  that  precise  truth  to 
bear  upon  him  which  his  conscience  requires.    Seek  yet  more  help.    It 


160  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULFIT. 

may  possibly  be  that  a  second  brother  will  speak  instructively,  where 
you  liave  only  s})okon  consolinorjy;  perhaps  the  instruction  may  be 
the  means  of  grace.  Yet  may  it  ])ossibIy  happen  that  even  in- 
stniction  will  not  suffice  any  more  than  consolation,  and  it  may  be 
needful  for  you  to  call  in  a  third,  who  perhaps  will  speak  impressively 
with  exhortation,  and  with  warning,  which  may  possibly  be  the  great 
requibite.  You  two,  already  in  the  field,  may  balance  his  cxhortatiou. 
which  might  have  been  too  pungent  by  itself,  and  might  have  raised 
prejudice  in  the  person's  mind  if  it  had  come  alone.  All  three  of  yon 
together  may  prove  the  fit  instruments  in  the  Lord's  hand.  Yet  when 
you  three  have  hap])ily  combined,  it  may  be  the  poor  paralysed  one  is  not 
yet  affected  savingly ;  a  fourth  may  be  needed,  who,  with  deeper  affection 
than  all  three  of  you,  and  |^>erhaps  with  an  experience  more  suited  to  the 
case  than  yours,  may  come  in,  and  working  with  yon,  the  result  may  be 
secured.  The  four  fellow-helpei's  together  may  accomplish,  by  the 
power  of  the  Spirit,  what  neither  one,  nor  two,  nor  three  were  com- 
petent to  have  done.  It  may  sometimes  happen  that  a  man  has  heard 
Paul  preach,  but  his  clear  doctrine,  though  it  has  enlightened  his 
intellect,  has  not  yet  convinced  his  conscience.  He  has  heard  ApoUos, 
and  the  glow  of  the  orator's  eloquent  appeals  has  warmed  his  heart,  but 
not  humbled  his  pride.  He  has  later  still  listened  to  Cephas,  whose 
rough  cutting  sentences  have  hewn  him  down,  and  convinced  him  of 
sin  ;  but  ere  he  can  find  joy  and  peace  in  believing,  he  will  require  to 
hear  the  sweet  afTectionate  words  of  John.  Onlv  when  the  fourth  Bhall 
grasp  the  bed  and  give  a  heaiiy  lift  will  the  paralysed  person  be  laid 
in  mercy's  path.  1  anxiously  desire  to  see  in  this  church  little  band^ 
of  men  and  women  bound  to  each  other  by  zealous  love  to  souls.  I 
would  have  you  say  to  one  another,  "  This  is  a  case  in  which  we  feel 
a  common  interest :  we  will  pledge  each  other  to  pray  for  this  person: 
we  will  unitedly  seek  his  salvation."  It  may  be  that  one  of  our  seat- 
holders,  after  listening  to  my  voice  these  ten  or  fifteen  years,  is  not  im- 
pressed ;  it  may  be  that  another  has  left  the  Sabbath-school  unsaved. 
Let  brotherly  quaternions  look  after  these  by  God's  help.  Moved  by 
one  impulse,  form  a  square  about  these  persons,  beset  them  behind  and 
before,  and  let  them  not  say,  **No  man  careth  for  my  soul."  Meet 
together  in  prayer  with  the  definite  object  before  you,  and  then  seek 
that  object  by  the  most  likely  ways.  I  do  not  know,  my  brethren,  how 
much  of  blessing  might  come  to  us  through  this,  but  I  feel  certain  that 
until  we  have  tried  it  we  cannot  pronounce  a  verdict  upon  it ;  nor  can 
we  be  quite  sure  that  we  are  free  from  all  responsibility  to  men's  souls 
imtil  we  have  tesLed  every  possible  and  probable  method  for  doing 
them  good. 

I  am  afraid  that  there  are  not  many,  even  in  a  large  church,  who  will 
become  sick-bearers.  Many  will  say  the  plan  is  admirable,  but  they 
will  leave  it  to  others  to  carry  it  out.  Remember  that  the  four  persons 
who  join  in  such  a  labour  of  love  ought  all  of  them  to  be  filled  with 
intense  affection  to  the  persons  whose  salvation  they  seek.  They  must 
be  men  who  will  not  shrink  because  of  difficulty;  who  will  put  forth 
their  whole  strength  to  shoulder  the  beloved  burden,  and  will  persevere 
until  they  succeed.  They  need  be  strong,  for  the  burden  is  heavy; 
they  need  be  resolute,  for  the  work  will  try  their  faith ;   they  need 


CARRISD  BT  FOUR.  161 

be  prayerfnl,  for  otherwise  they  labour  in  vain  ;  they  must  be  be- 
lieving, or  they  will  be  utterly  useless, — Jesus  saw  their  faith,  and 
therefore  accepted  their  service  ;  but  without  faith  it  is  impossible  to 
please  him.  Where  shall  we  find  quartettes  such  as  these  ?  May  the 
Lord  find  them,  and  may  he  send  them  to  some  of  you  poor  dying 
sinners  who  lie  paralysed  here  to-day. 
11.  We  now  pass  on  to  the  second  observation,  that  some  cases  thus 

TAKEN   UP  WILL    NEED    HUGH    THOUGHT    BEFORE    THE    DESIGN    IS    AC- 
003n^ISHED. 

The  essential  means  by  which  a  soul  is  saved  is  clear  enough.    The 
four  bearers  had  no  question  with  each  t)ther  as  to  what  was  the  way  to 
effect  this  man*s  cure :  they  were  unanimous  in  this — that  they  must 
bring  him  to  Jesus ;  by  some  means  or  other,  by  hook  or  by  crook,  they 
must  place  him  in  the  Saviour's  way.    That  was  undoubted  fact.     The 
question  was,  how  to  do  this  ?    There  is  an  old  worldly  proverb,  that 
*•  where  there's  a  will  there's  a  way;"  and  that  proverb,  I  believe,  may 
be  safely  imported  into  spiritual  things,  almost  without  a  caution  or 
grain  of  salt.    **  Where  there's  a  will  there's  a  way  ;"  and  if  men  be 
called  of  God's  grace  to  a  deep  anxiety  for  any  particular  soul,  there  is 
a  way  by  which  that  soul  may  be  brought  to  Jesus ;  but  that  way  may 
not  suggest  itself  till  after  much  consideration.     In  some  cases  the 
way  to  impress  the  heart  may  be  an  out-of-the-way  way,  an  extra- 
ordinary way — a  way  which  ordinarily  should  not  be  used  and  would 
not  be  successful.    I  dare  say  the  four  bearers  in  the  narrative  thought 
early  in  the  morning,  **We  will  carry  this  poor  pai-alytic  to  the  Saviour, 
passing  into  the  house  by  the  ordinary  door ; "  but  when  they  attempted 
to  do  so  the  multitudes  so  blocked  up  the  road  that  they  could  not  even 
reach  the  threshold.   "  Make  way  ;  make  way  for  the  sick !    Stand  aside 
there,  and  give  room  for  a  poor  paralysed  man.    For  mercy's  sake,  give 
a  little  space,  and  let  the  sick  man  reach  the  healing  prophet ! "    In 
vain  their  entreaties  and  commands.    Here  and  there  a  few  compas- 
sionate persons  back  out  of  the  crowd,  but  the  many  neither  can  nor 
will  remove ;  besides,  many  of  them  are  engaged  upon  a  similar  business, 
and  have  equal  reasons  for  pressing  in.     "  See,"  cries  one  of  the  four, 
*'I  will  make  way; "  and  he  pushes  and  elbows  himself  a  little  distance 
into  the  passage.  "  Come  on  you  three  I  "  he  cries :  "  follow  up,  and  fight 
for  it,  inch  by  inch."    But  they  cannot  do  it;  it  is  impossible  ;  the 
poor  patient  is  ready  to  die  for  fear  ;  the  bed  is  tossed  about  by  the 
throng  like  a  cockleshell  boat  on  the  sea-waves,  the  patient's  alarm 
increases,  the  bearers  are  distressed,  and  they  are  quite  glad  to  get 
outside  again  and  consider.     It  is  evidently  quite   impossible   by 
ordinary  means  to  get  him  in.     What  then?    **  We  cannot  burrow 
under  the  ground :  can  we  not  go  over  the  heads  of  the  people,  and  let 
the  man  down  from  above  ?    Where  is  the  staircase  ? "     Frequently 
there  is  an  external  staircase  to  the  top  of  an  eastern  house ;  we  cannot 
be  sure  that  there  was  one  in  this  case  ;   but  if  not,   the  next  door 
house  may  have  had  such  a  convenience,  and  so  the  resolute  bearers 
reached  the  top  and  passed  from  one  roof  to  another.     Where  we  have 
no  definite  information  much  may  he  left  to  conjecture ;  but  this  much 
is  clear :  by  some  means  they  elevated  their  unhappy  burden  to  the  house- 
top, and  provided  themselves  with  the  necessary  tackle  with  which  to 


1G2  HETOOPOLITAN  TABBBNACLE  PULPIT. 

let  hini  down.  Tlie  Saviour  was  probably  preaching  in  one  of  the  upper 
rooms,  unless  the  liouse  was  a  poor  one  without  an  up|)er  story. 
l^erhaps  the  room  was  open  to  the  courtyard,  which  was  crowded.  At 
any  rate,  the  Lord  Jesus  was  under  cover  of  a  roof^  and  a  substantial 
roof  too.  No  one  who  carefully  reads  the  original  will  fail  to  see  that 
there  was  real  roofing  to  be  broken  through.  It  has  been  suggested  as 
ii  ditliculty,  that  the  breaking  up  of  a  roof  might  involve  danger  to 
those  below,  and  would  probably  make  a  great  smother  of  dust ;  and  to 
avoid  tliis,  there  have  been  various  suppositions — such  ns  that  the 
Saviour  was  standing  under  an  awning,  and  the  men  rolled  up  the 
canvas;  or  that  our  Lord  stood  under  a  verandah  with  a  very  light 
covering,  which  the  men  could  readily  uncover ;  others  have  even  in- 
vented a  trap-door  for  the  occasion.  But  with  all  due  deference  to 
eminent  travellers,  the  words  of  the  evangelists  cannot  be  so  readily 
disposed  of.  According  to  our  text,  the  man  was  let  down  through 
"tilina:,'*  not  canvas,  or  any  light  material ;  whatever  sort  of  tiling  it 
was,  it  was  certainly  made  of  burnt  clay,  for  that  enters  into  the  essence 
of  the  word.  Moreover,  according  to  Mark,  after  they  had  uncovered 
the  roof,  which,  I  suppose,  means  the  removal  of  the  "  tiling,"  they 
broke  it  ?//;,  which  looks  exceedingly  like  breaking  tlirough  a  ceiling. 
The  Greek  word  used  by  Mark,  which  is  interpreted  **  breaking  up,"  is 
a  very  emphatic  word,  and  signifies  digging  through,  or  scooping  up, 
whicli  evidently  conveys  the  idea  of  considerable  labour  for  the  removal 
of  material.  We  are  told  that  the  roofs  of  Oriental  houses  are  often 
made  of  big  stones ;  that  may  be  true  as  a  general  rule,  but  not  in  this 
case,  for  the  house  was  covered  with  tiles ;  and  as  to  the  dust  and  falling 
rubbish,  that  may  or  may  not  be  a  necessary  conclusion;  but  as  clear 
as  noonday  is  it  that  a  substantial  housetop,  which  required  untiling 
and  dig<<ing  through,  had  a  hole  made  in  it,  and  througn  the  aperture 
the  man  in  his  bed  was  let  down.  Perhaps  there  was  dust^  and 
possibly  there  was  danger  too,  but  the  bearers  were  prepared  to 
accomplish  their  purpose  at  all  risks.  They  must  get  the  sick 
man  in  somehow.  There  is  no  need,  however,  to  suppose  either, 
for  no  doubt  the  four  men  would  be  careful  not  to  incommode 
the  Saviour  or  his  hearers.  The  tiles  or  plaster  might  be  removed 
to  another  part  of  the  flat  roof,  and  the  boards  likewise,  as  they 
were  broken  up ;  and  as  for  the  spars,  they  might  be  sufficiently 
Avide  to  admit  the  narrow  couch  of  the  sick  man  without  moving  any 
of  them  from  their  places.  Mr.  Hartley,  in  his  Travels,  says :  *'  Wlien  1 
lived  at  iEgina  I  used  to  look  up  not  unfrequently  at  the  roof  above  my 
head,  and  contemplate  how  easily  the  whole  transaction  of  the  paralytic 
might  take  place.  The  roof  was  made  in  the  following  manner : — ^A 
layer  of  reeds,  of  a  large  species,  was  placed  upon  the  rafters  ;  on  these 
n  quantity  of  heather  was  strewed;  on  the  heather  earth  was  deposited, 
and  beaten  down  into  a  solid  mass.  Now,  what  difficulty  would  there 
be  in  removing  first  the  earth,  next  the  heather,  and  then  the  reeds? 
Nor  would  the  difficulty  be  increased,  if  the  earth  had  a  pavement  of 
tiling  laid  upon  it.  No  inconvenience  could  result  to  the  persons  in 
the  house,  from  the  removal  of  the  tiles  and  earth ;  for  the  heather  and 
reeds  would  stop  anything  that  might  otherwise  fall  down,  and  would 
be  removed  last  of  ail."    To  let  a  man  down  through  the  roof  was  a 


CARBIBD  BT  FOUIL  163 

device  most  strange  and  strikin<r,  bnt  it  only  p:ives  point  to  the  remark 
which  we  have  now  to  make  here.  If  we  want  to  have  sonls  saved,  we 
most  not  be  too  squeamish  and  delicate  about  conventionalities,  rales, 
and  proprieties,  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  suffereth  violence.  We  must 
make  up  our  minds  to  this:  ^' Smash  or  crash,  everything  shall  go  to  pieces 
which  stands  between  the  soul  and  its  G  od :  it  matters  not  what  tiles  are  to 
be  taken  off,  what  plaster  is  to  be  di<rged  up,  or  what  boards  are  to  be  torn 
away,  or  what  labour,  or  trouble,  or  expense  we  may  be  at ;  the  soul  is  too 
precious  for  us  to  stand  upon  nice  questions.  If  by  any  means  we  may  save 
some,  is  oar  policy.  Skin  for  skin,  yea,  all  that  we  have  is  nothing  com- 
parable to  a  man's  soul.''  When  four  true  hearts  are  set  upon  the  spiritual 
good  of  a  sinner,  their  holy  hunger  will  break  through  stono  walls  or 
DOUse  roofis. 

I  haye  no  doubt  it  was  a  difficult  task  to  carry  the  paralysed  man 
upstairs ;  the  breaking  up  of  the  roof,  the  removing  the  tiling  with 
au  dne  care,  must  have  been  a  laborious  task,  and  have  required  much 
skill,  but  the  work  was  done,  and  the  end  was  gained.  We  must 
never  stop  at  difficulties ;  however  stem  the  task,  it  must  always  be  more 
difficult  to  us  to  let  a  soul  perish  than  to  labour  in  the  most  self-deny^ 
ing  form  for  its  deliverance. 

It  was  a  very  singular  action  which  the  bearers  performed.  Who 
would  have  thought  of  breaking  up  a  roof?  Nobody  but  those  who 
loved  much,  and  much  desired  to  benefit  the  sick  0  that  God  would 
make  us  attempt  siuf^ular  things  to  save  souls.  May  a  holy  ingenuity 
be  excited  in  the  church;  a  sacred  inventiveness  set  at  work  for 
winning  men's  hearts.  It  appeared  to  his  generation  a  singular 
thing  when  John  Wesley  stood  on  his  father's  tombstone  and 
preached  at  Epworth.  GI017  be  to  God  that  he  had  the  counige 
to  preach  in  the  open  air.  It  seemed  an  extraordinary  thing  wlien 
ceitain  ministers  delivered  sermons  in  the  theatres  ;  but  it  is  matter 
of  joy  that  sinners  have  been  reached  by  such  irregularities  who 
might  have  escaped  all  other  means.  Let  us  but  feel  our  hearts  full  of 
zeal  for  God,  and  love  for  souls,  and  we  shall  soon  be  led  to  adopt  means 
which  others  may  criticise,  but  which  Jesus  Christ  will  accept. 

After  all,  the  method  which  the  four  friends  followed  was  one  most 

suitable  to  their  abilities.    They  were,  I  suppose,  four  strong  fellows, 

to  whom  the  load  was  no  great  weight,  and  the  work  of  digf>ing  was 

comparatively  easy.    The  method  suited  their  capacity  exactly.    And 

what  did  thev  do  when  they  had  let  the  sick  man  down  ?    Look  at 

the  scene  and  admire  ?    I  do  not  read  that  they  said  a  single  word, 

jet  what  they  did  was  enough  :  abilities  for  lifting  and  carrying  did  the 

needful  work.    Some  of  you  say,  "  Ah,  we  cannot  be  of  any  use ;  we  wish 

we  could  preach."    These  men  could  net  preach  :  they  did  not  need  to 

preach.      They  lowered  the  paralytic,   and   their    work    was    done. 

They  could  not  preach,  but  they  could  hold  a  rope.    We  want  in  the 

Christian  church  not  only  preachers,  but  soul-winners,  who  can  bear 

tools  on  their  hearts,  and  feel  the  solemn  burden ;  men  who,  it  may  bo, 

cannot  talk,  but  who  can  weep ;  men  who  cannot  break  other  men's 

Ittarts  with  their  language,  but  who  break  their  own  hearts  with  their 

compassion.     In  the  case  before  us  there  was  no  need  to  plead  "  Jesus, 

thoa  son  of  David,  look  up,  for  a  man  is  coming  down  who  needs  thee.' 


164  METROPOLITAir  TABBfiNACLE  PULPIT. 


I 


There  was  no  need  to  urge  that  the  patient  had  been  so  many  years  sick. 
We  do  not  know  that  the  man  himself  uttered  a  word.  Helpless  and 
aralysed,  he  had  not  the  yigoor  to  become  a  suppliant.  Thej  placed 
is  almost  lifeless  form  before  the  Sarionr^s  eye,  and  that  was  appeal 
enough;  his  sad  condition  was  more  eloquent  than  words.  0 
hearts  that  love  sinners  lay  their  lost  estate  before  Jesus ;  bring 
their  cases  as  they  are  before  the  Saviour ;  if  your  tongues  stammer, 
your  hearts  will  prevail ;  if  you  cannot  speak  even  to  Christ  himself  as 
you  would  desire,  because  you  have  not  the  gift  of  prayer,  yet  if  yonr 
strong  desires  spring  from  the  spirit  of  prayer  you  cannot  faiL  God  hdp 
us  to  make  use  of  such  means  as  are  within  our  power,  and  not  to  nt 
down  idly  to  regret  the  powers  we  do  not  possess.  Perhai)S  it  would  be 
dangerous  for  us  to  possess  the  abilities  we  covet ;  it  is  always  safe  to 
consecrate  those  we  have. 

III.  Now  we  must  pass  on  to  an  important  truth.    "We  may  safdj 
gather  from  the  narrative  that  the  root  of  spiritual  paralysis 

(JEXERALLY   LIES   IN   UNPARDONED  SIN. 

Jesus  intended  to  heal  the  paralysed  man,  but  he  did  so  by  first  of 
all  saying,  "  Thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee."  There  are  some  in  this  house 
of  prayer  this  morning  who  are  spiritually  paralysed  ;  they  hare  eyes 
and  they  see  the  gospel ;  they  have  ears  and  they  have  heard  it,  and  h«ffd 
it  attentively  too  ;  but  they  are  so  paralysed  that  they  will  tell  you,  and 
honestly  tell  you,  that  they  cannot  lay  hold  upon  the  promise  of  God; 
they  cannot  believe  in  Jesus  to  the  saving  of  their  souls.  If  you  urge 
them  to  pray,  they  say :  "  We  trj^  to  pray,  but  it  is  not  acceptable  prayer." 
If  you  bid  them  have  confidence,  they  will  tell  you,  though  not  in  so 
many  words  perhaps,  that  they  are  given  up  to  despair.  Their  moumfiil 
ditty  is : — 

**  I  would,  but  cannot  sing ; 
I  would,  but  cannot  pray  ; 
For  Satan  meets  me  when  I  try, 
And  frights  my  soul  away. 

I  would,  but  can't  repeat, 
Though  I  endeavour  oft ; 
This  stony  heart  can  ne*er  i-^Ient 
Till  JchUS  makes  it  sofl. 

I  would,  but  cannot  love. 
Though  wooM  by  love  divine  ; 
Xo  ar*:umeut8  have  power  to  more 
A  soul  so  base  as  mine. 

O  could  I  but  believe ! 
Then  all  would  easy  be  ; 
I  would,  but  cannot — Lord,  relieve  : 
My  help  must  come  from  thee.'* 

The  bottom  of  this  paralysis  is  sin  upon  the  conscience,  working  death 
in  them.  They  are  sensible  of  their  guilt,  but  powerless  to  believe  that 
the  crimson  fountain  can  remove  it :  tbey  are  alive  only  to  Borrow, 
despondency,  and  agony.  Sin  paralyses  them  with  despair.  I  grant 
you  that  into  this  despair  there  enters  largely  the  element  of  unbelief 
which  is  sinful ;  but  I  hope  there  is  also  in  it  a  measure  of  sincere 
repentance,  which   bears  in  it  the  hope  of  something  better.     Ouc 


CARRIED  BY  FOUR.  165 

poor,  awakened  paralytics  Bometimes  hope  that  they  may  be  for«:iven, 
but  they  ciinnot  believe  it;  they  cannot  rejoice;  they  cannot  cast  thein- 
fielyes  on  Jesns ;  they  are  utterly  without  Btrenji^th.  Now,  the  bottom 
of  it,  I  say  again,  lies  in  unpardoned  sin,  and  I  earnestly  entreat  you 
who  love  the  Saviour  to  be  earnest  in  seeking  the  pardon  of  these 
paralysed  persons.  You  tell  me  that  /  should  be  earnest;  so  I  should; 
and  so  I  desire  to  be :  but,  brethren,  their  cases  appear  to  be  beyond  the 
minister's  sphere  of  action ;  the  Holy  Spirit  determines  to  use  other 
agencies  in  their  salvation.  They  have  heard  the  public  word ;  they  now 
need  private  consolation  and  aid,  and  that  from  three  or  four.  Lend  us 
your  help,  ye  earnest  brethren;  form  your  parties  of  four;  gi'asp  the 
conches  of  these  who  wish  to  be  saved,  but  who  feel  they  cannot  believe. 
The  Lord,  the  Holy  Spirit,  make  you  the  means  of  leading  them  into 
forgiveness  and  eternal  salvation.  They  have  been  lying  a  long  time 
waiting;  their  sin,  however,  still  keeps  them  where  they  are;  their  guilt 
prevents  their  laying  hold  on  Christ ;  there  is  the  point,  and  it  is  for 
such  cases  that  I  earnestly  invoke  my  brethren's  aid. 
IV.  Let  us  proceed  to  notice,  fourthly,  that  jesus  can  remove  both 

THE  8IN  AND  THE  PARALYSIS  IN  A  SINGLE  MOMENT.     It  waS  the  busineSS 

cf  the  four  bearers  to  bring  the  man  to  Christ ;  but  there  their  power 
ended.     It  is  our  part  to  bring  the  guilty  sinner  to  the  Saviour :  there 
our  power  ends.    Thank  God,  when  tve  end,  Christ  begins,  and  works 
right  gloriously.     Observe  that  he  began  by  saying :  "  Thy  sins  be 
forgiven  thee.'*     He  laid  the  axe  at  the  root;  he  did  not  desire  that 
the  man*s  sins  might  be  forgiven,  or  express  a  good  wish  in  that  direc- 
tion, but  he  pronounced  an  absolution  bv  virtue  of  that  authority  with 
which  he  was  clothed  as  the  Saviour.     The  poor  man's  sins  there  and 
then  ceased  to  be,  and  he  was  justified  in  the  sight  of  God.     Believest 
thou  this,  my  hearer,  that  Christ  did  thus  for  the  paralytic  man  ?  Then  I 
charge  you  believe  something  more,  that  if  on  earth  Christ  had  power 
to  forgive  sins  before  he  had  offered  an  atonement,  much  more  hath  he 
power  to  do  this,  now  that  he  hath  poured  out  his  blood,  and  hath  said, 
"  It  is  finished,"  and  hath  gone  into  his  glory,  and  is  at  the  right  hand 
of  the  Father.       He   is  exalted  on   high,  to  give    repentance  and 
remission  of  sin.    Should  he  send  his  Spirit  into  thy  soul  to  reveal 
himself  in  thee,  thou  wouldst  in   an  instant  be  entirely  absolved. 
Does  blasphemy  blacken  thee  ?    Does  a  long  life  of  infidelity  pollute 
thee?     Hast  thou  been  licentious?      Hast  thou  been  abominably 
wicked  ?     A  word  can  absolve  thee — a  word  from  those  dear  lips  which 
said,  "  Father  forgive  them,  for  they  know  not  what  they  do."     I  charge 
thee  ask  for  that  absolving  word.     No  earthly  priest  can  give  it  thee ; 
biit  the  great  High  Priest,  the  Lord  Jesus,  can  utter  it  at  once.   Ye  twos 
ind  fours  who  are  seeking  the  salvation  of  men,  here  is  encouragement 
for  you.     Pray  for  them  now,  while  the  gospel  is  being  preached  in 
their  hearing;    pray  for  them  day  and  night,  and  bring  the  glad  tidings 
wiistantly  h^fore  them,  for  Jesus  is  still  able  "  to  save  to  the  utter- 
nwrt  them  that  come  unto  God  by  him." 

After  our  blessed  Lord  had  taken  away  the  root  of  the  evil,  you 
<*«rve  he  then  took  away  the  paralysis  itself.  It  was  gone  in  a  single* 
ttoment.  Every  limb  in  the  man's  body  was  restored  to  a  healthy  state; 
^ooold  standy  oonld  walk,  could  lift  his  bed,  both  nerve  and  muscle 


166  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

were  restored  to  vigonr.  One  moment  will  snffice,  if  Jesns  speaks,  to  make 
the  dcspairinj:  happy,  and  the  unbelieving  full  of  confidence.  What  tct 
cannot  do  with  our  rcasonin^rs,  persuadings,  and  entreaties,  nor  eTen 
with  the  letter  of  God's  promise,  Christ  can  do  in  a  single  instant  bj 
his  Holy  Spirit,  and  it  lias  been  our  joy  to  see  it  done.  This  is  the 
standinj^  miracle  of  the  church,  performed  by  Christ  to  -dav  CTcn  as 
aforetime.  Paralysed  souls  who  could  neither  do  nor  will,  {lave  been 
able  to  do  yaliantly,  and  to  will  with  solemn  resolution.  The  Lord  has 
poured  power  into  the  faint,  and  to  them  that  had  no  might  he  hath 
increased  strength.  He  can  do  it  still.  I  say  again  to  loving  spirits 
who  are  seeking  the  good  of  others,  let  this  encourage  you.  You  may 
not  have  to  wait  long  for  the  conversions  you  aim  at;  it  may  be  ere 
another  Sabbath  ends,  the  ])er6on  you  pray  for  may  be  brought  to 
Jesus;  or  if  you  have  to  wait  a  little,  the  waiting  shall  well  repay  you, 
and  meanwhile  remember  he  has  never  six)ken  in  secret  in  the  dark 
places  of  the  earth ;  he  has  not  said  to  the  seed  of  Jacob»  '*  Seek  ye  my 
face  in  vain." 
V.    Passing  on,  and  drawing  to  a  conclusion:  Wherever  our  Lord 

WORKS  THE  DOUBLE  MIRACLE,   IT  WILL  BE  APPARENT.     He  forgEVe  tie 

man^s  sin  and  took  away  his  disease  at  the  same  time.  How  was  this 
apparent?  I  have  no  doubt  the  pardon  of  the  man's  sin  was  best  known 
to  himself;  but  possibly  those  who  saw  that  gleaming  conntenance 
which  liad  been  so  sad  before,  might  have  noticed  that  the  word  of 
absolution  sunk  into  his  soul  as  the  rain  into  the  thirsty  earth.  "  Thy 
sins  be  forgiven  thee,"  fell  on  him  as  a  dew  from  heaven;  he  believed 
the  sacred  declaration,  and  his  eyes  sparkled.  He  might  almost  have 
felt  indifferent  whether  he  remained  paralysed  or  not,  it  was  such  joy  to 
be  forgiven,  forgiven  by  the  Lord  himself.  That  was  enough,  quite 
enough  for  him ;  but  it  was  not  enough  for  the  Saviour,  and  therefore 
he  bade  him  take  up  his  couch  and  walk,  for  he  had  given  him  strength 
to  do  so.  The  man's  healing  was  proved  by  his  obedience.  Openly  to 
all  onlookers  an  active  obedience  became  indisputable  proof  of  the  poor 
creature's  restoration.  Notice,  our  Lord  bade  him  rise — ^he  rose ;  he 
had  no  power  to  do  so  except  that  power  which  comes  with  divine  com- 
mands. He  rose,  for  Christ  said  **  Rise."  Then  he  folded  up  that 
miserable  palliasse — the  Greek  word  used  Hhows  us  that  it  was  a  very 
poor,  mean,  miserable  affair — he  rolled  it  up  as  the  Saviour  bade  him, 
he  shouldered  it,  and  went  to  his  home.  His  first  impulse  must  have 
been  to  throw  himself  down  at  the  Saviour's  feet,  and  say, "  Blessed  be 
thy  name ;  *'  but  the  Master  said,  "  Go  to  thy  house  ;*'  and  I  do  not  find 
that  he  stayed  to  make  one  grateful  obeisance,  but  elbowing  the 
crowd,  jostling  the  throng  with  his  load  on  his  back,  he  proceeded  to 
his  house  just  us  he  was  told,  and  that  withot/t  deliberation,  or  question- 
ing. He  did  his  Lord's  bidding,  and  he  did  it  accurately,  in  detail, 
at  once,  and  most  cheerfully.  Oh  !  how  cheerfully ;  none  can  tell 
but  those  in  like  case  restored.  So,  the  true  sign  of  pardoned  sin, 
and  of  paralysis  removed  from  the  heart,  is  obedience.  If  thou  art 
really  saved  thou  wilt  do  what  Jesus  bids  thee ;  thy  request  will  be, 
"Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do?"  and  that  once  ascertained, 
thou  wilt  be  sure  to  do  it.  You  tell  me  Christ  has  forgiven  you,  and 
yet  you  live  in  rebellion  to  his  commands;  how  can  I  believe  you? 


CARBDED  BY  FOUK.  167 

lay  yon  are  a  saved  man,  and  yet  you  Trilfally  set  up  your  own 
gainst  Christ's  will;  what  evidence  have  I  of  what  you  say  ?  Have 
,  rather,  clear  evidence  that  you  speak  not  the  truth  ?  Open, 
il,  prompt,  cheerful  obedience  to  Christ,  becomes  the  test  of  the 
erful  work  which  Jesus  works  in  the  soul. 

.  Lastly,  ALL  THIS  TENDS  TO  OLORIFT  OOD. 

oee  four  men  had  been  the  indirect  means  of  bringing  much  honour 
)d  and  much  glory  to  Jesus,  and  they,  I  doubt  not,  glorified  God 
eir  Tcry  hearts  on  the  housetop.  Happy  men  to  have  been  of  so 
.  service  to  their  bedridden  friend !  Who  else  united  in  glorifying 
Why,  first  the  man  who  was  restored.  Did  not  every  part  of 
ody  glorify  God  ?  I  think  I  see  him  !  He  sets  one  foot  down 
id's  glory,  he  plants  the  other  to  the  same  note,  he  walks  to  God's 
,  he  carries  his  bed  to  God's  glory,  he  moves  his  whole  body  to 
^lory  of  God,  he  speaks,  he  shouts,  he  sings,  he  leaps  to  the 

of  God.    When  a  man  is  saved  his  whole  manhood  glorifies 

he  becomes  instinct  with  a  new-bom  life  which  glows  in  eyery 
3f  him,  spirit,  soul  and  body.  As  an  heir  of  heaven,  he  brings  glory 
d  Great  Father  who  has  adopted  him  into  the  family,  he  breathes 
ats  and  drinks  to  God's  praise.  When  a  sinner  is  brought  into 
hnrch  of  God  we  are  all  glad,  but  we  are  none  of  us  so  joyous  and 
^1  as  he ;  we  would  all  praise  God,  but  he  must  praise  him  the 
et,  and  he  will. 

t  who  next  glorified  God  ?  The  text  does  not  say  so,  but  we 
nre  that  his  family  did,  for  he  went  to  his  own  nouse.  We  will 
)8e  that  he  had  a  wife.  That  morning  when  the  four  Mends  came 
)ut  him  on  the  bed,  and  carried  him  out,  it  may  be  she  shook  her 
in  loving  anxiety,  and  I  dare  say  she  said,  *'  1  am  half  afraid  to 
him  with  you.  Poor,  poor  creature,  I  dread  his  encountering  the 
ig.  I  am  afraid  it  is  madness  to  hope  for  success.  I  wish  you 
peed  in  it,  but  I  tremble.  Hold  well  the  bed;  be  sure  you  do  not 
im  fall.  If  you  do  let  him  down  through  the  roof  hold  fast 
"opes,  be  careful  that  no  accident  occurs  to  mj  poor  bedridden 
i&d ;  he  is  bad  enough  as  he  is,  do  not  cause  him  more  misery." 
when  she  saw  him  coming  home,  walking  with  the  bed  on  his 

can  you  picture  her  delight  ?  How  she  would  begin  to  sing, 
praise  and  bless  the  Loi*d  Jehovah  Ropbi,  who  had  healed  her 
ed  one.  If  there  were  little  children  about,  playing  before  the 
ij  how  they  would  shout  for  glee,  **  Here's  father;  here's  father 
ng  again,  and  come  home  with  the  bed  on  his  back ;  he  is  made 
i  again,  as  he  used  to  be  when  we  were  very  little."  What  a  glad 
J !  They  would  gather  round  him,  all  of  them,  wife  and  children, 
riends  and  neighbours,  and  they  would  begin  to  sing,  "  Bless  the 
,  O  my  soul:  and  all  that  is  within  me,  bless  his  holy  name. 

the  Lord,  0  my  soul,  and  forget  not  all  his  benefits :  who  for- 
h  all  thine  iniquities :  who  healeth  all  thy  diseases."  How  the 
would  sing  those  verses,  rejoicing  in  the  forgiveness  first,  and  the 
ig  next,  and  wondering  how  it  was  that  David  knew  so  much 
;  it,  and  had  put  his  case  into  such  fit  words. 
jU,  but  it  did  not  end  there.  A  wife  and  family  utter  but  a  part 
e  glad  chorus  of  praise,  though  a  very  melodious  part.    There 


168  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLB  PULPIT. 

are  other  adoring  hearts  who  unite  in  glorifjinprthe  healing  Lord.  The 
disciples  who  were  around  the  Saviour,  they  glorified  God,  too.  They 
rejoiced;  and  said  one  to  another,  "  We  have  seen  strange  things  to-day." 
The  whole  Christian  church  is  full  of  sacred  praise  when  a  sinner  is 
saved ;  even  heaven  itself  is  glad. 

But  there  was  plory  brought  to  God,  even  by  the  conunon  people  who 
stood  around.  They  had  not  yet  entered  into  that  sympathy  with  Christ 
which  the  disciples  felt,  but  they  were  struck  by  the  sight  of  this  great 
wonder,  and  they,  too,  could  not  help  saying  that  God  had  wrought  great 
marvels.  I  pray  that  onlookers,  strangers  from  the  commonwealth  of 
Israel,  when  they  see  the  desponding  comforted,  and  lost  ones  brought 
in,  may  be  compelled  to  bear  their  witness  to  the  power  of  divine  grace, 
and  be  led  themselves  to  be  partakers  in  it.  There  is  "  Glory  to  God  in 
the  hifrhest,  and  on  earth  peace,  good-will  towards  men,"  when  a 
paralysed  soul  is  filled  with  gracious  strength. 

Now,  shall  I  need  to  stimd  here,  and  entreat  for  the  four  to  cany 
poor  souls  to  Jesus  ?  Shall  I  need  to  appeal  to  my  brethren  who  love 
their  Lord,  and  say,  band  yourselves  together  to  win  souls?  Your 
humanity  to  the  paralytic  soul  claims  it,  but  your  desire  to  bring  glory  to 
God  compels  it.  If  you  are  indeed  what  you  profess  to  be,  to  glorify  God 
must  be  the  fondest  wish  and  the  loftiest  ambition  of  your  souls.  Unlesa 
ye  be  traitors  to  my  Lord  as  well  as  inhuman  to  your  fellow-men,  you  inll 
catch  the  practical  thought  which  I  have  striven  to  bring  before  yon, 
and  yon  will  seek  out  some  fellow  Christians,  and  say,  **  Come,  1^  ub 
pray  together,  for  such  an  c»nc/'  and  if  you  know  a  desperate  case  you 
will  make  up  a  sacred  quaternion,  to  resolve  upon  its  salvation.  Hay 
the  power  of  the  Highest  abide  upon  you,  and  who  knoweth  what  gloty 
the  Lord  may  gain  through  you  ?  Never  forj^et  this  sti*ange  story  of 
the  bed  which  carried  the  man,  and  the  man  who  carried  his  bed. 


PORTIOX   OF   SCRirXUKE  READ  BEFORE  SeRMON — Luke  V.  1—26. 


Just  Published.    A  Memorial  of  tho  Marriage  of  the  Princess  LoniBe,  entitled, 

'-piIE    ROYAL    WEDDING:    the   Banquet  and  the  Guests.     By 

i      C.   H.  SPURGEON.    Price  One  Shilling,  beautifully  bound;  or  Sixpence,  i 
paper  i^Tapper. 

So  n^pid  has  been  the  sale  of  this  little  work  that  neariy  ten  thousand  hare 
issued  in  a  fortnight.    It  is  well  adapted  for  general  distribution. 

London :  Paeemore  &  Alabaster,  18,  Patcnioster  Row. 


Pt^tr0p0Ktan  iiaternade 


THE  ASCENSION   OF   CHRIST. 


Dblivbrbd  on  Lord's-day  Mokning,  Mabch  26th,  1871,  by 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,     NEWINGTON. 


"Unto  every  one  of  us  is  given  g^aco  according  to  the  measure  of  the  gift  of 
Christ.  Wkerefore  he  saith,  when  he  ascended  up  on  high,  he  led  captivity  captive, 
and  gave  "gifts  nnto  men.  (Now  that  he  ascended,  what  is  it^but  that  he  also 
descended  first  into  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth  ?  He  that  descended  is  the  same 
Hao  that  ascended  up  far  above  all  heavens,  that  he  might  fill  all  things.)  And  he 
give  some,  apostles ;  and  some,  prophets ;  and  some,  evang^ists  ;  and  some,  pastors 
and  teachers ;  for  the  perfecting  of  the  saints,  for  the  work  of  the  ministry,  for  the 
edifying  of  the  body  of  Christ."— Eph.  iv.  7—12. 

Our  blessed  Lord  and  Master  has  gone  from  us.    From  the  mount 
<^  Oliyes,  the  place  where  in  dread  conflict  his  garments  were  rolled  in 
bloody  he  has  mounted  in  triumph  to  his  throne.    After  having  shown 
himself  for  forty  days  amongst  his  beloved  disciples,  giving  them 
abundant  evidence  that  he  had  really  risen  from  the  dead,  and  enriching 
ihem  by  his  divine  counsels,  he  was  taken  up.    Slowly  rising  before 
them  all,  he  gave  them  his  blessing  as  he  disappeared.    Like  good  ^Id 
Jacob,  whose  departing  act  was  to  bestow  a  benediction  on  his  twelve 
sons  and  their  descendants,  so  ere  the  cloud  received  our  Lord  out  of  our 
eight,  he  poured  a  blessing  upon  the  apostles,  who  were  looking  upward, 
and  who  were  the  representatives  of  his  church.     He  is  gone !     His 
iroice  of  wisdom  is  silent  for  us,  his  seat  at  the  table  is  empty,  the 
congregation  on  the  mountain  hears  him  no  more.    It  would  be  very 
easy  to  have  found  reasons  why  he  should  not  have  gone.    Had  it  been 
a  matter  of  choice  to  us,  ^ve  should  have  entreated  him  to  tarry  with  us 
till  the  dispensation  closed.    Unless,  peradventure,  grace  had  enabled 
us  to  Bay :  "  Not  as  we  will,  but  as  thou  wilt,"  we  should  have  con- 
strained him,  saying,  "  Abide  with  us."    What  a  comfort  to  disciples  to 
lave  their  own  beloved  teacher  visibly  with  them  I    What  a  consolation 
to  a  persecuted  band  to  see  their  leader  at  their  head;  difficulties  would 
^Bappear,  problems  would  be  solved,  perplexities  removed,  trials  made 
€wy,  temptations  averted !   Let  Jesus  himself,  their  own  dear  Shepherd 
be  near,  and  the  sheep  will  lie  down  in  security.    Had  he  been  here  we 
<»tkld  have  gone  to  him  in  every  affliction,  like  those  of  whom  it  is  said, 
**they  went  and  told  Jesus." 
It  seemed  expedient  for  him  to  stay,  to  accomplish  the  conversion 
No.  982. 


170  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

of  the  world.  Would  not  his  presence  have  had  an  inflnence  to  win  bj 
eloquence  of  gracious  word  and  aimiment  of  loying  miracle  ?  If  lie 
put  forth  his  power  the  battle  would  soon  be  over^  and  his  rule  oyer  all 
hearts  would  be  for  ever  established.  ^'  Thine  arrows  are  sharp  in  the 
heart  of  the  king's  enemies ;  whereby  the  people  fall  under  thee."  Go 
not  from  the  conflict,  thou  mighty  bowman,  but  still  cast  thine  all-sub- 
duing darts  abroad.  In  the  days  of  our  Lord's  flesh,  before  he  had 
risen  from  the  dead,  he  did  but  speak,  and  those  who  came  to  take  him 
fell  to  the  ground ;  might  we  but  have  him  near  us  no  persecuting 
hand  could  seize  us;  at  his  bidding,  the  flercest  enemy  would  retire. 
His  voice  called  the  dead  out  of  their  graves  ;  could  we  but  have  him 
still  in  the  church  his  voice  would  awaken  the  spiritually  dead.  His 
personal  presence  would  be  better  to  us  than  ten  thousand  apostles,  at 
least,  so  we  dream ;  and  we  imagine  that  with  ]iim  visibly  among  us  the 
progress  of  the  church  would  be  like  the  march  of  a  triumphant  army. 

Thus  might  flesh  and  blood  have  argued,  but  all  such  reasoning  is 
hushed  by  our  Lord's  declaration,  "  It  is  expedient  for  you  that  I  go 
awav :  for  if  I  go  not  away,  the  Comforter  will  not  come  unto  you."  He 
might  have  told  us  that  his  majestic  presence  was  expected  by  the 
saints  in  heaven  to  complete  their  felicity  ;  he  might  have  said  that  for 
himself  it  was  fitting  that  after  so  long  an  exile  and  the  performance  of 
such  stupendous  labours,  he  should  rise  to  his  reward ;  he  might  also 
have  added  that  it  was  due  to  his  Father  that  he  should  return  into  the 
bosom  of  his  love ;  but,  as  if  he  knew  that  their  trembling  at  his  de- 
parture was  mainly  occasioned  by  fear  for  their  own  personal  interests, 
he  puts  the  consoling  word  into  this  form :  "  It  is  expedient yor  you  that 
I  go  away."  He  has  gone  then,  and  whether  our  weak  understandings 
are  able  to  perceive  it  or  not,  it  is  better  for  us  that  Jesus  should  be  at 
the  right  hand  of  God  than  here  corporeally  in  our  assemblies  below. 
Fain  would  a  hundred  Bethanies  entertain  him,  a  thousand  synagogues 
would  rejoice  to  see  him  open  the  Scriptures ;  women  there  are  among 
us*  who  would  kiss  his  feet,  and  men  who  would  glory  to  unloose  the 
latchets  of  his  shoes  ;  but  he  has  gotten  him,  away  to  the  mountains  of 
myrrh  and  the  hills  of  frankincense.  He  no  more  sits  at  our  tables,  or 
walks  with  us  on  our  highways  ;  he  is  leading  another  flock  to  living 
fountains  of  waters,  and  let  not  his  sheep  below  imagine  that  he  has 
injured  them  by  his  removal ;  unerring  wisdom  has  declared  that  it  is 
expedient  for  us  that  he  is  gone. 

This  morning,  instead  of  standing  here  gazing  up  into  heaven,  like 
the  men  of  Galilee,  deploring  that  we  have  lost  our  Lord,  let  us  sit 
down  in  quiet  contemplation,  and  see  if  we  cannot  gather  profitable 
reflections  from  this  great  thing  which  has  come  to  pass.  Let  our 
meditations  ascend  the  yet  glowing  trackway  of  our  Lord's  ascension, — 

'*  Beyond,  beyond  this  lower  sky. 
Up  where  eternal  ages  roll." 

We  shall,  by  the  Holy  Spirit's  aid,  first  consider,  with  a  view  to  practical 
good,  tkefa^t  of  Ms  ascension;  secondly,  tJie  triumph  of  that  ascension; 
thirdly,  the  gifts  of  that  ascension ;  and  then  we  shall  conclude  by  notions' 
the  hearings  of  that  ascension  upon  the  unconverted, 
I.  Firsts  then,  let  our  earnest  thoughts  gaze  upward,  viewing  THE 


TEX  ASOBNSIOir  OF  CHRIST.  171 

OF  THR  ASCENSION.  We  lay  aside  all  controversy  or  attempt  at  mere 
doctrinal  definition,  and  desire  to  meditate  npon  the  ascension  with  a 
view  to  comfort,  edification,  and  sonl  profit. 

//  shoitld  afford  vs  supreme  joy  to  remember  that  he  who  descended 
into  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth  has  now  "ascended  up  far  above  all 
heavens."  The  descent  was  a  subject  of  joy  to  angels  and  men,  but  it 
involved  him  in  much  humiliation  and  sorrow,  especially  when,  after 
having  received  a  body  which,  according  to  the  psalmist,  was  '^-curiously 
wrought  in  the  lowest  parts  of  the  es^,"  he  further  descended  into 
the  bowels  of  the  earth,  and  slept  as  a  prisoner  in  the  tomb.  His 
descent  on  earth,  though  to  us  the  source  of  abounding"  joy,  was  full  of 
pain,  shame,  and  humiliation  to  him.  In  proportion,  then,  ought  to  be 
our  joy  that  the  shame  is  swallowed  up  in  glory,  the  pain  is  lost  in  bliss, 
the  death  in  immortality.  Did  shepherds  sing  at  his  descent,  let  all 
men  sing  at  his  rising.  Well  deserves  the  warrior  to  receive  glory,  for 
he  has  dearly  won  it.  Our  love  of  justice  and  of  him  compels  us  to  re- 
joice in  his  rejoicing.  Whatever  makes  the  Lord  Jesus  glad  makes 
his  people  glad.  Our  sympathy  with  him  is  most  intense  ;  we  esteem 
his  reproadi  above  all  wealth,  and  we  set  ec^ual  store  by  his  honour. 
As  we  have  died  with  him,  were  buried  with  him  in  baptism,  have 
also  risen  with  him  through  the  faith  of  the  operation  of  God  who 
raised  him  from  the  dead,  so  also  have  we  been  made  to  sit  together  in 
the  heavenly  places,  and  have  obtained  an  inheritance.  If  angels  poured 
forth  their  sweetest  minstrelsy  when  the  Christ  of  God  returned  to  his 
royal  seat,  much  more  should  we.  Those  celestial  beings  had  but  slight 
share  in  the  triumphs  of  that  day  compared  with  us ;  for  it  was  a  man  who 
led  captivity  captive,  it  was  one  born  of  woman  who  returned  victoriously 
from  Bozran.  We  may  well  say  with  the  psalmist,  in  the  sixty-eighth 
Psalm,  to  which  our  text  refers,  "  Let  the  righteous  be  glad ;  let  them 
rejoice  before  God :  yea,  let  them  exceedingly  rejoice.  Sing  unto  God, 
sing  praises  to  his  name :  extol  him  that  rideth  upon  the  heavens  by  his 
name  J  AH,  and  rejoice  before  him."  It  was  none  other  than  Christ, 
bone  of  our  bone  and  flesh  of  our  flesh ;  it  was  the  second  Adam  who 
mounted  to  his  glory.  Rejoice,  0  believers,  as  those  who  shout  because 
of  victory,  divide  ye  the  spoil  with  the  strong. 

"  Bru&ed  is  the  serpent's  head, 
Hell  is  vanquish'd,  death  is  dead. 
And  to  Chnst  gone  up  on  high, 
Captive  is  captivity. 

All  his  work  and  warfare  done, 
He  into  Lis  heaven  is  gone, 
And  beside  his  Father's  throne. 
Now  is  pleading  for  his  own  : 

Sing,  O  heavens  !  O  earth,  rejoice ! 
Angel  harp  and  human  voice, 
Round  him,  in  his  glory,  raise 
Your  ascended  Saviour's  praise.'* 

Beflect  yet  again  that  from  the  hour  when  our  Lord  left  it,  this  tvorld 
^  hst  all  ehanns  to  us.  If  he  were  in  it,  there  were  no  spot  in  the 
^Terse  which  would  hold  us  with  stronger  ties;  but  since  he  has  gone  up 


172  METROFOLITAK  TABERNACLE  PTTLPIT. 

he  draws  ns  upward  from  it.  The  flower  is  gone  from  the  garden,  the  first 
ripe  fruit  is  gatliercd.  Earth's  crown  has  lost  its  brightest  jewel,  the 
star  is  gone  from  the  night,  the  dew  is  exhaled  from  tibe  morning,  the 
sun  is  eclipsed  at  noon.  We  have  heard  of  some  who,  when  they  lost  a 
friend  or  favourite  child  never  smiled  again,  for  nothing  could  supply 
the  dreary  vacuum.  To  us  it  could  not  be  that  any  affliction  should 
bring  us  such  grief,  for  we  have  learned  to  be  resigned  to  our  Father's 
will ;  but*  the  fact  that  "  Jesus,  om*  all,  to  heaven  is  gone,"  has  caused 
something  of  the  same  feeling  incur  souls ;  this  world  can  never  be  our 
rest  now,  its  power  to  content  us  is  gone.  Joseph  is  no  more  in  Egypt, 
and  it  is  time  for  Israel  to  be  gone.  No,  earth,  my  treasure,  is  not  here 
with  thee,  neither  shall  my  heart  be  detained  by  thee.  Thou  art,  0 
Christ,  the  rich  treasure  of  thy  people,  and  since  thou  art  gone  thy 
people's  hearts  have  climbed  to  heaven  with  thee. 

Flowing  out  of  this  is  the  great  truth  that  "  our  conversation  is  in 
heaven ;  from  whence  also  we  look  for  the  Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ" 
Brethren,  inasmuch  as  Christ  is  gone  our  life  is  hid  with  him  in  God.  To 
the  glory-land  our  Head  is  gone,  and  the  life  of  the  members  is  there. 
Since  the  head  is  occupied  with  things  celestial,  let  not  the  members 
of  the  body  be  grovelling  as  slaves  to  terrestrial  things.  "  If  ye 
then  be  risen  with  Christ,  seek  those  thing^s  which  are  above,  where 
Christ  sittcth  on  the  right  hand  of  God.  Set  your  affection  on  things 
above,  not  on  things  on  the  earth."  Our  Bridegroom  has  gone  into  the 
ivory  palaces,  he  dwelleth  in  the  midst  of  his  brethren  ;  do  we  not  hear 
him  calling  us  to  commune  with  him  ?  Hear  ye  not  his  voice,  **  Rise 
up  my  love,  my  fair  one,  and  come  away  "?  Though  awhile  our  bodies 
linger  here,  let  our  spirits  even  now  walk  the  golden  streets,  and  behold 
the  King  in  his  beauty.  Begin,  0  faithful  souls,  to-day  the  occuj)ation 
of  the  blessed,  praising  God  even  while  ye  linger  yet  below,  and  honouring 
him  if  not  by  the  same  modes  of  service  as  the  perfect  ones  above,  y^ 
with  the  same  obedient  delight.  **  Our  conversation  is  in  heaven.* 
May  you  and  I  know  what  that  means  to  the  full.  May  we  take  up  our 
celestial  burgess- rights,  exercise  our  privileges  and  avocations  as 
heavenly  citizens,  and  live  as  those  that  are  alive  from  the  dead,  who 
are  raised  up  together  and  made  partakers  of  his  resurrection  life. 
Since  the  head  of  the  family  is  in  the  glory,  let  us  by  faith  perceive  how 
near  we  are  to  it,  and  by  anticipation  live  upon  its  joys  and  in  its 
power.  Thus  the  ascension  of  our  Lord  will  remind  us  of  heaven,  and 
teach  us  the  holiness  which  is  our  preparation  for  it. 

Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  gone  from  us.  We  return  again  to  the 
thought.  We  cannot  speak  into  his  ear  and  hear  his  voice  reply  in 
those  dear  accents  with  which  he  spoke  to  Thomas  and  to  Philip.  He 
no  longer  sits  at  feasts  of  love  with  favoured  friends,  such  as  Mary  and 
Martha  and  Lazarus.  He  has  departed  out  of  this  world  unto  the 
Father,  and  what  then?  Why  he  has  taught  us  by  this  the  more 
distinctly,  that  we  must  henceforth  walk  hj  faith  and  not  by  sight.  The 
presence  of  Jesus  Christ  on  earth  would  haTc  been,  to  a  great  extent, 
a  perpetual  embargo  upon  the  life  of  faith.  We  should  all  have  desired 
to  see  the  Redeemer  ;  but  since,  as  man,  he  could  not  have  been  omni- 

E resent,  but  could  only  liave  been  in  one  spot  at  one  time,  we  should 
ave  made  it  the  busmess  of  our  lives  to  provide  the  means  for  a 


THE  JkSCENSIOK  OF  CHRIST.  173 

journey  to  the  place  where  he  might  be  seen ;  or  if  he  himself  condescended 
to  journey  through  all  lands,  we  shonld  have  fought  our  way  into  the 
throng  to  feast  our  eyes  upon  him,  and  we  should  have  envied  each  other 
when  the  turn  came  for  any  to  speak  familiarly  with  him.  Thank  God 
we  have  no  cause  for  clamour  or  strife  or  struggle  about  the  mere  sight 
of  Jefius  after  the  flesh  ;  for  though  once  he  was  seen  corporeally  by 
Ms  disciples,  yet  now  after  the  flesh  know  we  even  him  no  more. 
Jesus  is  no  more  seen  of  human  eyes ;  and  it  is  well,  for  faith's  sight 
is  saying,  instructing,  transforming,  and  mere  natural  sight  is  not  so. 
Had  he  been  here  we  should  have  regarded  much  more  the  things 
which  are  visible,  but  now  our  hearts  are  taken  up  with  the  things 
which  are  not  seen,  but  which  are  eternal.  This  day  we  have 
no  priest  for  eyes  to  gaze  upon,  no  material  altar,  no  temple 
made  with  hands,  no  solemn  rites  to  satisfy  the  senses ;  we  have  done 
with  the  outward  and  are  rejoicing  in  the  inward.  Neither  in  this 
mountain  nor  in  that  do  we  worship  the  Father,  but  we  worship  God, 
who  is  a  Spirit,  in  spirit  and  in  truth.  We  now  endure  as  seeing  him 
who  is  invisible ;  whom,  having  not  seen,  we  love ;  in  whom,  though 
now  we  see  him  not,  yet  believing,  we  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable 
and  full  of  glory.  In  the  same  fashion  as  we  walk  towards  our  Lord, 
so  walk  we  towards  all  that  he  reveals;  we  walk  by  faith,  not  by 
sight.  Israel,  in  the  wilderness,  instructed  by  types  and  shadows,  was 
ever  prone  to  idolatry ;  the  more  there  is  of  the  visible  in  religion, 
the  more  is  there  of  difficulty  in  the  attainment  of  spirituality. 
Even  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper,  were  they  not  ordained  by  the 
Lord  himself,  might  be  well  given  up,  since  the  flesh  makes  a  snare 
of  them,  and  superstition  engrafts  on  them  baptismal  regeneration 
and  sacramental  efficacy.  Our  Lord's  presence  might  thus  have 
become  a  difficulty  to  faith,  though  a  pleasure  to  sense.  His 
going  away  leaves  a  clear  field  for  faith ;  it  throws  us  necessarily 
upon  a  spiritual  life,  since  he  who  is  the  head,  the  soul^  the  centre  of 
our  faith,  hope,  and  love  is  no  more  within  the  range  of  our  bodily 
organs.  It  is  poor  believing  which  needs  to  put  its  finger  into  the 
nail-prints  ;  but  blessed  is  he  that  hath  not  seen  and  yet  hath  believed. 
In  an  unseen  Saviour  we  fix  our  trust,  from  an  unseen  Saviour  we 
derive  our  joy.  Our  faith  is  now  the  substance  of  things  hoped  for, 
the  evidence  of  things  not  seen. 

Let  us  learn  this  lesson  well,  and  let  it  never  be  said  to  us,  "  Are  ye 
so  foolish  ?  Having  begun  in  the  Spirit,  are  ye  now  made  perfect  by  the 
flesh  ?"  Let  us  never  attempt  to  live  by  feeling  and  evidence.  Let  us 
banish  from  our  soul  all  dreams  of  finding  peifection  in  the  flesh,  and 
equally  let  us  discard  all  cravings  for  signs  and  wonders.  Let  us  not  be 
like  the  children  of  Israel,  who  only  believed  while  they  saw  the  works 
of  the  Lord.  If  our  Beloved  has  hidden  himself  from  our  sight,  let 
him  even  hide  everything  else,  if  so  it  pleases  him.  If  he  only  reveals 
himself  to  our  faith,  the  eye  which  is  good  enough  to  see  him  with  is 
eood  enough  to  see  everything  else  with,  and  we  will  be  content  to  see 
his  covenant  blessings,  and  all  else  with  that  one  eye  of  faith,  and  no 
other,  till  the  time  shall  come  when  he  shall  change  our  faith  to  sight. 

Beloved,  let  us  further  reflect  hoto  secure  is  our  eternal  inheritance 
now  that  Jesus  has  entered  into  the  heavenly  places.    Our  heaven  is 


174  HETBOPOLITAK  TABERNACLE  FULPIT. 

secured  to  us,  for  it  is  in  the  actual  possession  of  oar  legal  represeata- 
tiyc,  who  can  never  be  dispossessed  of  it.  Possession  is  nine  points  ot 
the  law,  but  it  absolutely  secures  completely  onr  tenure  under  the 
gospel.  He  who  possesses  a  corenant  blessing  shall  never  lose  it,  fior 
the  covenant  cannot  be  changed,  nor  its  gifts  withdrawn*  We  are 
heritors  of  the  heavenly  Canaan  by  actual  hold  and  sure  title,  for  our 
legal  representative,  appointed  by  the  highest  court  of  judicatore,  has 
entered  into  possession  and  actual  occupancy  of  the  many  mansions  of 
the  great  Father's  house.  He  has  not  merely  taken  possession,  but  he 
is  making  all  ready  for  our  reception  and  eternal  inhabitation.  A  maa 
who  enters  a  house  and  claims  it,  if  he  has  any  question  about  his 
rights,  will  not  think  of  preparing  it  for  the  inhabitants,  he  will  leave 
any  expenditure  of  that  kind  till  all  doubts  are  cleared  up :  bat  oar 
good  Lord  has  taken  such  possession  of  the  city  of  the  new  Jerasalem 
for  us,  that  he  is  daily  preparing  it  for  us,  that  where  he  is  we  may  be 
also.  If  I  could  send  to  heaven  some  mere  human  being  like  mTseif  to 
hold  my  place  for  me  till  my  arrival,  I  should  fear  that  my  Mend  might 
lose  it :  but  since  my  Lord,  the  King  of  heaven  and  the  Master  of 
angels,  has  gone  thither  to  represent  all  his  saints  and  claim  their  places 
for  them,  I  know  that  my  portion  is  secure.  Rest  content,  beloved^ 
and  sing  for  joy  as  the  apostle's  heart  did  when  he  wrote,  **  In  whom 
also  we  have  obtained  an  inheritance." 

Further,  if  Jesus  has  gone  into  the  glory,  Ju^iv  suc/^essful  must  our 
prayers  be.  You  send  a  petition  to  court,  and  you  hope  for  its  sncoess^ 
for  it  is  drawn  up  in  proper  style,  and  it  has  been  countersigned  by  an 
influential  person ;  but  when  the  person  who  has  backed  your  plea  for 
you  is  himself  at  court,  to  take  the  petition  and  present  it  there,  yoa 
feel  safer  still.  To-day  our  prayers  do  not  only  receive  our  Saviour's 
imprimatur,  but  they  are  presented  by  his  own  hand,  as  his  own  re- 
quests. *'  Seeing  then  that  we  have  a  great  high  priest,  that  is  passed 
into  the  heavens,  Jesus  the  Son  of  God,'*  **  let  us  come  boldly  unto  the 
throne  of  grace,  that  we  may  obtain  mercy,  and  find  grace  to  help  iu 
time  of  need,*'  No  prayer  which  Jesus  urges  can  ever  be  dismissed 
unheard,  tliat  case  is  safe  for  which  he  is  advocate. 

"Look  up,  my  .soul,  with  cheerful  eye. 
See  where  the  great  Redeemer  stands ; 
The  glorious  Advocate  on  high. 
With  precious  incense  in  his  hands. 

He  sweetens  every  humble  groan, 
He  recommends  each  broken  prayer ; 
Kecline  thy  hope  on  him  alone. 
Whose  power  and  love  forbid  despair." 

Once  more,  though  I  feel  this  theme  might  detain  us  long,  we 
must  leave  it,  and  remark  further  that,  as  we  consider  Christ  ascended, 
our  hearts  bum  within  us  at  the  thought  that  lie  is  the  type  of  all  his 
peoj)le.  As  he  was,  so  arc  we  also  in  this  world ;  and  as  he  is,  so  shall 
we  also  be.  To  us  also  there  remain  both  a  resurrection  and  aa 
ascension.  Unless  the  Lord  come  very  speedily,  we  shall  die  as  he  did^ 
and  the  sepulchre  shall  receive  our  bodies  for  awhile ;  there  is  for  as  tb> 
tomb  in  a  garden,  or  a  rest  in  the  Machpelah  of  our  fathers.     For 


THE  ASCENSION  OF  CHRIST.  175 

there  are  winding-sheets  and  graye-clothes ;  yet  like  car  Lord  we  shall 
burst  the  bonds  of  death,  for  we  cannot  be  holden  of  them.  There  is  a 
resarrection  morning  for  ns,  because  there  was  a  rising  again  for  him. 
Death  could  as  soon  have  held  the  head  as  the  members ;  the  prison 
doors  once  taken  away,  post  and  bar  and  all,  the  captives  are  set  free. 
Ihen  when  we  hare  risen  from  the  dead  at  the  blast  of  the  archangel's 
trumpet,  we  shall  ascend  also,  for  is  it  not  written  that  we  shaU  be 
caught  up  together  with  the  Lord  in  the  air,  and  so  shall  be  for  ever 
with  the  liord  ?  Have  courage,  brother ;  that  glittering  road  up  to  the 
highest  heaTcns,  which  Christ  has  trodden,  you  too  must  tread;  the 
triumph  which  he  enjoyed  shall  be  yours  in  your  measure.  You,  too, 
shall  lead  your  captivity  captive,  and  amidst  the  acclamations  of  angels 
you  shall  receive  the  **  well  done  "  of  the  ever-blessed  Father,  and  shall 
sit  with  Jesus  on  his  throne,  even  as  he  has  overcome  and  sits  with  the 
Father  upon  his  throne. 

I  have  rather  given  you  suggestions  for  meditation  than  the  medita- 
tions themselves.  May  the  Boly  Spirit  bless  them  to  yon ;  and  as  you 
in  imagination  sit  down  on  Olivet  and  gaze  into  the  pure  azure,  may 
the  heavens  open  to  you,  and,  like  Stephen,  may  you  see  the  Son  of  Man 
at  the  right  hand  of  God. 

II.  Let  us  advance  to  the  second  point,  and  dwell  upon  it  very 

briefly — ^thb  teitjmph  op  the  ascension.      Psalmists    and   apostles 

have  delighted  to  speak  upon  our  Lord's  triumphal  ascension  to  the  hill 

of  the  Lord.    I  shall  not  attempt  to  do  more  than  refer  to  what  they 

have  said.    Gall  to  yonr  minds  how  the  Psalmist  in  vision  saw  the 

Saviour's  ascension,  and,  in  the  twenty-fourth  Psalm,  represented  the 

angels  as  saying :  "  Lift  up  your  heads,  0  ye  gates ;  and  be  ye  lift  up,  ye 

everlasting  doors ;  and  the  King  of  glory  shall  come  in.     Who  is  this 

King  of  glory  ?    The  Lord  strong  and  mighty,  the  Lord  mighty  in 

battle."     The  scene  is  described  in  rich  poetic  imagery  of  the  most 

sublime  kind,  and  it  evidently  teaches  us  that  when  our  Saviour  left  the 

sight  of  mortals,  he  was  joined  by  bands  of  spirits,  who  welcomed  him 

with  acclamations  and  attended  him  in  solemn  state  as  he  entered  the 

metropolis  of  the  universe.    The  illustration  which  has  usually  been 

given  is,  I  think,  so  good  that  we  cannot  better  it.    When  generals  and 

kings  returned  from  war,  in  the  old  Roman  ages,  they  were  accustomed 

to  celebrate  a  triumph ;  they  rode  in  state  through  the  streets  of  the 

capital,  trophies  of  their  wars  were  carried  with  them,  the  inhabitants 

crowded  to  the  windows,  filled  the  streets,  thronged  the  house-tops,  and 

showered  down  acclamations  and  garlands  of  flowers  upon  the  con- 

qnering  hero  as  he  rode  along.    Without  being  grossly  literal,  we  may 

conceive  some  such  a  scene  as  that  attending  our  Lord's  return  to  the 

celestial  seats.    The  sixty-eighth  Psalm  is  to  the  same  effect:    "The 

chariots  of  God  are  twenty  thousand,  even  thousands  of  angels :  the 

Lord  is  among  them,  as  in  Sinai,  in  the  holy  place.    Thou  hast  ascended 

wi  high,  thou  hast  led  captivity  captive :  thou  hast  received  gifts  for 

incQ;  yea,  for  the  rebellious  also,  that  the  Lord  God  might  dwell  among 

them,"    So  also  in  Psalm  forty-seven :    "  God  is  gone  up  with  a  shout, 

tbe  Lord  with  the  sound  of  a  trumpet.*'    Angels  and  glorified  spirits, 

*^Qted  our  returning  champion ;   and,  leading  captivity  captive,  he  as- 

naed  the  mediatorial  throne  amidst  universiu  acclamations.    "  Having 


176  METROrOLITAN  TABERNACLB  PULPIT.  * 

spoiled  principalities  and  powers,  he  made  a  show  of  them  openly, 
triumphing  over  them  in  it." 

Oar  Lord's  ascension  was  a  triumph  over  the  world.  He  had  passed 
through  it  unscathed  by  its  temptations ;  he  had  been  solicited  on  aQ 
hands  to  sin,  but  his  garments  were  without  spot  or  blemish.  There 
was  no  temptation  which  had  not  been  tried  upon  him,  the  qniYere  of 
the  earth  had  been  emptied  against  him,  but  the  arrows  had  glanced 
harmlessly  from  his  armour  of  proof.  They  had  persecuted  him  relent- 
lessly ;  he  had  been  made  to  suner  all  that  cruel  scorn  could  invent,  but 
he  came  forth  from  the  furnace  with  not  the  smell  of  fire  npon  him. 
He  had  endured  death  itself  with  love  unquenched  and  courage  invin- 
cible. He  had  conquered  by  enduring  all.  As  he  rose  he  was 
infinitely  beyond  their  reach;  though  they  hated  him  no  less  than 
before,  he  had  been  forty  days  amongst  them,  and  yet  no  hand  was  out- 
stretched to  arrest  him.  He  had  shown  himself  openly  in  divers  placeSy 
and  yet  not  a  dog  dare  move  liis  tongue.  In  the  clear  air,  from  far 
above  the  hills  of  Salem,  he  who  was  once  tempted  in  the  desert,  looked 
down  upon  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth,  which  had  been  shown  him  by 
Satan  as  the  price  of  sin,  and  reserved  them  all  as  his  own  by 
right  of  merit.  He  rises  above  all,  for  he  is  superior  to  all.  As  the 
world  could  not  injure  his  character  by  its  temptations,  so  no  longer 
could  it  touch  his  person  by  its  malice.  He  has  defeated  altogether 
this  present  evil  world. 

There,  too,  he  led  captive  sin.  Evil  had  assailed  him  furiously,  but 
it  could  not  defile  him.  Sin  had  been  laid  upon  him,  the  weight  of 
human  guilt  was  borne  upon  his  shoulders,  it  crushed  him  down,  but  he 
rose  from  the  dead,  he  ascended  into  heaven,  and  proved  that  he  had 
shaken  oft'  the  load,  and  left  it  buried  in  his  sepulchre.  He  has 
abolished  the  sins  of  his  people  ;  his  atonement  has  been  so  efficacious 
that  no  sin  is  upon  him,  the  Surety,  and  certainly  none  remains  upon 
those  for  whom  he  stood  as  substitute.  Though  once  the  Redeemer 
stood  in  the  place  of  the  condemned,  he  has  so  suffered  the  penalty  that 
he  is  justified  now,  and  his  atoning  work  is  finished  for  ever.  Sin,  my 
brethren,  was  led  captive  at  our  Immanuel's  chariot-wheels  when  he 
ascended. 

Death  also  was  led  in  triumph.  Death  had  bound  him,  but  he 
snapped  each  fetter,  and  bound  death  with  his  own  cords. 

"  Vain  the  stone,  the  watch,  the  seal, 
Christ  has  burst  the  gates  of  hell ; 
Death  in  vain  forbids  his  rise, 
Christ  hath  open'd  paradise. 

Lives  again  our  glorious  King ! 

*  Where,  O  death,  is  now  thy  sting?* 
Once  he  died  our  souls  to  s^ve ; 

*  Where's  thy  victory,  boasting  grave  V  *' 

Oar  Saviour's  ascension  in  that  same  body  which  descended  into  the 
lower  parts  of  the  earth,  is  so  complete  a  victory  over  death,  that 
every  aying  saint  may  be  sure  of  immortality,  and  may  leave  his 
body  behind  without  fear  that  it  shall  for  ever  abide  in  the  vault-s  of 
the  grave. 

So,  too,  Satan^  was  utterly  defeated !    He  had  thought  that  he  shonld. 


THB  ASCENSION  OF  CHBIST.  177 

overcome  the  seed  of  the  woman  when  he  had  bruised  his  heel,  but  lo  ! 
^  the  eonqaeror  moniits  aloft,  he  breaks  the  dragon's  head  beneath  his 
feet.  See  ye  not  the  celestial  coursers  as  they  drag  the  war  chariot  of 
the  Prince  of  the  house  of  David  up  the  everlasting  hills  !  He  comes 
who  has  fought  the  prince  of  darkness  I  Lo  !  he  has  bound  him  in 
iron  fetters.  See  how  he  drags  him  at  his  chariot  wheels,  amidst  the 
derision  of  all  those  pure  spirits  who  retained  their  loyalty  to  the 
almighty  King  I  Oh,  Satan  !  thou  wast  worsted  then  !  Thou  didst  fall 
like  lightning  from  heaven  when  Christ  ascended  to  his  throne. 

Brethren  in  Christ,  everything  tliat  makes  up  our  captivity  Christ  has 
ltd  captive.  Moral  evil  he  has  defeated,  the  difficulties  and  trials  of 
this  mortal  life  he  has  virtually  overcome.  There  is  nothing  in  heaven, 
or  earth,  or  hell,  that  can  be  thought  to  be  against  us  wnich  now 
remaineth;  he  hath  taken  all  away.  The  law  he  hath  fulfilled;  its 
curse  he  hath  removed :  the  handwriting  against  us,  he  hath  nailed  to 
his  cross.  All  foes  of  ours  he  hath  made  a  show  of  openly.  What  joy 
there  is  to  us  in  this  triumph !  What  bliss  to  be  interested  in  it  by  the 
gift  of  faith  in  him  I 

in.  We  may  now  turn  to  consider  the  gifts  of  the  ascension. 
Our  Lord  ascended  on  high,  and  gave  gifts  to  men.  What  were  these 
gifts  which  he  both  received  from  God  and  gave  to  men?  Our  text 
says  that  be  ascended  that  he  might  fill  all  things.  I  do  not  think  this 
almdes  to  his  omnipresence — in  that  respect  he  does  fill  all  things ; 
but  allow  me  to  explain,  as  I  receive  it,  the  meaning  of  the  passage, 
by  a  very  simple  figure.  Christ  descended  into  the  lowest  parts  of  the 
earth,  and  thereby  he  laid  the  foundations  of  the  great  temple  of  God's 
praise :  he  continued  in  his  life  labouring,  and  thereby  he  built  the 
walls  of  his  temple :  he  ascended  to  his  throne,  and  therein  he  laid 
the  topstone  amidst  shoutings.  What  remained  then  ?  It  remained 
to  furnish  it  with  inhabitants,  and  the  inhabitants  with  all  things 
necessary  for  their  comfort  and  perfection.  Christ  ascended  on  high 
that  he  might  do  that.  In  that  sense  the  gift  of  the  Spirit  fills  all 
things,  bringing  in  the  chosen,  and  furnishing  all  that  is  necessary  for 
their  complete  salvation.  The  blessings  which  come  to  us  through 
the  ascension,  are  "  for  the  perfecting  of  the  saints,  for  the  work  of  the 
ministry,  for  the  edifying  of  the  body  of  Christ :  till  we  all  come  in 
the  unity  of  the  faith,  and  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Son  of  God,  unto  a 
perfect  man,  unto  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness  of  Christ." 

Observe  next,  that  these  filling  blessings  of  the  ascension  are  given  to 
aTi  the  saints.  Does  not  the  first  verse  of  our  text  say :  *'  Unto  every  one 
of  us  is  given  grace  according  to  the  measure  of  the  gift  of  Christ." 
The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  particular  benediction  of  the  ascension,  and  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  in  measure  given  to  all  truly  regenerated  persons.  You 
have  all,  my  brethren,  some  measure  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  some  more ; 
wme  less :  but  whatever  you  have  of  the  Holy  Spirit  comes  to  you, 
'jecanse  Christ,  when  he  ascended  up  on  high,  received  gifts  for  men, 
^at  the  Lord  God  might  dwell  among  them.  Every  Christian  having 
fte  gift  of  Christ  in  his  measure,  is  bound  to  use  it  for  the  general 
?ood;  for  in  a  body  no  joint  or  member  exists  for  itself,  but  for 
^^  good  of  the  whole.  You,  brother,  whether  you  have  much  grace 
^  little,  must,  according  to  the  effectual  working  in  you,  supply  yoxu: 


178  HETROFOLITAN  TABEBNACLS  PULPIT. 

part  to  the  increase  of  the  body  unto  the  edifying  of  itself  in  loye.  See 
that  ye  regard  your  gifts  in  this  light ;  trace  them  to  Christy  and  then 
use  them  for  the  object  for  which  he  designed  them. 

But  to  some  persons  the  Holy  Spirit  is  given  more  largely.  As  the 
result  of  the  ascension  of  Christ  into  heaven  the  church  received  apostles, 
men  who  were  selected  as  witnesses  because  they  had  personaUy  seen 
the  Sanour — an  office  which  necessarily  dies  out,  and  properly  so,  be- 
cause the  miraculous  power  also  is  withdrawn.  They  were  needed 
temporarily,  and  they  were  given  by  the  ascended  Lord  as  a  choice 
legacy.  Prophets,  too,  were  in  the  early  church.  They  were  needed 
as  a  link  between  the  glories  of  the  old  and  new  coTenant;  hot 
each  prophetic  gift  came  from  the  Spirit  through  the  Bedeemefs 
ascent  to  glory.  There  remain  rich  gifts  among  us  still,  which  I  fear 
we  do  not  sutficiently  prize.  Among  men  God's  richest  gifts  are  mea 
of  high  vocation,  separated  for  the  ministry  of  the  gospel.  Prom  onr 
ascended  Lord  come  all  true  evangelists ;  these  are  they  who  preach 
the  gospel  in  divers  places,  and  find  it  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation; 
they  are  founders  of  churches,  breakers  of  new  soil,  men  of  a  missionary 
spirit,  who  build  not  on  other  men's  foundations,  but  dig  out  for  them- 
selves. We  need  many  such  deliverers  of  the  good  news  where  as 
yet  the  message  has  not  been  heard.  I  scarcely  know  of  any  greater 
blessing  to  the  church  than  the  sending  forth  of  earnest,  inde- 
fatigable, anointed  men  of  God,  taught  of  the  Lord  to  be  winners  of 
souls.  Who  among  us  can  estimate  the  value  of  George  Whitfield  to 
the  age  in  which  he  lived?  Who  shall  ever  calculate  the  price  of  a 
John  Williams  or  a  William  Knibb?  Whitfield  was,  under  God,  the 
salvation  of  our  country,  which  was  going  down  straight  to  Pande- 
monium ;  Williams  reclaimed  the  islands  of  the  sea  from  cannibalism, 
and  Knibb  broke  the  negro's  chains.  Such  evangelists  as  these  are 
gifts  beyond  all  price.  Then  come  the  past^^rs  afid  teachers^  doing 
<me  work  in  diflerent  forms.  These  are  sent  to  feed  the  flock;  they 
abide  in  one  place,  and  instruct  converts  which  haye  been  gathered 
— these  also  are  invaluable  gifts  of  the  ascension  of  Jesus  Christ  It 
is  not  given  unto  all  men  to  be  pastors,  nor  is  it  needed;  for  if  all  were 
shepherds,  where  were  the  flock  ?  Those  to  whom  this  gjace  is  especially 
given  are  fitted  to  lead  and  instruct  the  people  of  God,  and  this  leading 
is  much  required.  What  would  the  church  be  without  her  pastors? 
Let  those  who  have  tried  to  do  without  them  be  a  warning  to  you. 

Wherever  you  have  pastors  or  evangelists  they  exist  for  the  good  of 
the  church  of  God.  They  ought  to  labom*  for  that  end,  and  never  for 
their  own  personal  advantage.  Their  power  is  their  Lord's  gift,  and  it 
must  be  used  in  his  way. 

The  point  I  want  to  come  at  is  this.  Dear  friends,  since  we  all,  as 
believers,  have  some  measure  of  the  Spirit,  let  us  use  it  Stir  up 
the  gift  that  is  in  thee.  Be  thou  not  like  to  him  in  the  parable  who 
had  but  one  talent  and  hid  it  in  a  napkin.  Brother,  sister,  if  thou  be 
in  the  body  the  least  known  joint,  rob  not  the  body  by  indolence  or 
selfishness,  but  use  the  gift  thou  hast  in  order  that  the  body  of  Christ 
may  come  to  its  perfection.  Yet  since  thou  hast  not  great  personal 
gifts,  serve  the  church  by  praying  the  Lord  who  has  ascended  to  give  as 
moTQ  evangelists,  pastors,  and  teachers.    He  alone  can  give  them  ;  any 


THB  ASGENSIOir  OF  CHRIST.  179 

that  come  without  him  are  imposters.  There  are  some  prayers  you 
must  not  pray,  there  are  others  you  may  pray,  but  there  are  a  few  you 
moat  pray.  There  is  a  petition  which  Christ  has  commanded  us  to 
offer,  and  yet  I  very  seldom  hear  it.  It  is  this  one.  '*  Pray  ye  there- 
fore the  Lord  of  the  harvest,  that  he  will  send  forth  labourers  into  his 
hweat'*  We  greatly  lack  evangelists  and  pastors.  I  do  not  mean 
Aat  we  lack  muffs,  who  occupy  the  pulpits  and  empty  the  pews. 
I  beUeve  the  market  has  for  many  years  been  sufficiently  supplied 
therewith ;  but  we  lack  men  who  can  stir  the  heart,  arouse  the 
oonsdence,  and  build  up  the  church.  The  scatterers  of  flocks  may 
be  found  everywhere;  the  gatherers  of  them,  how  many  have  we 
0f  goch  ?  Such  a  man  at  this  day  is  more  precious  than  the  gold 
of  Ophir.  The  Queen  can  make  a  bishop  of  the  Established  Church, 
but  only  the  ascended  Lord  can  send  a  bishop  to  the  true  church. 
Prelates,  popes,  cardinals,  vicars,  prebends,  canons,  deans,  the  Lord  has 
nothing  to  do  with.  I  see  not  even  the  name  of  them  in  his  word,  but 
the  very  poorest  pastor  whom  the  Lord  ordains  is  a  gift  of  his  ascending 
glory.  At  this  moment  we  are  deploring  that  in  the  mission  field  our 
good  men  are  grey.  Duff,  Moffat,  and  the  like,  are  passing  from  the 
stage  of  action.  Where  are  their  successors?  I  was  almost  about 
to  say,  Echo  answers.  Where?  We  want  evangelists  for  India,  for 
€hina,  for  all  the  nations  of  the  earth ;  and  though  we  have  many 
godly  &ther8  among  us,  who  are  instructors  in  ihe  faith,  yet  have 
we  in  all  our  pastorates  few  of  eminence,  who  could  be  mentioned  in 
the  same  day  as  the  great  Puritanic  divines.  If  the  ministry  should 
become  weak  and  feeble  among  us,  the  church  richly  deserves  it,  for 
this,  the  most  important  part  of  her  whole  organisation,  has  been 
more  neglected  than  anything  else.  I  thank  God  this  church  has 
not  only  prayed  for  ministers,  but  has  proved  the  sincerity  of  her 
prayer  by  helping  such  as  God  has  called,  by  affording  them  leisure 
ana  assistance  for  understanding  the  way  of  God  more  perfectly.  We 
have  thought  that  Christ's  gifts  were  valuable  enough  for  us  to  treasure 
m  and  improve  them.  Our  College  has  now  received  and  sent  forth,  in 
ue  name  of  Jesus,  more  than  two  hundred  ministers  of  the  word. 
Look  around  you  and  see  how  few  churches  care  to  receive  the  ascension 

f'fts  of  Christ,  and  how  few  pastors  encourage  young  men  to  preach. 
read  the  other  day,  with  unutterable  horror,  the  complaint  that  our 
churches  were  like  to  have  too  many  ministers ;  an  almost  blasphemous 
complaint,  impugning  the  value  of  Christ's  ascension  gifts.  0  that 
Cfod  would  give  us  ten  times  the  number  of  men  after  his  own  heart, 
and  surely  tinere  would  be  then  great  lack  of  more !  But  there  are  too 
many,  say  they,  for  the  present  pulpits.  Oh,  miserable  soul  I  is  it 
<x>me  to  this,  that  a  minister  of  Christ  must  have  a  pulpit  ready  to 
hand?  Are  we  all  to  be  builders  on  other  men's  foundations?  Have 
we  none  among  us  who  can  gather  their  own  flocks  ?  In  a  three- 
miUion  city  like  this  can  any  man  say  that  labourers  for  Christ  are  too 
many?  Loiterers  are  too  many,  doubtless;  and  when  the  church 
drives  out  the  drones,  who  shall  pity  them?  While  there  remain 
hundreds  of  towns  and  villages  without  a  Baptist  church,  and  whole 
districts  of  other  lands  without  the  gospel,  it  is  idle  to  dream  that  of 
evangelists  and  teachers  we  can  have  too  many.    No  man  is  so  happy 


180  METBOFOLITAH  TABXBNAOLS  FULPTT. 

in  his  work  as  he  who  presides  oyer  a  flock  of  his  oiwn  gathering,  and 
no  pastor  is  more  beloved  than  he  who  raised  from  rain  a  ded;itnte 
church  and  made  it  to  become  a  joy  and  praise  in  the  earth.  Praj 
the  Lord  to  send  trae  pastors  and  tme  eyangelists.  Ghrist  procured 
them  by  his  ascension.  Let  ns  not  forget  this.  What !  shall  it  be  thought 
that  the  blessings  of  the  crucifixion  are  worth  the  having,  and  the 
blessings  of  the  resurrection  worth  receiving,  but  the  blessings  of  the 
ascension  are  to  be  regarded  with  indifference  or  even  with  suspicion? 
No ;  let  us  prize  the  gifts  which  God  gives  by  his  Son,  and  when  he 
sends  us  evangelists  and  pastors,  let  us  treat  them  vrith  loving  respect 
Honour  Christ  in  every  true  minister ;  see  not  so  much  the  man  as  his 
Master  in  him.  Trace  all  gospel  success  to  the  ascended  Saviour. 
Look  to  Christ  for  more  successful  workers.  As  they  come  receive  them 
from  his  hands,  when  they  come  treat  them  kindly  as  his  gifts,  and  daily 
pray  that  the  Lord  will  send  to  Zion  mighty  champions  of  the  faith. 
IV.  We  shall  conclude  by  noticing  the  bearing  op  our  Lord*s 

ASCENSION  UPON  SINNERS. 

We  will  utter  few  words,  but  full  of  comfort.  Did  you  notice  in  the 
sixty-eighth  Psalm  the  words:  **  He  received  gifts  for  men;  y«i,  far  thi 
rebellious  also''?  When  the  Lord  went  back  to  his  throne  he  had 
thoughts  of  love  towards  rebels  still.  The  spiritual  gifts  of  the  church 
are  for  the  good  of  the  rebels  as  well  as  for  the  buUding  up  of  those 
who  are  reconciled.  Sinner,  every  true  minister  exists  for  thy  good, 
and  all  the  workers  of  the  church  have  an  eye  to  you. 

There  are  one  or  two  promises  connected  with  our  Lord's  ascension 
which  show  his  kindness  to  you  :  "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth, 
will  draw  all  men  unto  me."  An  ascended  Saviour  draws  you — ^nm 
after  him.  Here  is  another  word  of  bis :  "  He  is  exalted  on  high," 
To  curse  ?  No  ;  "  to  give  repentance  and  remission  of  sins.**  Look 
up  to  the  glory  into  which  he  has  entered;  ask  for  repentance  and 
remission.  Do  ye  doubt  his  power  to  save  you  ?  Here  is  another  text : 
**  He  is  able  also  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost  that  come  unto  God  by 
him,  seeing  he  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them."  Surely  he 
has  gone  to  heaven  for  you  as  well  as  for  the  saints.  Ton  ought  to 
take  good  heart,  and  put  your  trust  in  him  at  this  happy  hour. 

How  dangerous  it  will  be  to  despise  him  I  They  who  despised  him 
in  his  shame  perished.  Jerusalem  became  a  field  of  blood  because  it 
rejected  the  despised  Nazarene.  What  will  it  be  to  reject  the  King, 
now  that  he  has  taken  to  himself  his  great  power  7  Bemember,  that 
this  same  Jesus  who  is  gone  up  to  heaven,  will  so  come  in  like  manner 
as  he  was  seen  to  go  up  into  heaven.  His  return  is  certain,  and  your 
summons  to  his  bar  equally  certain;  but  what  account  can  you  give  if 
you  reject  him  ?  0  come  and  trust  him  this  day.  Be  reconciled  to 
him  lest  he  be  angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way  while  his  wrath  is 
kindled  but  a  little.  The  Lord  bless  you,  and  grant  you  a  share  in  his 
ascension.    Amen,  and  Amen. 


Portions  of  Scripture  read  before  SER:^roN — Psalm  Ixviii.  1—19} 

Ephesians  iv.  1 — 16. 


JR(ti[09atttain:  iiahrnade  §0i 


MOAB  IS  MY  WASHPOT. 


%  ^ermon 


BT 

C.  H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABSRNAOLB,  NSWINQTOV. 


•  Moab  is  my  iraehpot** — Psalm  Ix.  %, 

wbich  had  threatened  Israel,  was  to  be  so  completely  subdned, 
and  beooime  so  utterly  contemptible  as  to  be  likened  to  a  wasbpot  or  basin 
in  which  men  wash  their  feet.  More  than  this,  however,  may  have  been 
intended — nay,  we  feel  anre  was  intended  by  the  expression.  Let  as 
exjdiiin  exactly  what  the  language  literally  means.  In  the  £ast  the 
general  mode  of  washing  the  hands  and  the  feet  is  with  a  basin  and 
ewer ;  water  is  poured  upon  the  hands  or  feet  from  the  ewer,  and  it  falls 
into  the  basin.  No  Oriental,  if  he  can  help  it,  will  wash  in  standing 
water ;  he  prefers  to  have  it  clear  and  running.  He  puts  his  feet  into  the 
wasbpot,  into  the  bath,  into  the  basin,  and  men  the  clear,  cool  liquid  is 
poured  upon  his  feet ;  the  wasbpot  answering  the  sole  purpose  of  holding 
the  dirty  water  which  has  already  passed  over  the  man's  flesh.  Wearing 
no  completely  covering  shoes,  as  we  do,  but  only  sandals,  the  feet  of  an 
eastern  tmveller  in  a  long  jonmey  become  very  much  defiled ;  the 
water,  tiierefbre,  when  it  runs  off  from  them,  is  far  from  clean,  and  the 
washpot  is  thus  put  to  a  very  contemptible  use  by  being  only  the 
reoej^ade  of  dirty  water.  When  Moab  thus  became  a  washpot,  it  was 
far  other  than  when  it  was  said,  ''  Moab  hath  been  at  ease  from 
his  youth,  and  he  hath  settled  on  his  lees,  and  hath  not  been  emptied 
from  vessel  to  vessel,  neither  hath  he  gone  into  captivity :  therefore  his 
taste  remained  in  him,  and  his  scent  is  not  changed."  "  We  have  heard 
the  pride  of  Moab  (he  is  exceeding  proud),  his  loftiness,  and  his  arro- 
gancT,  and  his  pride,  and  the  haughtiness  of  his  hearL** 

WluU^does  Mx)ab  represent  to  you  and  to  me  T  We  are  the  children  of 
Israel  by  faith  in  Christ,  and  in  him  we  have  obtained  by  covenant  a  pro- 
mised land.  Our  faith  may  cry,  '*  I  will  divide  Shechem,  and  mete  out  the 
valley  of  Socooth."  All  things  are  ours  in  Christ  Jesus ;  *^  G  ilead  is  mine, 
and  Hanasseh  is  mine."  Now  Moab  was  outside  of  Canaan.  It  was  not 
given  to  Israel  as  a  possession,  but  in  course  of  time  it  was  subdued  in 
warfare^  and  became  tributary  to  the  Jewish  king.  Even  thus  our  faith 
overoometh  the  world,  and  enables  us  to  say,  ^  this  world  is  ours" — ours 
kt  a  nseftil,  needftal  purpose.  We  set  but  small  store  by  it ;  it  is  nothing 
bat  cor  washpot,  but  we  are  content  to  use  it  as  &r  as  we  may  make  it 

Ho.  98d. 


182  HETBOPOLITAH  TABEENAOLB  PULPIT. 

BubBerve  a  holy  end.  The  Vest  poBseBsionB  we  hare  onUide  of  the  Bpiritoal 
heritai^e  we  put  under  our  feet,  desiring  to  keep  them  in  their  px>per 
inferior  position;  they  are  not  the  crown  of  our  head,  nor  the  comfort  of 
our  hearf,  nor  the  girdle  of  our  loins,  nor  the  staff  of  our  support;  thej 
are  put  to  baser  uses  far.  They  yield  us  some  comfort,  for  which  we 
are  grateful  to  God,  but  it  is  only  for  our  feet  or  lower  nature;  our  head 
and  heart  find  nobler  joys.  The  whole  world  put  together,  with  all  its 
wealt  li,  is  but  a  mess  of  potage  for  Esau,  and  nothing  more.  God's  Jacob 
has  a  better  portion,  for  ne  has  the  birthright.  Our  worst  ifi  better  than 
the  world's  best,  for  the  reproach  of  Christ  is  greater  riches  than  all  the 
treasures  of  E«:ypt. 

**  We  tread  the  world  beneath  our  feet, 
With  all  that  earth  calls  good  or  great.** 

"Moab  is  my  washpot,"  nothing  more — a  thing  contemptible  and  de- 
spicable as  compared  with  the  eternal  realities  of  covenant  blessings; 
yet,  for  all  that,  there  was  a  use  for  Moab,  a  use  to  be  rightly  under- 
stood. A  washpot  has  its  ncccssair  function  ;  and  even  this  base  world 
may  be  made  by  faith,  in  the  hands  of  God,  to  be  the  means  of  aiding 
the  purity  of  the  saints  ;  its  afflictions  and  troubles  may  work  our  present 
and  lasting  good.  The  world  and  its  trials  can  never  be  comparea  to  the 
water  which  cleanses  our  feet ;  for  that  purifying  stream  we  look  to  a  far 
higher  source  ;  but  it  may  be  likened  to  the  basin  in  which  our  feet  are 
placed  while  they  are  being  washed. 

If  we  regard  Moab  as  representative  of  the  unregenerate  people 
among  whom  we  dwell,  we  do  well,  like  the  chiJdreii  of  Israel,  on 
their  march  to  Canaan,  to  let  them  alone,  for  their  heritage  is  not  our 
heritage,  neither  are  their  joys  our  joys.  The  less  communion  we  have 
with  them  the  better.  If  we  ask  of  them,  as  Israel  did  of  Moab,  simply 
to  be  allowed  to  go  on  our  way  in  peace,  it  is  all  we  need.  Moses  sent 
his  messenger,  who  said,  *'  Let  me  pass  through  thy  land :  I  will  go 
along  by  the  highway,  I  will  neither  turn  unto  the  right  hand  nor  to 
the  left.  Thou  shalt  sell  me  meat  for  money,  that  I  may  eat ;  and  give 
me  water  for  money,  that  I  may  drink :  only  I  will  pass  through  on  my 
feet ;  until  I  shall  pass  over  Jordan  into  the  land  which  the  Lord  our 
God  giveth  us."  Like  the  pilgrims  in  Vanity  Fair,  we  only  ask  a  clear 
passage  through  tlie  place,  for  we  have  no  inheritance  in  it,  no,  not  so  much 
as  we  can  set  our  foot  upon.  Yet,  inasmuch  as  we  cannot  altogether 
separate  ourselves  from  the  sinful,  for  then  must  we  needs  go  out  of  the 
world,  we  are  compelled  to  feel  the  influence  of  their  conduct,  and  it 
will  become  our  wisdom  to  watch  that  this  become  not  injurious  to  ai» 
but  be  made  under  God  rather  to  be  of  service  to  us  than  a  hindrance. 

My  object  will  be  to  show  that,  contrary  to  the  ordinaiy  course 
of  nature,  but  not  contrary  to  faith,  even  this  ungodly  world  may  be 
made  to  assist  our  advance  in  holiness.  As  of  old  the  men  of  Israel 
went  down  to  the  Philistines  to  sharpen  every  man  his  aze  and  his 
coulter,  so  may  we  derive  some  sharpening  from  our  enemiea.  We  may 
gather  honey  from  the  lion,  take  a  jewel  from  the  toad's  head,  and  borrow 
a  star  from  the  brow  of  night.    Moab  may  become  our  washpot. 

While  this  is  contrary  to  nature,  it  is  also  unusual  in  history.  In  the 
Book  of  Numbers  we  read  that  Balak,  son  of  Zippor,  desired  to  Tanquiah 


VOIB  18  MT  WASHPOT.  188 

Igrael,  and  iherefore  heflent  for  Bakam,  the  iMin  of  Bcor,  «a3'in<r,  *^  Cnrse 
me  Israel,  and  peradtieiitiire  I  fiball  prevail  against  them/'  Balaam  was 
not  able  to  cime  Isvael  bj  word  of  moath,  but  be  careed  them  in  very 
deed  when  he  oonnselled  the  king  to  make  them  unclean  in  God*g  eight 
bj  sending  the  danghters  of  Moab  among  them,  who  not  only  led  tl^m 
into  lascivionsaees,  bat  invited  them  to  the  sacrifices  of  their  gods. 
Then  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kmdled  against  Israel,  and. the  plague 
would  hare  d^^onrod  them,  had  not  the  holy  seal  of  Phinehas  turned 
away  the  divine  anger.  Thus  it  is  clear  that  Moab  of  old  was 
foremost  in  pallntlng  and  defiling  IsraeL  It  is  a  great  feat  of  faith 
when  the  thing  which  naturally  defiles  is  turned  into  a  washpot.  Behold 
the  transfonnations  of  grace !  This  ungodly  world  outside  the  church,  the 
world  of  wicked  men,  would  naturally  pollute  ns,  but  faith  turns  them 
into  a  washpot,  and  finds  in  them  motives  fior  watchfhlness  and  holiness. 
We  aigh«  in  the  words  of  the  old  psalm — 

^  Woe^f  me  that  I  in  Mesech  aa 
A  amouner  ao  loag ; 
That  I  in  tmbemaclee  dwell 
To  Kedar  that  bek>ng.'* 

At  we  cannot  aing  the  Lord's  song  in  a  strange  land,  so  neither  can  we 
▼ery  readily  keep  our  garments  unspotted  in  a  land  deluged  with  un- 
cleanness.  Witn  difficulty  do  we  save  ourselves  from  this  untoward  gene- 
ration. And  yet  Caith  learns  the  secret  of  overcoming  the  ordinary  tendency 
of  things^  and  of  making  that  which  might  injure  us  subsidiary  to  our 
advttntee;  fulfilling  that  ancient  promise,  ''And  strangers  ^all  stand 
and  feed  your  fioeks,  and  the  sons  of  the  alien  shall  be  your  plowmen 
and  Toar  irmedMSsers.^ 

The  defiling  world  may  be  made  helpful  to  us  in  the  following  ways. 

I.  First  of  all,  ungodly  men,  if  we  are  in  a  gracious  spirit,  may  be  of 
aolemn  aemoe  to  us,  because  we  beb  in  them  what  sin  ib.  They 
are  b^ioons  upon  the  rocks  to  keep  us  ftom  danger.  The  lives  of 
many  men  are  recorded  in  Scripture,  not  as  excuses  for  our  sins,  much  less 
as  esumples,  but  the  very  reverse.  Like  murderers  in  the  olden  times 
hung  in  chains,  they  are  meant  to  be  warnings.  Their  lives  and  deaths 
are  mnger-aignala,  bidding  those  who  are  pursuing  a  career  of  sin,  to  come 
to  a  pause,  and  neverse  the  engine  forthwitfa.  They  are  our  washpot  in 
that  respect^  that  they  warn  us  of  pollution,  and  so  help  to  prevent  our 
Cilliiig  into  iL  Wh^  we  learn  that  pride  turned  angels  into  devils,  we 
haTO  a  lesson  in  humility  read  to  us  from  heaven  and  hell.  When  we 
read  of  poofane  Esau,  obstinate  Pharaoh,  disobedient  Saul,  apostate 
Judas,  or  ▼acillating  Pilate,  we  are  taught  thereby  to  shun  the  rocks 
npon  whicii  they  made  eternal  shipwreck.  Transgressors  of  our 
own  raoe  aie  peculiarly  suitable  to  act  as  warnings  to  us,  for  we  ought 
ever  to  remember  when  we  see  the  sins  of  ungodlv  men,  that 
**sueh  ioere  soms  of  us*'  Whenever  thou  seest  a  drunkard,  if  thou 
wast  once  auch,  it  will  Ining  the  tears  to  thine  eyes  to  remember  when 
ibon  too  wast  a  slave  to  the  ensnaring  cup,  and  thou  wilt  thank  Ood  tihat 
his  graoe  has  changed  thee.  Not  as  tlie  Pharisee  wilt  thou  pretend 
to  thank  God,  whilst  thou  art  flattering  thine  own  self,  bnt  with  deep 
hnmiliation  then  wilt  confess  what  grace  has  done.    When  we  read  in . 


184  XETBOFOLITAH  TABEBKACLE  PULPIT. 

the  newspaper  a  sad  case  of  lasciyionsness,  or  any  other  breach  of  the 
laws  of  God  and  man,  if  we  were  aforetime  gnilty  of  the  like  and  have 
now  been  renewed  in  heart,  it  will  make  us  blush ;  it  will  humble  us,  and 
cause  us  to  admire  the  power  and  sovereignty  of  divine  grace.  Now  the 
blnsh  of  repentance,  the  shamefacedness  of  humility,  and  the  tear  of 
gratitude,  are  three  helpful  things,  and  all  tend  under  God's  grace  to  set 
us  purging  out  the  old  leaven.  Remember,  0  believer,  that  there  is  no 
wretch  upon  earth  so  bad,  but  what  thou  wast  once  his  equal  in  aliens* 
tion  from  (xod  and  death  in  sin.  In  untoward  acts  there  may  have  been 
much  difference,  but  in  the  inner  man  how  little !  The  seed  of  all  the  sii 
which  thou  seest  in  him  lies  in  thy  corrupt  nature,  and  needs  only  a  6t 
season  to  bring  forth  and  bud.  Thou  wast  once  in  that  fire  of  sin,  m 
which  he  is  consumed  by  his  passions ;  thou  hast  been  plucked  a£  a 
brand  from  the  burning,  else  hadst  thou  been  there  still.  Yonder  is  a 
prodigal,  all  bespattered  from  head  to  foot,  but  we  also  once  were  plunged 
into  the  ditch,  until  our  own  clothes  abhorred  us,  and  we  should  be 
sinking  in  the  mire  even  now,  if  the  mighty  hand  of  grace  had  not 
lifted  us  up  from  the  horrible  pit,  and  washed  us  in  the  ^viour's  blood. 
We  were  **  heirs  of  wrath  even  as  olhers'*  "  All  have  sinned  and  come 
short  of  the  glory  of  God."  Our  sins  are  different,  but  we  were  all 
without  exception  shapen  in  iniquity,  and  as  in  water,  face  answereth 
unto  face,  so  the  heart  of  man  to  man. 

When  you  see  the  wickedness  of  an  ungodly  man,  make  him  your 
washpot,  by  remembering  that  yoti  ahOy  though  you  are  regeneraU^  are 
encompassed  with  "  the  body  of  this  death.**  Remember  the  words  of  the 
Apostle  :  "  For  I  know  that  in  me  (that  is,  in  my  flesh,)  dwelleth  no 
good  thing ;  for  to  will  is  present  with  me  ;  but  how  to  perform  that 
which  is  good  I  find  not.  For  the  good  that  I  would  I  do  not: 
but  the  eyil  which  I  would  not,  that  I  do.  I  find  then  a  law, 
that,  when  I  would  do  good,  evil  is  present  with  me.  For  I  delight  in 
the  law  of  God  after  the  inward  man  :  but  I  see  another  law  m  my 
members,  warring  against  the  law  of  my  mind,  and  bringing  me  into 
c^tivity  to  the  law  of  sin  which  is  in  my  members.**  The  old  nature 
so  remains  in  us,  that,  if  we  were  to  be  deserted  by  God,  we  should  even 
yet  become  such  as  the  ungodly  are.  Need  I  quote  to  you  the  speech 
of  John  Bradford,  one  of  the  godliest  of  men  ?  When  he  saw  a  wretch 
taken  out  to  Tyburn  to  be  hanged,  the  tears  were  in  his  eyes,  and 
when  they  asked  him  why,  he  said,  **  There  goes  John  Bradford,  but 
for  the  grace  of  God."  Ah,  and  when  we  see  a  prodigal  planghig  into 
excess  of  riot,  there  goes  the  best  among  us,  if  we  are  not  preserved  in 
Christ  Jesus.  Ay,  and  when  the  damned  go  down  to  hell,  there  must  I 
go,  unless  the  same  grace  which  restrains  me  now  from  sin,  shall  uphold 
me  to  my  last  day  ;  and  keep  me  from  falling.  Brother  Christian,  you 
carry  much  combustible  matter  in  your  nature,  be  warned  when  you  see 
your  neighbour's  house  on  fire.  When  one  man  falls,  the  next  should 
look  to  his  steps.  You  are  a  man  of  like  passions,  remember  yourself 
lest  you  also  be  tempted.  In  these  days  of  epidemics,  if  we  knew  that 
a  certain  house  was  tainted  with  disease,  and  if  we  saw  a  person  who 
had  come  from  it  with  the  marks  of  the  disease  in  his  face  ;  what  should 
we  feel  ?  Should  we  not  take  it  as  a  warning  to  keep  clear,  both  of  the 
house  and  of  him ;  because  we  ourselves  are  as  likely  to  take  the  dinease 


XOAB  IB  MY  WikSHPOT.  185 

as  he  was  ?  So  when  we  see  a  sinner  transgressing  we  should  say  to 
ourselves,  '*!  also  am  a  man,  and  a  fallen  man,  let  me  abhor  every  evil 
way,  and  gaard  myself  jealously,  lest  I  also  fall  into  sin."  In  this  way 
Moab  may  be  a  washpot.  By  remembering  what  we  are,  and  what  we 
were,  we  may,  by  taking  warning  from  the  evil  courses  of  others,  avoid 
the  like  condemnation. 

There  are  certain  sins  which  we  readily  detect  in  others,  which  should 
serve  ae  loud  calls  tous  lo  correct  the  same  things  in  ourselves.  Wh^n 
a  man  sees  the  faults  of  others,  and  conu:ratulates  himself  that  he  is  far 
superior  to  such,  he  evidently  knows  not  how  to  extract  good  from  evil ; 
he  is  proud,  and  knows  nothmg.  But  when  we  perceive  errors  in  others, 
and  immediately  set  a  diligent  watch  against  falling  into  the  like,  then 
Moab  is  rightly  used,  and  becomes  our  washpot  For  instance,  as  to  the 
matter  of  bodily  indulgence?  The  sinner  is  a  man  who  puts  his  body 
before  his  soul,  and  his  head  where  his  feet  should  be ;  he  is  therefore  a 
monster  in  nature.  Instead  of  the  world  being  under  his  feet,  as  it  is  with 
eTery  good  man,  he  inverts  himselj^  and  places  nis  headand  his  heart  in  the 
dust.  He  lives  for  the  body  which  is  to  die,  and  forgets  the  soul  which 
lives  for  ever.  When  therefore  you  see  a  drunkard,  or  an  unchaste 
person,  say  to  yourself,  ''  I  must  mortify  my  members,  and  give  my 
roiritual  nature  the  predominanee.  For  this  I  must  cry  mightily  to 
God,  the  Eternal  Spirit,  lest  the  body  of  this  death  prevail  over  me. 
I  must  keep  under  my  body,  as  the  Apostle  saith,  and  bring  it  into 
subjection,  lest  I  too  become  a  prey  to  the  same  animal  passions,  which 
lead  sinners  captives." 

I  see  the  ungodly  man  putting  this  poor  fleeting  world  before  the 
eternal  world  to  come;  therein  he  is  a  fool  ;  but  let  me  take  heed  that 
I  in  no  measure  imitate  him.  Let  me  never  in  my  business  live  as 
though  to  make  money;  to  get  a  competenee,  to  earn  the  where- 
withal to  eat  and  drink,  were  the  first  thing  with  me.  Let  me  not  fall 
into  his  error,  but  ever  seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his  righteous- 
ness, and  believe  that  other  things  shall  be  added  to  me.  The  ungodly 
man  disregards  God.  God  is  not  in  all  his  thoughts.  He  saith  in  his 
hearty  "  No  God.*'  Now  when  I  know  that  the  ungodlv  man  does  that, 
it  should  be  a  warning  to  me  not  to  forget  the  Lora,  or  depart  from 
him  in  any  measure.  Alas,  we  are  all  of  us  more  or  less  atheistic 
How  little  of  our  life  is  given  to  God !  You  who  love  and  fear  him  are 
not  always  near  to  him,  though  he  is  always  near  to  you.  Do  you 
never  enter  upon  vour  enterprises  without  him  ?  When  you  begin 
your  business  with  him,  are  you  not  apt  to  forget  him  in  the  middle 
passage  of  it  7  Or  when  you  have  gone  on  to  the  very  centre  of  a 
work  with  him,  are  you  not  liable  to  leave  him  ere  you  close  ?  Is  not 
this  to  learn  the  way  of  the  wicked  and  to  be  like  them  in  wandering  away 
from  the  living  God  ?  To  have  God  always  with  us,  to  lean  hourly  upon 
him,  and  to  feel  each  moment  that  he  is  all  in  all  tous — this  is  the  true 
condition  in  which  our  minds  ought  to  be  continually.  The  atheism  of 
the  outside  world  should  warn  us  against  the  inward  godlessness  of  our 
naturally  atheistic  hearts. 

We  select  these  sins  as  specimens  of  the  general  principle,  but  it 
IB  applicable  to  all  forms  of  evil.  Did  you  ever  meet  with  a  vain 
ttan,  who  boasted  loudly,  and  evermore  talk^  about  his  own  beloved  self  ? 


186  ICETBiOrOLITlH  TABESRiCLB  PULFTT. 

Was  not  that  a  lesson  for  jon  ?  Snrelj  it  will  help  to  preoerre  70a 
from  acting  so  ridicnloBS  a  part.  Did  not  I  hear  joq,  the  other  night, 
laughing  at  the  hoa^^ter  for  his  folly?  Let  ns  hope^  then,  yon  will 
neTer  set  others  langhing  at  yourself.  Ton  know  another  perton  who 
is  morose,  he  always  speaks  sharply,  and  makes  enemies.  Be  yon  of 
another  spirit ;  he  courteous,  cnltiyate  the  grace  of  cheerfnlnesB  and  good 
temper  as  a  Christian.  The  moroseness  of  the  churl  should  enforce  upon 
you  the  duty  of  godly  gentleness.  Moah  will  he  your  washpot.  You  know 
a  certain  person  whose  hands  appear  to  he  paruiysed  if  thej  are  required 
to  bestow  a  contribution.  How  unlorely  his  meanness  makes  himl 
Will  not  the  miserable  exhibition  of  stinginess,  wliich  he  presents,  lead 
you  to  ayoid  all  coyetousness  ?  Another  person  of  your  aeqciaintaiice  is 
Tory  soon  irritated.  You  can  hardly  say  a  word  todispleasehim  bathemakes 
a  crime  of  it  immediately,  and  falls  into  the  tempcnrary  insanitj  of  anger. 
Well,  then,  learn  yourself  to  be  slow  to  wrath.  Seek  that  chanty  whidi  is 
not  easily  provoked,  thinketh  no  eyil.  May  be  your  friend*s  blood  is 
warmer  ^an  yours,  and  there  is  some  excuse  for  him;  but  sinoe 
you  see  how  unwise  and  wicked  it  is  in  him,  seek  much  grace  wherewith 
to  overcome  the  propensity  in  your  own  case.  If  a  man  should  fsdl  into 
a  pit  through  walking  unwarily  along  a  dangerous  path,  his  fall  should 
be  my  safety,  his  experience  should  be  my  instruction ;  there  can  be  no 
seed  for  me  to  roll  over  the  same  precipice  in  order  to  know  experimentally 
how  dangerous  it  is.  How  sad  a  fact  it  is  that  very  few  of  us  ey^r  & 
learn  by  the  experience  of  other  people !  Dame  Experience  most  take 
each  one  of  us  into  her  school,  and  make  us  personally  smart  under  her 
riKi — we  will  not  learn  else.  Warnings  are  neglected  by  the  foolish. 
The  yonng  sluggard  sees  the  huge  thorns  and  thistles  in  the  older 
6h:.ggard's  garden,  and  yet  he  follows  the  same  lazy  habita.  One  sheep 
follows  another  into  the  shambles.  Flies  sec  their  brethren  perishing 
in  the  sugared  trap,  and  yet  rush  into  it  themselves.  The  Lord  make 
us  wise  and  prudent,  and  from  the  erroirs  of  others  may  we  learn  to 
steer  our  own  course  aright ;  then  may  we  truly  say,  *'  Moah  is  my 
wanhpot.** 

II.  Another  illustration  of  this  practical  principle  lies  in  the  fact^  that 

VB  SEE  IN  THE  UNGODLY  THBJ  PRE8ENT   EVIL   RESULTB  OF  SIK.       We 

frequently  have  the  opportunity  of  beholding  in  them,  not  only  sin,  hut 
some  of  its  bitter  fruits,  and  this  should  still  further  help  us  to  shun  it, 
by  God's  grace.  Evil  is  now  no  longer  an  unknown  seed  of  doubtful 
character ;  we  haye  seen  it  planted,  and  have  beheld  sinners  reaping  the 
first  sheaves  of  its  awful  harvest.  This  poison  is  no  longer  an  uncertain 
drug,  for  its  deadly  effects  are  apparent  in  those  around  us.  If  we  sin, 
it  is  no  longer  through  the  want  of  knowing  what  sin  will  lead  to,  for 
its  mischief  is  daily  before  our  eyes. 

First,  are  you  not  yery  certain,  those  of  yon  who  watch  nncon- 
yerted  and  ungodly  people^  thai  they  an  not  solidly  happy  ?  What 
roaring-boys  they  are  sometimes!  How  yociferons  are  their  songs! 
How  merry  their  dances !  How  hilarious  their  laughter !  Yon 
would  think  that  there  were  no  happier  people  to  be  fuund  nnder 
the  sun ;  but  as,  on  many  a  face,  beauty  is  produced  by  art  rather  than 
by  nature,  and  a  little  paint  creates  a  transient  comeliness,  so,  often  the 
mirth  of  this  world  is  a  painted  thing,  a  base  imitatiuiy  not  ao  deep 


MQAB  JB  XT  WAfiHFOT.  187 

eren  as  the  skin.  Ungodly  men  knfow  nothing  of  heart-Ianghin^;  tliej  are 
Btrangera  to  the  deep,  serene  bappmeas  which  is  the  portion  of  believers. 
Th^r  joy  cornea  and  goes  with  the  )ionr.  See  them  when  the  feast  is 
over — **  Who  hath  woe  ?  1^  ho  hath  redness  of  the  ejcs  ?  They  that 
tarry  long  at  the  wine ;  the  men  of  strength  to  mingle  strong  drink/* 
Hark  them  when  alone :  they  are  ready  to  die  with  dulness.  They 
want  to  kill  time,  as  if  they  had  an  overplus  of  it  and  wonld  be  ^lad 
to  dispose  of  the  snperflaity.  A  man's  face  must  be  yery  Dgly  when 
he  never  cares  to  look  at  it,  and  a  man's  state  mast  be  yery  bad  indeed 
when  he  is  ashamed  to  know  what  it  is ;  and  yet  in  the  case  of  tens  of 
tfaonaands  of  people,  who  Hiy  they  are  yery  happy,  there  is  a  worm 
inside  the  apple  ;  the  yery  foundation-stone  has  been  removed  from  the 
edifice ;  and  yon  may  be  sure  it  is  so,  for  they  dare  not  examine  into 
matters.  Ungodly  men  at  bottom  are  unhappy  men.  *'  The  way  of 
trangressors  is  hard."  "  There  is  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the 
wicked."  Their  Marah  is  neyer  dry,  bnt  flows  with  perennial  waters  of 
bitterness.    What  says  their  great  poet  Byron : — 

*^  Connt  o'er  the  joys  thme  houTt  bare  seen, 
Coiiiit  o*er  the  days  from  anguish  free ; 
And  know  whaterer  thon  hast  been, 
*Ti8  something  better  nOt  to  be/' 

Now  then,  if  things  be  so— if  sin  brings  after  all  an  unsatisfactory 
lesolt  to  the  mind,  if  a  man  is  not  rendered  happy  by  an  evil  course — 
then  let  me  chcose  another  path,  and,  by  God's  grace,  keep  to  wisdom's 
waya  of  pleasantness  and  paths  of  peace,  into  which  my  Lord  by  his 
loye  has  turawn  me  and  by  hia  grace  has  led  me.  I  am  happy  in  his 
bosom,  I  drink  living  waters  out  of  his  fountain.  Why  shoula  I  go  to 
those  broken  cisterns,  which  I  clearly  see  can  hold  no  water  ?  Why 
should  I  wish  to  wander  over  the  dreary  waste  of  waters  ?  Noah's 
hand  ia  warm,  and  the  peaceful  ark  is  near :  ''  Return  unto  thy  rest,  O 
my  soul,  for  the  Lord  hath  dealt  bountifully  with  thee."  When  I  read 
01  aching  hearts,  and  hear  that  great  worldling,  who  had  all  the  world 
could  give  him,  sum  it  all  up  with  this  sentence,  *'  Vanity  of  vaniticB, 
all  is  yanity,"  does  not  my  heart  say  at  once,  *'  Oh,  empty  world,  thou 
temptest  ma  in  vain,  for  I  see  through  the  cheat."  Madam  Bubble  we 
have  seen  with  her  mask  off,  and  are  not  to  be  fascinated  by  so  ugly  a 
witch.  We  follow  not  after  yonder  green  meads  and  flowing  orooks,  be- 
eanae  they  are  not  real^  ana  are  only  a  mirage  mocking  the  traveller. 
Wherefore  should  we  pursue  a  bubble  or  chase  the  wind  ?  We  spend  our 
money  no  more  for  that  which  is  not  bread.  Moab  is  our  washpot ;  if 
oihera  have  found  earthly  things  to  be  unsatisfactory,  we  wash  our 
hands  of  their  disappointing  pursuits.  Dear  Saviour,  we  would  follow 
ihee  whith^:'8oever  thou  goest,  till  we  come  to  dwell  with  thee  for  ever. 
Bat  it  ia  not  merely  thai  ungodly  men  are  not  happy ;  Ihere  an  times 
wksm  ihey  are  positively  wretched  through  their  sins.  Sometimes  fear 
CQmetb  upon  them  as  a  whirlwind,  and  they  have  no  refuge  or  way  of 
escape.  I  have  been  now  and  then  called  to  witness  the  utter  anguish 
of  a  man  who  has  lost  his  gods.  His  great  idols  have  been  broken, 
and  he  has  been  in  despair.  His  darling  child  is  dead,  or  his  wife  is 
a  corpae,  and  he  knows  not  how  to  endure  life.  Did  yon  eyer  see  a 
fadksa  man  when  he  had  lost  all  hia  money  in  a  speculation  which  once 


188  METROPOLITAN  TABERNAOLI  PULPIT. 

promised  fair?  Did  jou  mark  his  woe  ?  Did  you  erer  see  the  coanteiumce 
of  a  gambler  who  had  staked  his  last  and  lost  his  all  ?  See  him  insa 
agony  which  can  find  no  alleviation.  He  rises  from  the  table,  he  roahei 
to  imbrue  his  hands  in  his  own  blood.  Poor  soul,  he  has  lost  his  all! 
That  never  happens  to  a  Christian — never  I  If  all  he  had  on  earth  were 
gone,  it  would  be  only  like  losing  a  little  of  his  spending-money,  butlus 

g^rmanent  capital  would  be  safe  in  the  Imperial  exchequer,  where 
mnipotence  itself  stands  guard. 

Even  when  no  very  great  calamity  puts  oat  the  candle  of  the 
worldling,  yet,  as  years  revolve,  a  gathering  cloud  darkens  his  day. 
Hear  again  the  world's  master  songster.  The  confesaion  will  soit 
many : — 

'*  My  days  are  in  the  yellow  leaf, 
The  flowers  and  fruito  of  love  are  gone  ; 
The  worm,  the  canker,  and  the  grief — 

Are  mine  alone. 

The  fire  that  in  my  bosom  plays 
Is  lone  as  some  volcanic  isle  ; 
No  torch  is  kindled  at  its  blaze — 

A  funeral  pile.** 

This  is  the  world's  treatment  of  its  old  servants :  it  discards  them  inoM 
age ;  but  it  is  not  so  with  aged  believers  :  *'  they  shall  still  bring  forth 
fruit  in  old  age  ;  they  shall  be  fat  and  flourishing,  to  show  that  the  Lord 
is  upright."  When  all  our  wealth  on  earth  is  gone,  our  treasure  is  stiU 
safe  in  heaven,  where  moth  corrupts  not,  and  thieves  break  not  through 
nor  steal.  When  we  think  of  the  despair  of  men,  of  blasted  hopes, 
Moab  may  become  our  washpot,  and  may  keep  us  firom  setting  oor 
affection  u|K)n  their  fleeting  joys. 

Here  and  there,  in  the  Moab  of  sin,  you  meet  with  men  who  are 
in  their  garments,  their  trembling  limbs,  their  penury,  and  their  shame, 
living  monitors  and  standing  proofs  that  the  way  of  transgressors  is 
hard.  There  are  sins  whose  judgment  hastens  as  a  whirlwind- 
sins  of  the  flesh,  which  eat  into  the  bones  and  poison  the  blood ;  sins 
of  appetite,  that  degrade  and  destroy  the  frame.  If  young  men  knew 
the  price  of  sin,  even  in  this  life,  they  would  not  be  so  hot  to  purchase 
pleasurable  moments  at  the  price  of  painful  years.  Who  would  coin 
his  life  into  iniquity  to  have  it  returned  to  him  in  this  life,  red-hot  fixtm 
the  mint  of  torment  1  Mark  well  the  spendthrift,  void  of  under- 
standing !  I  have  seen  him  at  my  door.  1  knew  his  relativesy  pec^e 
of  reputable  character  and  good  estate.  I  have  seen  him  in  rags  which 
scarcely  covered  him,  piteously  weeping  for  a  piece  of  bread.  Yet  a 
few  short  years  ago  he  inherited  a  portion  which  most  men  would  have 
thought  wealth.  In  a  mad  riot,  into  which  he  could  not  crowd  enough 
of  debauchery,  he  spent  all  that  he  had.  He  was  soon  penniless,  and 
then  loathsome  ana  sore  sick.  He  was  pitied  by  his  friends,  but  pity 
has  been  lost  on  him,  and  now  none  of  his  kith  or  kin  dare  own  him. 
I  too  fed  Inm,  clothed  him,  and  found  him  a  place  of  labour.  The 
garments  which  charity  had  supplied  him,  within  the  next  few  honrsi 
were  sold  for  drink,  and  he  was  wallowing  in  drnnkennesa.  The  work 
was  deserted  almost  as  scon  as  attempted.  He  will  die  of  starvatioiif 
ii'  he  be  not  already  dead,  for  he  has  abandoned  himself  to  every  vicknu 


XOAB  IB  MY  WASHFOT.  189 

Gzoess,  and  already  trembles  from  head  to  foot,  and  looks  to  be  on  the 
borders  of  the  grave.    Nothing  keeps  him  sober  bnt  want  of  another 
penny  to  bay  drink  ;  not  even  that  can  restrain  him  from  ancleanness. 
Hunger,  and  cold,  and  nakedness  he  knows  fall  well,  and  prefers  to 
endnre  them  rather  than  earn  honest  bread  and  abandon  his  licentioas- 
ness.    Tears  hare  been  wept  oyer  him  in  vain,  and  many  mnst  have  been 
his  own  tears  of  misery  when  he  has  been  in  want.  The  workhoase  is  his 
1>e8t  shelter,  and  its  panper  clothing  his  noblest  livery.    Away  from  that 
retreat  he  is  a  mass  of  rags  and  indescribable  filth.    Yonng  Christian  pro- 
fessor, if  yon  are  tempted  by  the  strange  woman,  or  by  the  wine  which 
moTcUi  itself  aright  in  the  cnp,  look  on  the  victims  of  these  destroyers 
ere  yon  dally  with  them.    See  the  conseqaences  of  sin  even  in  this  life, 
and  avoid  it,  pass  not  bv  it,  look  not  on  it,  bnt  flee  yoathfal  Insts  which 
war  against  tne  sonl.    ^hus  make  filthy  Moab  to  become  yonr  washpot 
from  this  time  forth. 

The  unconverted  when  they  go  not  thas  fiar  may  yet  be  beacons  to 
as.  Observe,  for  instance,  the  procrastinating  hearer  of  the  gospel,  how 
certainly  he  becomes  hardened  to  all  rebukes.  Early  sensibility  gives 
way  to  indifference.  Let  us  also  beware  lest  we,  by  trifling  with  con- 
victions and  holy  impulses,  lose  tenderness  of  conscience.  They  advance 
inevO,  and  at  last  commit  with  impunity  sins  which,  years  ago,  would 
have  struck  them  with  unaffected  horror;  let  us  be  caatious  lest  a  similarly 
blontlDg  process  should  be  carried  on  upon  our  hearts.  But  time 
woold  &il  me  to  show  you  in  detail  how  readily  the  evil  results  of  sin 
in  others  may  preserve  us  from  falling  into  the  like ;  how,  in  a  word, 
Moab  may  be  our  washpot 

III.  A  third  point  suggests  itself.  Men  of  this  world  are  made 
oseftil  to  us  since  thet  discoyeb  in  us  ouk  weak  places.  Their  op- 
position, slander,  and  persecution,  are  a  rough  pumice-stone,  to  remove 
some  of  our  spots.  When  young  men  come  to  college,  one  of  the  chief 
benefits  they  ootain  is  the  severe  criticism  to  which  they  are  subjected  from 
their  tntors  and  fellow  students.  Sharp  ears  hear  their  slips  of  speech, 
and  they  are  made  conscious  of  them.  Now  in  a  certain  sense  the  outside 
world  often  becomes  a  college  to  the  Christian.  When  we  are  with  our 
dear  Christian  brethren,  they  do  not  look  for  our  faults — at  least,  they 
should  not — neither  do  they  irritate  us  and  so  bring  our  infirmities  to  the 
surfiice  ;  but  they  treat  us  so  lovingly  and  gently  that  we  do  not  know 
our  weak  side.  Young  Christians  would  be  like  plants  under  glass 
cases  in  a  conservatory,  and  become  tender  and  feeble,  but  the  rough 
woiid  tries  them,  ana  is  over-ruled  by.  Ood  to  their  strengthening  and 
general  benefit.  Men's  lynx  eyes  see  our  shortcomings,  and  their 
nerdless  tongues  inform  us  of  them ;  and,  for  mv  part,  I  see  much 
advantage  brought  out  of  this  maliciousness  of  tneirs ;  they  are  our 
monitors,  and  help  to  keep  us  humble,  and  make  us  careful.  If  we 
cannot  bear  a  little  shake  from  men,  hew  shall  wc  bear  the  shaking  of 
heaTen  and  earth  at  the  last  day  7 

The  world  often  tries  us  as  with  fire,  and  the  things  which  we 
reckoned  to  be  gold  and  silver  perish  in  the  ordeal  if  they  are  but 
coanterfeil^  but  we  are  gainers  by  such  a  loss.  In  the  world  our 
temper  is  tried,  and  too  often  we  become  irritated.  What  then? 
Why  just  this.    If  sanctification  has  regulated  our  emotions,  patience 


190  XETROFOUTAS  TABIBHAGLB  KTLPIT. 

will  hftve  her  perfect  work,  and  charity  will  snfTer  long;  bnt  if  we 
are  soon  angry  and  find  it  hard  to  forgive,  let  as  not  bo  much  find 
fault  with  those  who  try  na  as  with  onraelvea,  because  we  cannot  bear 
the  ordeaL  Our  pride  must  go  down,  we  most  become  slow  to  wrath, 
we  mnst  be  content  to  be  as  our  Lord,  the  meek  and  lowly  Sariour. 
These  irritations  show  as  how  far  we  are  from  the  model,  and  should 
excite  in  as  a  desire  for  progress  towards  his  complete  image. 
Perhaps  you  had  fondly  said  in  your  heart,  *'  I  could  bear  a  great  dwd. 
I  could  act  the  Christian  under  the  worst  abuse;"  but  now  you  sing 
another  song,  and  find  how  great  your  weakness  is.  Moab  thus  again 
becomes  your  washpot,  for  now  you  will  go  to  God  in  prayer,  and  ask 
to  be  subdued  to  his  will. 

Do  not  worldly  men  in  some  cases  frighten  professors  out  of  theff 
testimony  for  Christ  ?  I  mean,  has  it  never  happened  that  oor 
cheek  has  blanched,  and  our  tongue  failed  us  in  the  pre8«u»  of 
cavillers,  and  blasphemers,  and  sceptics,  and  have  we  not  beeii  silfot 
when  we  ought  to  have  avowed  our  Lord?  That  also  shows  how 
cowardly  we  are  at  heart,  and  how  cold  is  our  love.  We  are  to  blame 
for  not  having  more  courage;  for  if  we  were  strong  in  the  Lord  and  in 
the  power  of  his  might,  as  we  onght  to  be,  we  should  be  ready  t«  go 
with  Christ  to  prison  and  to  death,  and  never  think  of  shuimlhg  Us 
aervioe. 

Do  you  not  find  that  ungodly  men,  when  you  are  obliged  to  be  in 
their  company  in  business,  will  occasionally  utter  remarks  which  shake 
your  faith  about  truths  which  you  imagined  you  firmly  believed  ?  Too 
many  are  content  with  a  superficial  creed.  Their  faith  is  not  rooted 
deep  in  their  hearts,  and  therefore  a  little  wind  rocks  the  tree  to  andfto^ 
but  ere  long  the  very  motion  of  the  tree  tends  to  root  it,  and  it  becomes 
all  the  more  firm.  God  over-rules  for  good  the  cavillin(i:s  of  men  against 
the  truth.  Besides,  do  not  ungodly  men  drive  us  from  loving  the  world  t 
We  might  think  of  finding  our  rest  here  below,  but  when  we  hear  their 
tongues  cruelly  and  unkindly  slandering  us,  then  we  are  sick  of  thdr 
company. 

^  My  soul  distracted  mourns  and  pines 
To  reach  that  peacefal  shore, 
Where  all  the  weaiy  are  at  rest, 
And  troublen  vex  no  more.** 

An  extreme  case  of  the  way  in  which  evil  treatment  may  tend  to  our 
sanctification,  maybe  found  in  the  life  of  one  of  the  old  mmisters  in  the 
north  of  Scotland  ''A  cold,  unfeeling,  bold,  unheeding,  worldly  woman 
was  the  wife  of  Mr.  Fraser,  one  of  the  ministers  of  Hoss-shire,**  writes 
my  beloved  friend,  Mr.  John  Kennedy,  in  his  interesting  book,  en- 
titled, "The  Days  of  the  Fathers  in  Ross  shire.-  "Never  did  her 
godly  husband  sit  down  to  a  comfortable  meal  in  his  own  house, 
and  ofien  would  he  have  feinted  but  for  the  considerate  kindness  or 
some  of  his  parishioners.  8he  was  too  insensate  to  try  to  hide  her 
treatment  of  him,  and  well  was  it  for  him,  on  one  account,  that  she 
was.  His  friends  thns  knew  of  his  ill-treatment,  and  were  moved  to 
do  what  they  could  for  his  comfort.  A  godly  a(*quaintance  arranged 
with  him  to  leave  a  supply  of  fi>od  in  a  certain  place,  beside  his  nnial 
walk,  of  which  he  might  avail  himself  when  starved  at  home.    Even 


XOAB  18  ICY  WASHPOT.  191 

light  And  fire  in  his  stndj  were  denied  to  him  on  the  lonpf,  cold  winter 
efenings ;  and  as  his  atndy  was  his  only  place  of  refuge  from  the  cmel 
Bconrge  of  hia  wife's  tongae  and  temper,  there,  shiyering  and  in  the 
dark,  he  nsed  to  spend  his  winter  evenings  at  home.  Compelled  to 
walk  in  order  to  keep  himself  warm,  and  accnstomed  to  do  so  when 
prenaring  for  the  pnlpit,  he  always  kept  his  hands  before  him  as  feelers 
m  toe  dark,  to  warn  nim  of  his  approaching  the  wall  at  either  side  of 
the  room.  In  this  way  he  acbaally  wore  a  hole  through  the  plaster  at 
each  end  of  his  accustomed  beat,  on  which  some  eyes  have  looked  that 
(listened  with  light  from  other  fire  than  that  of  loye,  at  the  re- 
membrance of  his  cruel  wife.  But  the  godly  husband  had  learned  to 
thank  the  Lord  for  the  discipline  of  this  trial.  Being  once  at  a 
Preabytery  dinner,  alone,  amidst  a  group  of  moderates,  one  of  them 
proposed,  as  a  toast,  the  health  of  their  wives,  and  turning  to  Mr. 
Fraaer,  said,  as  he  winked  at  his  companions,  'You,  of  course,  will 
eqidially  join  in  drinking  to  this  toast.' — '  So  I  will,  and  so  I  ought,' 
Mr.  Eraser  said,  '  for  mine  has  been  a  better  wife  to  me  than  any  of 
yonrs  has  been  to  yon.'  '  How  so  ? '  they  all  exclaimed. — '  She  has  sent 
me,'  was  his  reply,  *  seven  times  a  day  to  my  knees,  when  I  would  not 
otherwise  have  gone,  and  that  is  more  than  any  of  you  can  say  of 
yonnu' "  Ah,  this  is  the  way  to  make  Moab  our  washpot,  that  is  to 
say,  to  make  those  who  grieve  us  most,  act  but  as  rough  waves  to  hurry 
ns  on  to  the  rock,  or  as  biting  winds  that  drift  ns  the  faster  into  port. 
If  the  birds  of  paradise  will  keep  to  the  nest,  their  ungodly  relatives 
or  neighbours  shall  be  a  thorn  therein  to  make  them  mount  into  their 
native  element — the  heaven  of  God. 

The  attacks  of  the  ungodly  upon  the  church  have  been  overruled  by 
God  to  make  his  people  leave  the  camp  and  forsake  ungodly  associa- 
tions, BO  as  to  be  separate.  I  know  a  beloved  sister  in  Christ  who  was 
baptised;  she  had  moved  in  high  circles,  but  they  told  me  that  after 
her  baptism  she  received  the  cold  shoulder.  When  I  heard  it,  I  said, 
*^  Iliank  God  for  it>"  for  half  her  temptations  are  gone.  If  the  world 
has  turned  its  back  upon  her,  she  will  be  all  the  more  sure  to  turn  her 
back  on  the  world  and  live  near  to  her  Lord.  The  friendship  of  the 
world  is  enmity  to  God — why  should  we  seek  it?  **  If  any  man  love 
the  world,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him."  If  any  man  will 
fellow  Christ  he  must  expect  persecution,  and  one  of  the  cardinal 
precepts  of  the  Christian  faith  runs  thus :  **  Come  ye  out  from  among 
them,  and  be  ye  separate,  saith  the  Lord,  and  I  will  be  a  Father  unto 
you,  and  ye  shall  be  my  sons  and  daughters."  **Let  hs  go  forth, 
therefore,  nnto  him,  without  the  camp,  bearing  his  reproach." 

lY.  Lastly,  in  befbbencb  to  the  world  to  come,  the  terrible  doom 
of  the  nngooly  is  a  most  solemn  warning  to  us.  My  heart  fails  me  to 
speak  concerning  the  destiny  of  the  ungodly  in  another  world.  Dying 
withont  hope,  without  a  Saviour,  they  go  before  the  throne  un- 
deansed,  nnforgiven,  to  hear  that  awful  sentence,  "  Depart,  ye  cursed, 
into  ererlasting  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels."  Pursue 
them  for  a  moment  m  your  thoughts,  down  to  the  deeps  of  wrath, 
whither  Ood's  judgment  riiall  pursue  them.  My  Lord,  I  pray  thee  of 
thy  mce,  save  me  from  the  sin  which  brings  such  a  result  at  the  end  of 
it   If  the  wages  of  sin  be  such  a  death  as  this,  Lord  save  me  from  se 


192  KETBOPOLITAV  TABERHACSLB  PULPIT. 

aocDrsed  a  serrice.  Will  not  the  sight  of  their  defltrtictioii  drive  qb  to 
watchfulnefis,  and  cause  us  to  make  oar  calling  and  election  anre? 
Will  it  not  make  ub  anxioas  leat  we  also  come  into  tiiia  place  <^ 
torment  ?  0  the  wrath  to  come !  The  wrath  to  come  whereof  this 
Book  speaks  in  so  many  terrihle  tones  and  dreadf  al  images  !  Bemember 
Lot's  wife  I  '*  I  will  therefore  pat  yon  in  remembrance,  thongh  yeonoe 
knew  this,  how  that  the  Lord,  having  saved  the  people  out  of  the  land 
of  E<!ypt,  afterward  destroyed  them  that  believed  not  And  the 
angels  which  kept  not  their  first  estate,  bat  left  their  own  habitation, 
he  hath  reserved  in  everlasting  chains  under  darkness  unto  the  judgment 
of  the  great  day.  Even  as  Sodom  and  Oomorrha,  and  the  cities  about 
them  in  like  manner,  giving  themselves  over  to  fornication,  and  going 
after  strange  flesh,  are  set  forth  for  an  example,  suffering  the  ven- 
geance of  eternal  fire." 

In  this  way  Moab  becomes  our  wash  pot,  by  showing  ns  what  na 
grows  to  when  it  has  developed  itself.  This  consideration  will  surely 
cause  us  more  heartily  to  love  the  Saviour,  who  can  deliver  us  &om  it 

Dear  friends,  if  you  are  not  in  Christ,  much  of  what  I  have  said  bean 
upon  you.  Bethink  yourself,  and  pray  to  escape  ^m  the  wrath  to 
come.  I  would  not  have  von  be  made  a  mere  washpot  to  be  used  and 
broken  as  a  potter's  vessel.  Neither  should  you  wish  to  be  a  veoel 
without  honour,  a  thing  of  no  esteem ;  but  may  you  have  &itli  in 
Jesus — life  in  him,  and  then  you  shall  be  a  royal  diadem,  a  crown  of 
glory  in  the  hand  of  oar  God.  May  you  have  a  heritage  among  those 
who  fear  the  Lord,  and  are  reconciled  to  him  by  faith  in  the  atoning 
sacrifice  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 


PoRTiOK  OF  Scripture  read  before  Sermon— Psalm  Ix. 


^^THE  TREASURY  OF   DAVID." 

BY  C.  H.  8PURGE0N.     Vols.  L  &  II. 

This  Work  is  the  substance  of  mstiy  Lihraries.  It  contains  the  essence  of  all  thi 
commeatators  upon  the  Psalms,  both  aadent  and  modem.  Besides  oootaioiVK 
original  observations  by  the  Author,  it  is  crowded  with  the  wisdom  of  haii4riCb» 
the  most  eminent  writers.  K(>viewers  pronounce  the  work  to  be  of  the  higbsit 
%'4lue.  The  volumes  are  published  at  8s.  each,  and  contain  far  more  matter  toaii  If 
g.neraUy  sold  for  half  a  guinea.    Vol.  I.  is  now  in  the  fourth  thousand. 

Published  bj  Passmosb  St  Alabaltbr,  Paternoster  Row,  and  may  be  had 

of  all  Booksellers. 


K«ir«plton  iiabtrnade  fttl^tt. 


THE  CHURCH  AS  SHE  SHOULD  BE. 


^  ^mun 


DELIYERKD  BY 

C.  E  SPURGEON, 

AT     THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,     NEWINGTON. 


rhoa  art  beautiful,  0  my  love,  as  T^rzah,  comely  as  Jerusalem,  terrible  as  an 
'  with  banners." — Canticles  vi.  4. 

HE  are  various  estimates  of  the  Christian  church.  Some  think  every- 
V  of  her;  some  think  nothing  of  her ;  and  probably  neither  opinion 
Drth  the  breath  which  utters  it.  Neither  Bitualists,  who  idolise  their 
tsh,  nor  sceptics,  who  yillify  all  churches,  have  any  such  knowledge 
le  true  spiritual  church  of  Jesus  Christ  as  to  be  entitled  to  gire  an 
lion.  The  king's  daughter  is  all  glorious  within,  with  a  beauty 
3h  they  are  quite  unable  to  appreciate.  What  is  usually  the  most 
ect  character  which  is  obtainable  of  a  woman  ?  Shall  we  be  guided 
iic  praises  of  those  neighbours  who  are  on  good  terms  with  her,  or 
he  scandal  of  those  who  make  her  the  subject  of  ill-natured  gossip? 
;  the  most  accurate  judgment  we  are  likely  to  get  is  that  of  her  hus- 
d.  Solomon  saith  in  the  Proverbs  concerning  the  virtuous  woman, 
er  husband  also  riseth  up,  and  he  praiseth  her."  Of  that  fairest 
mg  women,  the  church  of  Christ,  the  same  observation  may  be  made. 
B  to  her  of  small  consequence  to  be  judged  of  man's  judgment,  but 
I  her  honour  and  joy  to  stand  well  in  the  love  and  esteem  of  her  royal 
ose,  the  Prince  Emmanuel.  Though  the  words  before  us  are  alle- 
ical,  and  the  whole  song  is  crowded  with  metaphor  and  parable,  yet 
teaching  is  plain  enough  in  this  instance ;  it  is  evident  that  the 
ine  Bridegroom  gives  his  bride  a  high  place  in  his  heart,  and  to  him, 
iterer  she  may  be  to  others,  she  is  fair,  lovely,  comely,  beautiful,  and 
ihe  eyes  of  his  love  without  a  spot.  Moreover,  even  to  him  there  is 
>  only  a  beauty  of  a  soft  and  gentle  kind  in  her,  but  a  majesty,  a 
nity  in  her  holiness,  in  her  earnestness,  in  her  consecration,  which 
kes  even  him  say  of  her  that  she  is  **  terrible  as  an  army  with  ban- 
»,"  "  awful  as  a  bannered  army."  She  is  every  inch  a  queen :  her  as- 
st  in  the  sight  of  her  beloved  is  majestic.  Take,  then,  the  words  of 
r  text  as  an  encomium  upon  Christ's  church,  pronounced  by  him  who 
ows  her  best,  and  is  best  able  to  judge  concerning  her,  and  you  learn 
It  to  his  discerning  eye  she  is  not  weak,  dishonourable,  and  despicable, 
No.  984. 


194  METROrOLITAN  TABERNACLB  PULPIT. 

but  bears  I'.erself  as  one  of  highest  rank,  consciously,  joyously  strong  in 
her  Lord's  strength. 

On  this  occasion  let  as  note,  first  of  all,  why  it  is  that  the  church 
OF  God  is  haid  to  be  an  army  with  banners.    That  she  is  an  army 
is  true  enough,  for  the  church  is  one,  but  many;  and  consists  of  men 
who  niareli  in  order  under  a  common  leader,  with  one  design  in  view, 
and  that  design  a  conflict  and  a  victory.     She  is  the  church  militant 
here  below,  and  both  in  suffering  and  in  service  she  is  made  to  proTe 
that  she  is  in  an  enemy's  country.     She  is  contending  for  the  tmth 
against  error,  for  the  light  against  darkness :  till  the  day  break  and 
the  sliadows  flee  away,  she  must    maintain  her  sentinels  and  kindle 
her  watch  fires ;  for  all  around  her  there  is  cause  to  guard  against  the 
enemy,  and  to  defend  the    royal  treasure  of  gospel  truth  against  its 
deadly  foes.     But  why  an  army  with  banners?    Is  not  this,  first  of  all, 
for  disiinrtion?    How  shall  we  know  to  which  king  an  army  belongs 
unless  we  can  see  the  royal  standard  ?     In  times  of  war  the  nationality 
of  troops  is  often  declared  by  their  distinguishing  regimentals.     The 
grey  coats  of  the  Russians  were  well  known  in  the  Crimea ;  the  white 
livery  of  the  Anstrians  was  a  constant  eyesore  in  bygone  days  to  the 
natives  of  Lombardy.     No  one  mistook  the  Black  Brunswickers  for 
French  Guards,  or  our  own  Hussars  for  Garibaldians.    Quite  as  effec- 
tively armies  have  been  distinguished  by  the  banners  whidh  they  carried. 
As  the  old  knights  of  old  were  recognised  by  their  plume  and  helmet, 
and  escutcheon,  so  an  army  is  known  by  its  standard  and  the  national 
colours.    The  tricolor  of  the  French  readily  marked  their  troops  as 
they  fled  before  the  terrible  black  and  white  or  the  German  army.    The 
church  of  Christ  displays  its  banners  for  distinction's  sake.    It  desires 
not  to  be  associated  with  other  armies,  or  to  be  mistaken  for  them,  for 
it  is  not  of  this  world,  and  its  weapons  and  its  warfare  are  far  other 
than    those   of  the  nations.      God   forbid   that  followers  of  Jcsns 
should  be  mistaken  for  political  partisans  or  ambitious  adventurers. 
The  church  unfurls  her  ensign  to  the  breeze  that  all  may  know  whose 
she  is  and  whom  she  serves.    This  is  of  the  utmost  importance  at  this 
present,  when  crafty  men  are  endeavouring  to  palm  off  their  inven- 
tions.   Every  Christian  church  should  know  what  it  believes,  and  pub- 
licly avow  what  it  maintains.    It  is  our  duty  to  make  a  clear  and  dis- 
tinct declaration  of  our  principles,  that  our  members  may  know  to  what 
intent  they  have  come  together,  and  that  the  world  also  may  know  what 
we  mean.    Far  be  it  from  us  to  join  with  the  Broad  Church  cry,  and  ftirl 
the  banners  upon  which  our  distinctive  colours  are  displayed.    We 
hear  on  all  sides  great  outcries  against  creeds.    Are  these  clamours 
justifiable  ?     It  seems  to  me  that  when  properly  analysed  most  of  the 
protests  are  not  against  creeds,  but  against  truth,  for  every  man  who 
believes  anything  must  have  a  creed,  whether  he  write  it  down  and 
print  it  or  no  ;  or  if  there  be  a  man  who  believes  nothing,  or  anythin^f 
or  everything  by  turns,  he  is  not  a  fit  man  to  be  set  up  as  a  modd. 
Attacks  are  often  made  against  creeds  because  they  are  a  short,  handy 
form  by  which  the  Christian  mind  gives  expression  to  its  belief,  and 
those  who  hat«  creeds  do  so  because  they  find  them  to  be  weapons  aft 
inconvenient  as  bayonets  in  the  hands  of  British  soldiers  have  been  to 
our  enemies.     They   are  weapons  so  destructive  to  neology  that  it 


THE  CHUCCH  AS  SHE  SHOULD  BE.  195 

protests  against  them.  For  this  reason  let  us  be  slow  to  part  with 
them.  Let  us  lay  hold  of  God's  truth  with  iron  grip,  and  never  let  it 
go.  After  all,  there  is  a  Protestantism  still  worth  contending  for; 
there  is  a  Calvinism  still  worth  proclainning,  and  a  jjospel  worth  dying 
for.  There  is  a  Christianity  distinctive  and  distinp^nished  from 
Bitualism,  Eationalism,  and  Legalism,  and  let  us  make  it  known  that 
we  believe  in  it.  Up  with  your  banners,  soldiers  of  the  cross  !  This 
is  not  the  time  to  be  frightened  by  the  cries  against  conscientions  con- 
victions, which  are  nowadays  nicknamed  sectarianism  and  bigotry. 
Believe  in  your  hearts  what  you  profess  to  believe ;  proclaim  openly 
and  zealously  what  you  know  to  be  the  truth.  Be  not  ashamed  to 
say  such-and-such  things  are  true,  and  let  men  draw  the  inference  that 
the  opposite  is  false.  Whatever  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  may  be  to 
the  rest  of  mankind,  let  them  be  your  glory  and  boast.  Display  your 
banners,  and  let  those  banners  be  such  as  the  church  of  old  carried. 
Unfurl  the  old  primitive  standard,  the  all-victorious  standard  of  the 
cross  of  Christ.  In  very  deed  and  truth — in  hoc  si^no  vinces — the 
atonement  is  the  conquering  truth.  Let  others  believe  as  they  may,  or 
deny  as  they  will,  for  you  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  is  the  one  thing 
that  has  won  your  heart  and  made  you  a  soldier  of  the  cross. 

Banners  were  carried,  not  merely  for  distinctiveness,  but  also  to  serve 
the  purposes  of  discipline.    Hence  an  army  with  banners  had  one  banner 
as  a  central  standard,  and  then  each  regiment  or  battalion  displayed  its 
own  particular  flag.    The  hosts  of  God,  which  so  gloriously  marched 
through  the  wilderness,  had  their  central  standard.    I  suppose  it  was 
the  very  pole  upon  which  Moses  lifted   up  the  brazen  serpent  (at 
any  rate,  our  brazen  serpent  is  the  central  ensign  of  the  church) ;  and 
then,  besides  that,  each  tribe  of  the  twelve  had  its  own  particular 
banneret,  and  with  these  uplifted  in  the  front,  the  tribes  marched  in 
order,  so  that  there  was  no  confusion  on  the  march,  and  in  time  of 
battle  there  was  no  difficulty  in  marshalling  the  armed  men.     It  was 
believed  by  the  later  Jews  that  "  the  standard  of  the  carap  of  Judah 
represented  a  lion;  that  of  Reuben,  a  man ;  that  of  Joseph,  an  ox  ;  and 
that  of  Dan,  an  eagle.    The  Targumists,  however,  believe  that  the 
banners  were  distinguished  by  their  colours,  the  colour  for  each  tribe 
being  analogous  to  that  of  the  precious  stone  for  that  tribe,  in  the 
breastplate  of  the  high  priest ;  and  that  the  great  standard  of  each  of 
the  four  camps  combined  the  three  colours  of  the  tribes  which  composed 
it."    So,  brethren,  in  the  church  of  God  there  must  be  discipline — the 
discipline  not  only  of  admission  and  of  dismission  in  receivinj:^  the  con- 
yerts  and  rejecting  the  hypocrites,  but  the  discipline  of  marshalling  the 
troops  to  the  service  of  Christ  in  the  holy  war  in  which  we  arc  engaged. 
Every  soldier  should  have  his  orders,  every  officer  his  troop,  every  troop 
its  fixed  place  in  the  army,  and  the  whole  army  a  resularity  such  as  is 
prescribed  in  the  rule,  "Let  all  things  be  done  decently  and  in  order.*' 
As  in  the  ranks  each  man  has  his  place,  and  each  rank  has  its  [)articular 
place  in  the  battalion,  so  in  every  rightly  constituted  church  each  man, 
each  woman,  will  have,  for  himself  or  herself,  his  or  her  own  particular 
form  of  service,  and  each  form  of  service  will  link  in  with  every  other, 
and  the  whole  combined  will  constitute  a  force  which  cannot  be  broken. 
A  church  is  not  a  load  of  bricks,  remember :  it  is  a  house  builded 


196  METROFOLITAK  TABSENACLB  FULPIT. 

together.    A  chnrch  is  not  a  bundle  of  cuttings  in  the  gardener's  hand: 
it  is  a  vine,  of  which  we  are  the  branches.    The  true  church  is  an 
organised  whole  ;  and  life,  true  spiritual  life,  wherever  it  is  paramount 
in  the  church,  without  rules  and  rubrics,  is  quite  sure  to  create  order 
and  arrangement.     Order  without  life  reminds  us  of  the  rows  of  graves 
in  a  cemetery,  all  numbered  and  entered  in  the  register :  order  with 
life  reminds  us  of  the  long  lines  of  fruit  trees  in  Italy,  festooned  with 
fruitful  vines.      Sunday-school  teachers,  bear  ye  the  banner  of  the 
folded  lamb ;  sick  visitors,  follow  the  ensign  of  the  open  hand ;  preachos, 
rally  to  the  token  of  the  uplifted  brazen  serpent;  and  all  of  you, ac- 
cording to  your  sacred  calling,  gather  to  the  name  of  Jesus,  armed  for 
the  war. 

An  army  with  banners  may  be  also  taken  to  represent  aeiivUij,  When 
an  army  folds  up  its  colours  the  fight  is  over.    Little  is  being  done  in 
military  circles  when  the  banners  are  put  away  ;  the  troops  are  on 
furlough,  or  are  resting  in  barracks.     An  army  with  banners  is  exer- 
cising, c»r-marching,  or  fighting ;  probably  it  is  in  the  middle  of  a  cam- 
paign, it  is  marshalled  for  offence  and  defence,  and  there  will  lie  rough 
work  before  long.     It  is  to  be  feared  that  some  churches  have  hung  np 
their  flails  to  rot  in  state,  or  have  encased  them  in  dull  propriety.  They 
do  not  look  to  do  great  things,  or  to  see  great  things.     They  do  not 
expect  many  conversions ;  if  many  did  happen,  they  would  be  alarmed 
and  suspicious.     They  do  not  expect  their  pastor's  ministry  to  be  with 
power;  and  if  it  were  attended  with  manifest  effect  they  would  be  greatly 
disturbed,   and  perhaps   would  complain  that   he   created  too  much 
excitement.    The  worst  of  it  is,  that  do-nothing  churches  are  usually 
very  jealous  lest  any  should  encroach  on  their  domains.     Our  churches 
sometime  ago  appeared  to  imagine  that  a  whole  district  of  this  teeming 
city  belonged  to  them  to  cultivate  or  neglect,  as  their  monopolising 
decree  might  be.     If  anybody  attempted  to  raise  a  new  interest,  or  even 
to  build  a  preaching  station,  within  half  a  mile  of  them,  they  resented 
it  as  a  most  pernicious  poacliing  upon  their  manor.    They  did  nothing 
themselves,  and  were  very  much  afraid  lest  anybody  should  supplant 
them.    Like  the  lawyers  of  old,  who  took  away  the  key  of  knowledge, 
they  entered  not  in  themselves,  and  them  that  were  entering  in  they 
hindered.    That  day,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  has  gone  once  for  all ;  yet  too 
much  of  the  old  spirit  lingers  in  certain  quarters.    It  is  high  time 
that  each  church  should  feel  that  if  it  does  not  work,  the  sole  reason 
for  its  existence  is  gone.    The  reason  for  a  church  being  a  chnrch  lies 
in  nmtual  edification  and  in  the  conversion  of  sinners  ;  and  if  these  two 
ends  arc  not  really  answered   by  a  church,  it  is   a   mere  name,  a 
hindrance,  an  evil,  a  nuisance ;  like  the  salt  which  has  lost  its  savour, 
it  is  neither  fit  for  the  land  nor  yet  for  the  dunghill.     May  we  all  in 
our  church  fellowship  be  active  in  the  energy  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 
yiwy  none  of  us  be  dead  members  of  the  living  body,  mere  impediments 
to  the  royal  host,  baggage  to  be  dragged  rather  than  warriors  pnshing 
on  the  war.     Alay  we,  eveiy  one  of  us,  be  soldiers  filled  with  vigour  to 
the  fulness  of  our  manhood,  by  the  eternal  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit; 
i.nd  m:iy  we  be  resolved  that  any  portion  of  the  church  which  does 
not  uplift  its  banner  of  service  shall  not  long  number  us  among  its 
adherents.    Be  it  ours  to  determine  that  whether  others  will  or  will  not 


THE  CHURCH  AS  bHE  SHOULD  BE.  197 

8er?e  God  and  extend  the  kingdom  of  his  dear  Son,  we  will,  in  his 
name  and  strength,  contend  even  to  the  death.  Unsheath  your  swords, 
ye  soldiers  of  the  cross ;  arise  from  your  slumbers,  ye  careless  ones, 
gird  on  your  swords  and  prepare  for  the  war.  The  Lord  has  redeemed 
yon  by  bis  blood,  not  that  you  might  sleep,  but  that  you  might  fight 
for  the  glory  of  his  name. 

Does  not  the  description,  "  an  army  with  banners,'*  imply  a  degree  of 
eonfiderue?  It  is  not  an  army  retiring  from  the  foe,  and  willing 
enoQgh  to  hide  its  colours  to  complete  its  escape.  An  army  that  is 
afi-aid  to  venture  out  into  the  open,  keeps  its  banners  out  of  the  gleam 
of  the  sun.  Banners  uplifbea  are  the  sign  of  a  fearlessness  which 
rather  courts  than  declines  the  conflict.  Ho  I  warriors  of  the  cross, 
nofurl  the  gospel's  ancient  standard  to  the  breeze ;  we  will  teach  the 
foeman  what  strength  there  is  in  hands  and  hearts  that  rally  to  the 
Christ  of  God.  TJp  with  the  standard,  ye  brave  men  at  arms ;  let  all 
eves  see  it ;  and  if  the  foemen  glare  like  lions  on  it,  we  will  call  upon 
tlie  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  to  lead  the  van,  and  we  will  follow 
vith  his  word  like  a  two-edged  sword  in  our  hands : — 

**  Stand  up !  stand  up  for  Jesus ! 

Ye  soldiers  of  the  cross ! 
Lift  high  his  royal  banner ; 

It  must  not  suffer  loss : 
From  victory  unto  victory 

His  army  shall  he  lead. 
Till  every  foe  is  vanquished. 

And  Christ  is  Lord  indeed.** 

We  cannot  place  too  much  reliance  in  the  gospel ;  our  weakness  is  that 
we  are  so  oiffident  and  so  apt  to  look  somewhere  else  ibr  strength. 
We  do  not  believe  in  the  gospel  as  to  its  power  over  the  sons  of  men 
as  we  should  believe  in  it.    Too  often  we  preach  it  with  a  coward's 
voice.     Have  I  not  heard  sermons  commencing  with  abject  apologies 
for  the  preacher's  daring  to  open  his  mouth ;  apologies  for  his  youth, 
for  his  assertions,  for  his  venturing  to  intrude  upon  men's  consciences, 
and  I  know  not  what  else  ?  Can  God  own  ambassadors  of  this  cowardly, 
cringing  breed,  who  mistake  fear  of  men  for  humility?  Will  our  Captain 
honour  such  caipet-knights,  who  apologise  for  bearing  arms  ?    I  have 
heard  that  of  old  the  ambassadors  of  Holland,  and  some  other  states, 
when  introduced  to  his  celestial  majesty,  the  brother  of  the  son  and 
cousin  of  the  moon,  the  Emperor  of  China,  were  expected  to  come 
crawling  on  their  hands  and  knees  up  to  the  throne ;  but  when  our 
ambassadors  went  to  that  flowery  land,  they  declined  to  pay  such  hu- 
miliating homage  to  his  impertinent  majesty,  and  informed  him  that 
they  would  stand  upright  in  his  presence,  as  free  men  should  do,  or  else 
they  would  decline  all  dealings  with  him,  and  in  all  probability  his 
majesty  would  hear  from  a  cannon's  mouth  far  less  gentle  notes  than 
he  wotdd  care  for.    Even  thus,  though  we  may  well  humble  ourselves 
as  men,  yet  as  ambassadors  of  God  we  cannot  crouch  to  the  sons  of 
men,  to  ask  them  what  message  would  suite  them  best.    It  must  not, 
ihall  not,  be  that  we  shall  smoothe  our  tongues  and  tone  our  doctrines 
to  the  taste  of  the  age.  The  gospel  that  we  preach,  although  the  worldly 
wiae  man  despises  it,  is  God's  gospel  for  all  that.     *'  Ah,"  says  he^ 


198  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

"tlicrc  is  nothing  in  it:  science  has  overthrown  it."  "And,"  says 
another,  *'  this  *^ospel  is  but  so  much  platitude ;  we  have  heai'd  it  over 
and  over  a;:.^ain.*'  Ah,  sir,  and  though  it  be  platitude  to  you,  and  von 
dec-hire  it  to  be  contemptible,  you  shall  hear  it  or  nothing  else  from  us; 
*•  for  it  is  the  power  of  God,  and  the  wisdom  of  God."  In  its  simplicity 
lies  its  majosty  and  its  power.  "We  are  not  ashamed  of  the  gospel  of 
Christ.  "  God  forbid  that  we  should  glory,  save  in  the  cross  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ."  We  will  proclaim  it  again  with  confidence;  we 
will  bring  forth  once  more  the  selfsame  truth  as  of  old  ;  and  as  the 
barley  loaf  smote  the  tent  of  Midian,  so  that  it  lay  along,  so  shall 
the  gospel  overturn  its  adversaries.  The  broken  pitcher,  and  the 
flaming  torches,  and  the  old  war  cry,  "  The  sword  of  the  I^ord,  and  of 
Gideon,**  shall  yet  fill  the  foeman  with  dismay.  Let  us  but  be  bold  for 
Jesus,  and  we  shall  sec  what  his  arm  can  do.  The  pospel  is  the  voice 
of  the  eternal  God,  and  has  in  it  the  same  power  as  tliat  which  brought 
the  world  out  of  nothing,  and  which  shall  raise  the  dead  from  their 
graves  at  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man.  The  gospel,  the  word  of  God, 
can  no  more  return  to  him  void  than  can  the  snow  go  back  to  heaven, 
or  the  rain-drops  climb  again  the  path  by  which  they  descended  from 
the  clouds.  Have  iaith  in  God's  word,  faith  in  the  presence  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  faitli  in  the  reigning  Saviour,  faith  in  the  fulfilment  of  the  ever- 
lasting ])uii)oses,  and  you  will  be  full  of  confidence,  and  like  an  army 
with  banners. 

Once  more,  an  army  with  banners  may  signify  the  constancy  and  perse- 
verance in  holding  the  truth.  We  see  before  us  not  an  army  that  has 
lost  its  banners,  that  has  suffered  its  colours  to  be  rent  away  from  it^ 
but  an  army  which  bears  aloft  its  ancient  standard  and  swears'by  it  still. 
Let  us  be  very  earnest  to  maintain  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints. 
Let  us  not  give  up  this  doctrine  or  that,  at  the  dictates  of  policy  or 
fashion ;  but  whatsoever  Jesus  saith  unto  us,  let  us  receive  it  as  the 
word  of  life.  Great  injury  may  be  done  to  a  church  ere  it  knows  it,  if  it 
shall  tolerate  error  here  and  there ;  for  false  doctrine,  like  the  little 
leaven,  soon  leavens  the  whole  lump.  If  the  church  be  taught  of  ths 
Spirit  to  know  the  voice  of  the  Good  Shepherd,  a  stranger  it  will 
not  follow  ;  for  it  knows  not  the  voice  of  strangers.  This  is  part  of 
the  education  Avhich  Christ  gives  to  his  people:  '*  All  thy  people  shall 
be  Umght  of  the  Lord."  They  shall  know  the  truth,  and  the  truth 
shall  make  them  free.  May  we,  as  a  church,  hold  fast  the  things  which 
we  have  learned  and  have  been  taught  of  God ;  and  may  we  be  preserved 
from  the  philosophies  and  refinings  of  these  last  days.  If  we  give  up 
the  things  which  are  verily  believed  among  us  we  shall  lose  our  power, 
and  the  enemy  alone  will  be  pleased ;  but  if  we  maintain  them,  the 
maintenance  of  the  old  faith,  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  shall  make  us 
strong  in  the  Lord  and  in  the  power  of  his  might.  Wrap  the  colours 
round  you,  ye  standard  bearers,  in  the  day  of  danger,  and  die  sooner 
than  give  them  up.  Life  is  little  compared  Avith  God's  lovingkindness, 
and  that  is  the  sure  heritage  of  the  brave  defender  of  the  faith.  Thus 
resolute  for  truth,  the  church  becomes  an  army  with  banners. 

IL  Secondly,  the  church  is  said  to  be  terrible.  To  whom  is  she 
terrible  ?  She  should  be  amiable,  and  she  is.  May  God  grant  that  our 
church  m:iy  never  be  terrible  to  young  converts  by  moroseness  and 


THE  CHUBCH  AS  SUE  SHOULD  BE.  TJl) 

nncharitablenesB.  Whenever  I  hear  of  candidates  being  alarmed  at  comin;;^ 
before  our  elders,  or  seeing  the  pastor,  or  making  confession  of  faith 
before  the  chnrch,J  wish  I  could  say  to  them:  " Dismiss  your  fear:?, 
beloved  ones ;  we  shall  be  glad  to  see  you,  and  you  will  find  your  inter- 
conrsc  with  us  a  pleasure  rather  than  a  trial.'*  So  far  from  wishing  to 
repel  you,  if  jou  really  do  love  the  Saviour,  we  shall  be  glad  enough  to 
welcome  you.  If  we  cannot  see  in  you  the  evidence  of  a  great  change, 
we  shall  kindly  point  out  to  you  our  fears,  and  shall  be  thrice  happy  to 
point  you  to  the  Saviour ;  but  be  sure  of  this,  if  you  have  really  believed 
in  Jesus,  you  shall  not  find  the  church  terrible  to  you.  Harsh  judg- 
ments are  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  Christ  and  the  nature  of  the  gospel ; 
where  they  are  the  rule,  the  church  is  despicable  rather  tlian  terrible. 
Bigotry  and  uncharitableness  arc  indications  of  weakness,  not  of 
strengUi. 

To  what  and  to  whom  is  the  church  terrible  ?    I  answer,  first,  in  a 
certain  sense  she  is  terrible  to  all  ungodly  men,    A  true  church  in  her 
holiness  and  testimony  is  very  terrible  to  sinners.    The  ungodly  care 
not  a  rush  about  a  mock  church,  nor  about  sham  Christians  ;  but  a 
really  earnest  Christian  makes  the  ungodly  abashed.    AVc  have  known 
some  who  could  not  use  the  foul  language  which  they  were  accustomed 
to  when  they  were  in  the  presence  of  godly  men  and  women,  thougli 
these  persons  had  no  authority  or  position  or  rank.     Even  in  the  most 
ribald  company,  when  a  Christian  of  known  consistency  of  character 
has  wisely  spoken  the  word  of  reproof,  a  solemn  abaslmient  comes  over 
the  majority  of  those  present ;  their  consciences  have  borne  witness 
against  them,  and  they  have  felt  how  awful  goodness  is.    Not  that  avc 
are  ever  to   try  and  impress  others  with  any  dread  of  us  ;   sncli 
an  attempt  would  be  ridiculed,  and  end  in  deserved  failure;  but  tlie 
influence  which  we  would  describe  flows  natui-ally  out  of  a  godly 
life.      Majesty  of  character  never  lies  in   aftectation  of  demeanour, 
but  in  solidity  of  virtue.     If  there  be  real  goodness  in  us — if  we 
really,  fervently,  zealously  love  the  right,  and  hate  the  evil — the  out- 
flow of  our  life  almost  without  a  word  will  judge  the  ungodly — and 
condemn  them  in  their  heart  of  hearts.     Holy  living  is  the  weightiest 
ocmdemnation  of  sin.    We  have  heard  of  an  ungodly  son  who  could  not 
bear  to  live  in  the  house  where  his  departed  father  had  in  his  lifetime 
to  devoutly  prayed ;  every  room,  and  every  piece  of  furniture  reproved 
him  for  forsaking  his  father's  God.    We  have  read  of  others  who  were 
wont  to  dread  the  sight  of  certain  godly  men  Avhose  holy  lives  held 
them  more  in  check  than  the  laws  of  the  land.    The  bad  part  of  this  is 
that  the  terror  of  the  ungodly  suggests  to  them  an  unhallowed  retort 
npon  their  reprovers,  and  becomes  the  root  out  of  which  springs 
pereecution.     Those  whom  the  ungodly  fear  because  they  condemn 
them  by  their  character,  they  try  to  put  out  of  the  world  if  they  c;m,  or 
to  bespatter  them  with  slander  if  they  cannot  smite  them  with  the  hand 
of  cruelty.    The  martyrdom  of  saints  is  the  result  of  the  darkness 
hating  the  light,  because  the  light  makes  manifest  its  evil  deeds.    There 
will  be  always  in   proportion  to  the  real  holiness,  earnestness,  and 
Cbristlikeness  of  a  church  something  terrible  in  it  to  the   perverse 
g^eration  in  which  it  is  placed ;  it  will  dread  it  as  it  docs  the  all- 
fwealing  day  of  judgment. 


200  METROPOLITAN  TABEllXACLE  PULPIT. 

So  is  there  something  terrible  in  a  living  church  to  all  errarists.  Just 
now  two  armies  have  encamped  against  the  host  of  God,  opposed  to 
each  other,  but  confederates  against  the  church  of  God.  Ritualism, 
with  its  superstition,  its  priestcraft,  its  sacramental  efficacy,  its 
hatred  of  the  doctrines  of  grace ;  and  on  the  other  side  Rationalism,  with 
its  sneering  unbelief  and  absurd  speculations.  These,  like  Herod  and 
Pilate,  agree  in  nothing  but  in  opposition  to  Christ ;  they  have  one 
common  dread,  altliough  they  may  not  confess  it.  They  do  not  dread 
those  platform  speeches  in  which  they  are  so  furiously  denounced  at 
public  meetings,  nor  those  philosophical  discussions  in  which  ther  are 
overthrown  by  argument;  but  they  hate,  but  they  fear,  and  there- 
fore abuse  and  pretend  to  despise,  the  prayerful,  zealous,  plain, 
simple  preaching  of  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  This  is  ft 
weapon  against  whicli  they  cannot  stand — the  weapon  of  the  old 
gospel.  In  the  days  of  Luther  it  did  marvels;  it  wrought  wonders  in 
the  days  of  Whitfield  and  Wesley :  it  has  often  restored  the  ark  of  the 
Lord  to  our  land,  and  it  will  again.  It  has  lost  none  of  its  ancient 
power,  and  thereft)re  is  it  the  terror  of  the  adversaries  of  Christ 

**  Thine  aspect's  awful  majesty 
Doth  strike  thy  foes  with  fear ; 
As  nriiiies  do  when  banners  fly, 
And  martial  flags  appear. 

How  does  thine  armour,  glittVing  bright. 

Their  frighted  spirits  auell ! 
The  weapons  of  tliy  warhke  might 

Defy  the  gates  of  hell.'* 

Even  to  Satan  himself  the  church  of  God  is  terrible.  He  might, 
he  thinks,  deal  with  individuals,  but  when  these  individuals  strengthen 
each  other  by  mutual  converse  and  prayer,  when  they  are  bound  to  each 
other  in  holy  love,  and  make  a  temple  in  which  Christ  dwells,  then  is 
8atan  hard  put  to  it.  0  brethren  and  sisters,  it  is  not  every  cbnrch 
that  is  terrible  thus,  but  it  is  a  church  of  God  in  whicli  there  is  the  life 
of  God,  and  the  love  of  God  ;  a  church  in  which  there  is  the  uplifted 
banner,  the  banner  of  the  cross,  high-held  amid  those  various  bannerets 
of  truthful  doctrine  and  spiritual  grace,  of  which  I  have  just  now 
t;])oken. 

III.  We  will  take  a  third  point;  and  that  is,  WHY  is  the  CHUBCH 
OF  Christ  terriblk  as  ax  army  with  bana'ers  ?  Why  is  it  ter- 
rible because  of  its  banners?  The  whole  passage  seems  to  say  that 
the  church  is  terrible  as  an  army,  but  that  to  the  fullest  degree  she 
owes  her  terribleness  to  her  banners.  **  Terrible  as  an  army  with 
banners."  I  believe  the  great  banner  of  the  Christian  church  to  be  tic 
uplifted  Saviour.  *'  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw  all 
men  unto  me."  Around  him  then  we  gather.  **  Unto  him  shall  the 
gathering  of  the  people  be."  As  the  brazen  serpent  in  the  midst  oi 
the  cam})  in  the  wilderness, 'so  is  the  Saviour  lifted  high,  our  banner. 
The  atoning  sacrifice  of  Christ  is  the  great  central  standard  of  all 
really  regenerate  men.  and  this  is  the  main  source  of  dismay  to  Israel's 
foes. 

But  we  shall  take  the  thoughts  in  order.  The  church  herself  i? 
terrible,    and    then    terrible    because    of    her    banners.      BiethreDi 


THE  CHURCH  AS  SHE  SHOULD  BE.  201 

ic  army  itself  is  terrible.  Why?  First,  because  it  consists 
r  elect  people.  Remember  how  Haman's  wife  enquired  concerning 
[ordecai  whether  he  belonged  to  the  seed  of  the  Jews;  for  if 
e  did,  then  she  foretold  that  her  husband's  scheme  would  prove  a 
ulnre.  "  If  Mordecai  be  of  the  seed  of  the  Jews,  before  whom  thou 
ast  bep^un  to  &11,  thou  shalt  not  prevail  against  him,  but  shalt  surely 
ill  before  him."  Now,  the  church  of  God  as  made  up  of  men  and 
romen  is  nothing  more  than  any  other  organisation.  Look  ut  its 
xtarior,  and  you  see  in  it  few  persons  of  great  education  and  a 
;reat  many  of  no  education ;  here  and  there  a  wealthy  and  powerful 
lerson,  but  hundreds  who  are  poor  and  despised.  It  does  not  possess 
a  itself,  naturally,  the  elements  of  strength,  according  to  ordinary 
eckoning.  Indeed,  its  own  confession  is  that  in  itself  it  is  perfect 
reakness,  a  flock  of  sheep  among  wolves  ;  but  here  lies  its  strength, 
hat  each  of  the  true  memoers  of  the  church  are  of  the  seed  royal ;  they 
ire  God's  chosen  ones,  the  seed  of  the  woman  ordained  of  old  to  break 
be  head  of  Satan  and  all  his  serpent  seed.  They  nre  the  weakness  of 
Jod,  but  they  are  stronger  than  men ;  he  has  determined  with  the 
hings  that  are  not  to  bring  to  nought  the  things  that  arc.  As  the 
3anaanitc8  feared  the  chosen  race  of  Israel  because  the  rumour  of  them 
lad  gone  forth  among  the  people,  and  the  terror  of  Jehovah  was  upon 
them;  so  is  it  with  the  hosts  of  evil.  They  have  dreamed  their  dreams, 
as  thcMidianite  did,  and  valiant  men  like  Gideon  can  hear  them  telling 
it;  the  barley  cake  shall  fall  upon  the  royal  tent  of  Midian,  and  smite 
it  till  it  lies  along ;  the  sword  of  the  Lord,  and  of  Gideon,  shall  rout 
the  foe.  The  elect  shall  overcome  through  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  and 
none  shall  say  them  nay.  Ye  are  a  royal  priesthood,  a  peculiar  people, 
a  chosen  peneration ;  and  in  you  the  living  God  will  gloriously  declare 
hig  sovereign  grace. 

The  church,  again,  consists  of  a  pray  in ff  people.  Now  prayer  is  that 
vhich  links  weakness  with  infinite  strength.  A  people  who  can  pray 
can  never  be  overcome,  because  their  reserve  forces  can  never  be  ex- 
hausted. Go  into  battle,  my  brother;  and  if  tou  be  vanquished  with 
the  strength  you  have,  prayer  shall  call  up  another  legion,  yea,  twenty 
legions  of  angels,  and  the  foe  shall  marvel  to  see  undeleated  adversaries 
«till  holding  the  field.  If  ten  thousand  saints  were  burned  to-morrow, 
their  dying  prayers  would  make  the  church  rise  like  a  phoenix  from  her 
ashes.  Who,  therefore,  can  stand  against  a  people  whose  prayers  enlist 
God  in  their  quarrel?  "The  Lord  of  hosts  is  with  us;  the  God  of 
iwoh  is  our  refuge."  We  cry  unto  the  Lord,  «nd  he  heareth  us ;  he 
lieaketh  through  the  ranks  of  the  foe;  he  ^-ivcth  us  triumph  in  the 
fcy  of  battle :  therefore,  terrible  as  an  army  with  banners  are  those  who 
wield  the  weapon  of  all-prayer. 

Again,  a  true  church  is  based  upon  eternal  truth.  I  need  not  quote 
toyoa  the  old  Latin  proverb  which  says  that  truth  is  mighty  and  must 
fKTai).  Truth  is,  and  truth  shall  be.  It  alone  is  substance,  and  must 
outlast  the  lapse  of  ages.  Falsehoods  are  soon  swollen  to  their  perfec- 
tion of  development,  like  the  bubbles  with  rainbow  hues  which  children 
How,  but  they  are  dispersed  as  easily  as  they  are  fashioned ;  they  are 
Aildreii  of  the  hour,  while  truth  is  the  offsprin?^  and  heir  of  eternity. 
Widiood  dies,  pierced  through  the  heart  by  the  arrows  of  time,  but 


202  METROPOLITAN  TABBBj^ACLE  PULPIT. 

troth,   in  her  impenetrable  mail  bids   defiance   to   all    foes.     Men 
who  love  the  truth  are  building  gold  and  silver,  and  precions  stones; 
and  though  their  architecture  may  progress  but  slowly,  it  is  built  for 
eternity.     Ramparts  of  truth  may  often  be  assailed,  but  they  will  ncTer 
be  carried  by  the  foe.     Establish  a  power  among  men  of  the  most 
ostentatious  and  apparently  stable  kind,  but  rest  assured  that  if  untruth 
bo  at  the  root  of  it,  it  must  perish,  sooner  or  later;  only  truth  is  in- 
vincibl*,  eternal,  supreme.     Tiie  fear  of  the  true  church  and  the  dread 
thereof  falls  upon  the  enemy,  because  they  have  wit  enough  left  to 
know  that  truth  has  an  abiding  and  indestructible  power.    I  was  verv 
much  amused,  the  other  day,  to  read  a  criticism  by  an  eminent  infidel, 
whose  name  would  be  well  known  if  I  were  to  mention  it,  in  which  he 
spenks  very  highly  of  the  exceeding  great  skill  and  wisdom,   and 
common  sense,  always  exhibited  in  the  arrangements  of  the  Romao 
Catholic  Church  in  opposition  to  Infidelity,  and  of  the  imbecility  and 
childishncKs  manifested  by  Christian  ministers  in  assailing  Rationalism 
with  their  dogmatism,  etc.     I  was  very  glad  to  receive  information  60 
valuable,  and  I  thought :  "  I  see,  my  friend,  what  kind  of  warfare  yon 
like  best.     You  admire  the  Roman  Catholic  kind  of  fighting,  but  yoa 
do  not  admire  that  which  evangelical  ministers  have  adopted.    It  is  no 
aim  of  ours  to  please  our  enemies  in  our  mode  of  warfare,  but  the 
rcvers^o ;  and  if  we  have  discovered  a  weapon  which  galls  you,  we  will 
use  that  same  arm  more  freely  than  ever."    There  is  a  story  of  an 
ollicer  who  was  rather  awkward  in  his  manners,  and,  upon  some  great 
occasion,  almost  fell  over  his  sword  in  his  haste.    His  majesty  remarked, 
**  Your  sword  seems  to  be  very  much  in  the  way."     **  So  your  majesty's 
enemies  have  very  often  felt,'*  was  the  reply.     So,  when  the  enemies  of 
the  truth  are  finding  fault  with  our  procedure,  we  accept  their  verdict 
when  Avc  have  turned  it  the  other  way  upwards.     If  they  do  not  admire 
our  mode  of  warfare,  we  think  it  is  in  all  probability  about  the  best 
method    we   could   adopt.     Wo  would   still,  God   granting  us  help, 
continue   preaching   the   **  foolishness "   of  the   gospel,   and   deliyer 
again  and  again  the  old  truth,  that  God  was  in  Christ  reconciling  the 
world  unto  himself,  not  imj>uting  their  trespasses  unto  them.    Instead 
of  lifting  up  a  new  banner  (which  would  better  please  our  adversaries), 
it  shall  be  the  old  banner  still — *•  2sone  but  Christ.'*    "  By  grace  are  ye 
saved  through  fiiith  ;  and  that;  not  of  yourselves  :  it  is  the  gift  of  Goi" 
Salvatiun  is  by  free  favour,  through  the  expiatory  sacrifice  of  Jesos 
Christ  our  Lord. 

We  arc  now  to  observe,  that  the  chief  glory  and  majesty  of  the  church 
lies  mainly  in  the  banner  which  she  carries.  What  cause  for  terror  is 
there  in  the  banner  ?  We  roj)ly,  the  enemies  of  Christ  dread  the  cross, 
because  thev  know  what  the  cross  has  done.  Wherever  the  crucified 
Jesus  has  been  preachoil,  false  systems  have  tottered  to  their  falL 
D.:gon  has  always  fallen  before  the  ark  of  the  Lord.  Rage  the  most 
violent  is  excited  by  the  doctrine  of  the  atonement,  a  rage  in  which  the 
first  cause  for  wrath  is  fear. 

The  tcrribleness  of  the  church  lies  in  her  banners,  because  those 
banners  put  strength  into  her.  Drawing  near  to  the  standard  of  the 
cross  the  weakest  soldier  becomes  strong:  he  who  might  have  played 
the  coward  becomes  a  hero  when  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus  is  felt 


THE  CHURCH  AS  SHE  SHOULD  BE.  203 

rith  power  in  his  soul.  Martyrs  are  bom  and  nurtured  at  the  cross, 
t  is  the  blood  of  Jesus  which  is  the  life-blood  of  self-denial ;  we 
an  die  because  our  Saviour  died.  The  presence  of  Alexander  made 
be  Greeks  more  than  giants :  the  presence  of  our  Redeemer  makes 
itelievers  swifter  than  eagles,  and  stronger  than  Iiotjs. 

Moreover,  the  powers  of  evil  tremble  at  the  old  standard,  because 
they  have  a  presentiment  of  its  future  complete  triumph.  It  is  de- 
creed of  God,  and  fixed  by  his  predestinating  purpose,  that  all  flesh 
Bhall  see  the  salvation  of  God.  Jesus  must  reign  ;  the  crucified  One 
must  conquer.  The  hands  nailed  to  the  wood  must  sway  the  sceptre 
of  all  kingdoms.  Like  potters'  vessels  dashed  to  pieces,  must  all  the 
might  and  majesty  of  men  be,  that  shall  oppose  the  crown  and  sceptre 
of  Christ's  kingdom.  In  Christ  preached  lies  the  battle-axe  and 
weapons  of  war,  with  which  the  Lord  will  work  out  his  everlasting 
decrees.  The  church  with  the  name  of  Immanuel  emblazoned  on  her 
bwmer,  which  it  is  her  duty  to  keep  well  displayed,  and  lifted  high,  is 
aire  to  be  terrible  to  all  the  powers  of  darkness. 

We  will  close  with  one  or  two  reflections.  Will  each  one  here  say  to 
himself:  "  An  army,  a  company  of  warriors,  am  I  one  of  them  ?  Am  I 
a  soldier?  I  have  entered  the  church  ;  I  make  a  profession ;  but  am  I 
really  a  soldier?  Do  I  fight  ?  Do  I  endure  hardness  ?  Am  I  a  mere 
carpet-knight,  a  mere  lie-a-bed  soldier,  one  of  those  who  are  pleased  to 
put  on  regimentals  in  order  to  adorn  myself  with  a  profession  without 
ever  going  to  the  war  ? " 

*'  Am  I  a  soldier  of  the  cross — a  follower  of  the  Lamb  ?  '* 

Pass  the  question  round,  my  dear  brethren  and  sisters :  Are  you  soldiers 
who  engage  in  actual  fighting  for  Jesus,  under  his  banner  ?  Do  you 
nllj  round  it  ?  Do  you  know  the  standard  ?  Do  you  love  it  ?  Could 
joa  die  in  defence  of  it  ?  Is  the  person  of  Jesus  dearest  of  all  things  to 
yon?  Do  you  value  the  doctrine  of  the  atoning  substitution  ?  Do  you 
feel  your  own  energy  and  power  awakened  in  the  defence  of  that,  and 
for  the  love  of  that  ?  Let  not  one  go  away  without  making  the 
searching  question. 

And  then  "  terrible."  Am  I  in  any  way  terrible  through  being  a 
Christian  ?  Is  there  any  power  in  my  life  that  would  condemn  a  sinner  ? 
Any  holiness  about  me  that  would  make  a  wicked  man  feel  ill  at  ease  in 
my  company  ?  Is  there  enough  of  Christ  about  my  life  to  make  me  like 
alight  in  the  midst  of  the  darkness?  or  is  it  very  likely  that  if  I  wei-e 
to  live  in  a  house  the  inhabitants  would  never  see  any  difference  between 
me  and  the  ungodly  ?  Oh,  how  many  Christians  there  are  who  need  to 
'^ar  a  label  round  their  necks:  you  would  never  know  that  they  were 
Ohriatians  without  it  I  They  make  long  prayers  and  great  pretences, 
bat  they  are  Christians  in  nothing  but  the  name.  May  your  life  and 
mine  never  be  thus  despicable,  but  may  we  convince  gainsayers  that 
there  is  a  power  in  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  make  them  confess, 
4at  they,  not  having  it,  are  losing  a  great  blessing. 

One  other  thought.  If  I  am  not  a  soldier,  if  1  am  not  a  servant  of 
Christ  in  very  truth,  and  yet  I  come  to  the  place  of  worship  where 
Christians  meet,  and  where  Christ  is  preached,  the  day  will  be  when  the 
church  of  God  will  be  very  terrible  to  me.    I  will  suppose  that  there  is 


204  METROPOLITAN  TABEIINACLE  PULPIT. 

a  pcFFon  listening:  to  this  sermon  who  has  been  hearing  the  pn^eachiog 
of  the  word  in  this  place  now  for  many  years.     Imagine  that  thelait 
day  is  come.     You  are  brou;j:ht  before  the  great  judgment-seat,  and  this 
is  the  (incstion : — "Did  this  sinner  hear  the  gospel  faithfully  preached? 
lie  is  unitedly,  he  has  rejected  Clirist:  does  he  deserve  to  be  cast  away? 
Did  he  really  hear  the  gospel,  and  did  he  reject  it?  "     If  I  am  asked  to 
give  niy  witness,  I  must  say,  *'  To  the  best  of  my  ability,  I  tried  to  tell 
him  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ."     "  Was  this  sinner  prayed  for  by  the 
church  ? "    There  are  many  of  the  members  of  this  church  who  would 
feel  bound  to  declare,  "  Yes,  Lord,  we  did  pray  for  him."     Yes,  and 
all  of  us  would  say,  **  If  we  did  not  pray  for  him  by  name,  we  included 
him  in  the  general  company  of  those  who  attended  upon  the  means  of 
grace,  for  whom  we  made  a  constant  intercession."     Is   there  any 
member  of  the  church  who  would  be  able  to  make  an  apology*  for  the 
rejector  of  Christ  ?     He  has  wilfully  rejected  the  Saviour,  he  knowingly 
continued  in  sin.    Will  anybody  be  an  advocate  for  him?     Xot  one 
tongue  would  be  able  to  excuse  you  at  the  judgment,  or  to  argne 
aj::ainst  the  righteous  sentence  of  God.    When  the  great  Judge  con- 
demns the  sinner  to  be  taken  away  to  execution,  the  whole  church  with 
whom  that  sinner  has  worshii)ped,  and  in  whose  presence  that  sinner 
has  ejected  Christ,  will  become  *'  terrible  as  an  army  with  banners;" 
lor  all  its  voices  will  sav,  "  Amen,  Amen,  Amen !  Thou  art  righteous, 
0  Lord." 

This  is  no  picture  drawn  from  fancy.  Know  ye  not  that  the  saints 
shall  judge  the  world?  They  shall  sit  as  co-assessors  with  the  Son  of 
God  at  the  last  great  assize,  and  shall  say,  '*  Amen  ! "  to  every  verdict 
which  proceedeth  from  his  mouth.  0  that  the  thought  of  this  might  be 
blessed  of  God's  Spirit,  so  as  to  lead  many  of  you  to  be  reconcUedto 
God.  Jesus  is  still  the  loving  Mediator,  and  a  full  surrender  of 
yourselves  to  him  will  assuredly  save  you.  Whosoever  believeth  on 
him  is  not  condemned;  and  this  is  to  believe  on  him — that  ye  trust  in 
him,  and  know  that  God  hath  j»iven  unto  us  eternal  life — and  this  life 
is  in  his  Son  who  suffered  in  the  stead  of  sinners,  that  whofloeYcr 
believeth  in  him  might  not  i)erish,  bub  have  everlasting  life.  Hfi 
Lord  bless  vou,  for  the  Lord  Jesus'  sake.   Amen. 


Mr.  Srt  rgeon  has  boon  laid  asido  by  sickness  for  two  Sabbaths,  but  i»  bo* 
rocoverin;^',  .;nfl  hopos  to  bo  ngain  in  tlie  pulpit  next  Lord*»-day.  He  earoMtlf  bflg' 
llio  prayers  of  loving  friends  that  his  fn.»quent  infirmities  ma j  be  sanotifiad to tlM 
glory  of  God  and  the  ja-ofit  of  the  church;  and  then,  if  it  were  the  Lord's  wift 

cfTectu:jlly  removed. 


Ictrffpfitan  il^ahrnatlc  iuljit. 


THE  TOUCHSTONE  OF  GODLY  SINCEKITY. 


%  ^mmn 


DELIVERED  BY 

C.  H.  STURGEON, 

AT    THE    HETIIOFOLITAN    TABERNACLE,     NKWINGTON. 


**  Will  he  always  call  upon  God  ?*' — Job  xxvii,  10. 

K  Job  resumes  his  address  in  this  chapter,  he  appeals  to  God  in  a 
solemn  matter  as  to  the  truth  of  all  that  he  had  spoken.  No  less 
mently  does  he  assert  his  innocence  of  any  signal  crime,  or  his 
nousness  of  any  secret  guile,  \vhich  could  account  for  his  being 
k1  with  extraordinary  suffering.  I  do  not  know  that  his  language 
tsarily  implies  any  culpable  self-righteousness ;  it  appears  to  me 
nr  that  he  had  good  cause  to  defend  himself  against  the  bitter  insinua- 

of  his  unfriendly  friends.  Possibly  his  tune  was  rash,  but  his 
ling  was  right.  He  might  well  feel  the  justice  of  vindicating  his 
icter  before  men;  but  it  was  a  pity  if  in  so  doing  he  seemed  to 
•  a  protest  of  complete  purity  in  the  sight  of  God.  You  may  re- 
ber  how  Paul  under  equal,  if  not  exactly  similar,  provocation, 
)ered  his  speech  and  guarded  against  the  danger  of  misconstruction. 
B  he  wrote  to  the  Corinthians:  "With  me  it  is  a  very  small  thing 
I  should  be  judged  of  you,  or  of  man's  judgment :  yea,  I  judge  not 
)  own  self.  For  I  know  nothing  by  myself  [or  of  myself,  as  though 
lould  say,  *  My  conscience  does  not  accuse  me  of  wrong '] ;  yet  am  I 
ereby  Jus/tfied.*'  But  the  two  holy  men  are  very  like  in  one  respect, 
nst  iis  Paul,  in  the  struggles  of  the  spirit  against  the  flesh,  faced  the 

and  mounted  guard  a^rainst  it,  "  lest  that  by  any  means,  when  I  have 
:hed  to  others,  I  myself  shall  be  a  castaway;"  so  Job  lays  bare 
?e  his  own  eyes,  and  paints  to  the  view  of  those  who  heard  him,  the 
irps  of  a  hypocrite,  lest  by  any  means  he  should  turn  out  to  be  such, 
rriblc  language  he  describes  and  denounces  the  hypocrite's  flattering 

and  withering  doom.  The  suspicion  that  he  himself  could  harbour 
in  pretence  in  his  own  breast,  or  would  pretend  to  be  what  he  was 
was  utterly  abhorrent  to  Job's  honest  heart.  He  placed  himself  at 
)or,  he  laid  down  the  law  with  rigour,  he  weighed  his  case  with 
tncss;  and  so  forestalled  his  adversaries'  verdict,  by  judging  him- 
that  he  might  not  be  judged. 

ho,  then,  is  this  "  wicked  man,"  thus  pourtraycd  before  us  ?  And 
OS.  985-86. 


206  METROPOUTAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

what  arc  the  first  syroptomB  of  his  depravity  ?  We  ask  not  the  qaestion 
idly,  but  in  order  that  we  take  heed  against  the  uprise  of  such  an  ctQ 
in  ourselves, 

*'  Beneath  the  saintly  veil  the  votary  of  sin 
Mny  lurk  unseen  ;  and  to  that  eye  alone 
Which  penetrates  the  heart,  may  stand  revealed,** 

The  hypocrite  is  very  often  an  exceedingly  neat  imitation  of  the  Christian. 
To  the  common  observer  he  is  so  good  a  counterfeit  that  he  entirely 
escapes  suspicion.     Like  base  coins  which  are  cunningly  made,  you  can 
scarcely  detect  them  by  their  ring;  it  is  only  by  more  searching  tests  that 
you  are  able  to  discover  that  they  are  not  pure  gold,  the  current  coin  of 
the  realm.  It  would  be  difficult  to  say  how  nearly  any  man  might  resemble 
a  Christian,  and  yet  not  be  **  in  Christ  a  new  creature;"  or  how  closely 
he  might  imitate  all  the  virtues,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  possess  none 
of  the  iruits  of  the  Spirit  as  before  the  judgment  of  a  heart-searching 
God.    In  almost  all  deceptions  thcro  is  a  weak  point  somewhere.    Never 
is  a  lying  stoiy  told  but,  if  you  be  keen  enough,  you  may  from  internal 
evidence  somewhere  or  other  detect  the  flaw.    Though  Satan  himsdf 
has  been  enc^aged  in  the  manufacture  of  impostures  for  thousands  of 
years,  yet  whether  through  the  lack  of  skill  on  his  part,  or  through  the 
folly  of  his  agents,  he  always  leaves  a  weak  point;  his  flattering  state- 
ments are  a  little  too  strongly  scented  and  smell  of  a  lie ;  and  his  mimic 
Christians  are  so  overdone  in  one  place,  and  slovenly  in  another,  that 
their  falsehood  betrays  itself.    Now,  in  discriminating  between  saints 
and  hypocrites,  one  great  test-point  is  prayer.    "  Behold,  he  prayeth/  was 
to  the  somewhat  sceptical  mind  of  Ananias  demonstration  enoogh  that 
Paul  was  really  converted.    If  he  prays,  it  may  be  safely  inferred  that  the 
breath  of  prayer  arises  from  the  life  of  faith.    The  process  of  spiritual 
quickening  has  at  least  begun.    Hence  the  hypocrite  feigns  to  possess 
tnat  vital  action.    If  the  Christian  prays,  he  will  betake  himself  to  the 
like  exercise :  if  the  Christian  calls  upon  God,  the  deceiver  takes  care 
that  he  will  likewise  make  mention  of  the  name  of  the  Lord.    And  yet, 
between  the  prayer  of  the  truly  converted  man  and  the  prayer  of  the 
hypocrite  there  is  a  diifcrence  as  radical  as  between  life  and  death,  although 
it  is  not  fipparent  to  everybody.    No  one,  it  may  be,  at  first  can  be  aware 
of  it  exc(ept  the  man  himself,  and  sometimes  even  he  scarcely  perceives  it 
3fany  aue  deceived  by  the  fine  expressions,  by  the  apparent  warmth,  and 
V  the  i  excellent  natural  disposition  of  the  hypocrite,  and  they  think 
when  tlivey  hear  him  call  upon  God  that  his  supplications  are  sufficient 
evidence  .that  he  is  truly  a  quickened  child  of  God.     Prayer  is  always 
the  tell-taf 'e  of  spiritual  life.    No  right  prayer,  then  is  there  no  grace 
within.     Sl.'ackcncd  prayer,  then  is  there  a  decrease  of  grace.     Prayer 
stronger,  tht^^i  the  whole  man  also  is  stronger.    Prayer  is  as  good  a  test 
of  spiritual  1   ife  and  health  as  the  pulse  is  of  the  condition  of  the  human 
frame.    Hcn(""?e  I  say  the  hypocrite  imitates  the  action  of  prayer  while 
he  does  not  re    'XiWy  possess  the  spirit  of  prayer. 

Our  text  got  :3  deeper  than  the  surface,  and  enquires  into  vital  matters. 
Prayer  is  a  tes  t,  but  here  is  a  test  for  the  test— a  trial  even  for  prayer 
itself.  "  Will }  le  always  call  upon  God?"  There  is  the  point.  He  does 
call  upon  God  n     ow,  and  he  appears  to  be  intensely  devout ;  he  says  he 


THE  T0UCH8T0NB  OP   GODLY  SINCERITY.  207 

was  converted  in  the  late  revival ;  he  is  very  fervid  in  expression,  and 
very  forward  in  manneiT  at  present.  But  will  it  wear?  Will  it  wear?  Will 
it  last?  His  prajeif  alness  has  sprung  up  like  Jonah's  gourd  in  a  night. 
Will  it  perish  in  a  night  ?  It  is  beautiful  to  look  upon,  like  the  early 
dew  that  glistens  in  the  sunlight  as  though  the  morning  had  sown  the 
earth  with  orient  pearl ;  will  it  pass  away  like  that  dew?  or  will  it  always 
abide  ?  *'  Will  he  always  call  upon  God?  "  There  is  the  point  0  that 
each  one  of  us  now  may  search  ourselves,  and  see  whether  we  have  those 
attributes  connected  with  our  prayer  which  will  prove  us  not  to  be  hypo- 
crites, or  whether,  on  the  contrary,  we  have  those  sad  signs  of  base  dis- 
sembling and  reckless  falsehood  which  will  before  long  discover  us  to  be 
dupes  of  Satan,  impostors  before  heaven. 

**  Will  he  always  call  upon  God?"  This  question,  simple  as  it  is,  I 
think  involves  several  pertinent  enquiries.  The  first  point  which  it 
raises  is  that  of  consistency.  Is  the  prayer  occasional,  or  is  it  con- 
stant? Is  the  exercise  of  devotion  permanent  and  regular,  or  is  it 
spasmodic  and  inconstant  ?  Will  this  man  call  upon  God  in  all  seasons  of 
prayer  f  There  are  certain  times  when  it  is  most  fit  to  pray,  and  a 
genuine  Christian  will  and  must  pray  at  such  periods.  Will  this  hypocrite 
pray  at  all  such  times,  or  will  he  only  select  some  of  the  seasons  for  prayer  ? 
Will  he  only  be  found  praying  at  certain  times  and  in  selected  places?  Will 
he  always,  in  all  fit  times,  be  found  drawing  near  to  God  ?  For  instance, 
he  prayed  standing  at  the  corners  of  the  streets  where  he  was  seen  of 
men :  he  prayed  in  the  synajrogne,  where  everybody  could  mark  his 
fluency  and  his  fervour,  but  will  he  pray  at  home?  Will  he  enter  into 
his  closet  and  shut  to  the  door  ?  Will  he  there  speak  unto  the  Father  who 
beareth  in  secret?  Will  he  there  pour  forth  petitions  as  the  natural 
outflow  of  his  soul  ?  Will  he  walk  the  field  at  eventide^  in  lonely  medita- 
tion, like  Isaac,  and  pray  there  ?  Will  he  go  to  the  housetop  with  Peter, 
and  pray  there?  Will  he  seek  his  chamber  as  Daniel  did,  or  the  soli- 
tude of  the  garden  as  did  our  Lord  ?  Or  is  he  one  who  only  prays  in 
public,  who  has  the  gift  of  prayer  rather  than  the  spirit  of  prayer,  who 
is  fluent  in  utterance  rather  than  fei-vent  in  feeling  ?  Oh,  but  this,  this 
is  one  of  the  surest  of  tests,  by  which  we  may  discern  between  the  pre- 
cious and  the  vile.  Public  prayer  is  no  evidence  of  piety:  it  is  practised 
by  an  abundance  of  hypocrites;  but  private  prayer  is  a  tiling  for  which 
the  hypocrite  has  no  heart — and  if  he  ^ivcs  himself  to  it  for  a  little  time 
he  soon  finds  it  too  hot  and  heavy  a  business  for  his  soulless  soul  to 
persevere  in,  and  he  lets  it  drop.  He  will  sooner  perish  than  continue 
m  private  prayer.  0  for  heart  searchings  about  this !  Do  I  draw  near 
to  God  alene  ?  Do  I  pray  when  no  eye  sees,  when  no  ear  hears  ?  Do  I 
make  a  conscience  of  private  prayer?  Is  it  a  delight  to  pray?  For 
I  may  gather  that  if  I  never  enjoy  private  prayer  I  am  one  of  those  hypo- 
crites who  will  not  always  call  upon  God. 

The  tjue  Christian  will  pray  in  business ;  he  will  pray  in  labour ;  ho 
will  pray  in  his  ordinary  calling  :  like  sparks  out  of  the  smithy  chimney 
short  prayers  fly  up  all  day  long  from  truly  devout  souls.  Not  thus  is 
it  with  the  mere  pretender.  The  hypocrite  prays  at  prayer-meetings, 
md  his  voice  is  heard  iu  the  assembly,  stnietinies  at  tedious  length ; 
but  will  he  pray  with  ejaculatory  prayer?  Will  he  s})eak  with  God  at 
the  counter?    Will  he  draw  near  to  God  iu  the  field?    "Will V\^ ^\^^^ 


206  METROPOUTAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

what  arc  the  first  syroptomfi  of  his  depravity  ?  We  ask  not  the  qaestkm 
idly,  but  in  order  that  we  take  heed  against  the  uprise  of  auch  an  eril 
in  ourselves. 

*'  Beneath  the  saintly  veil  the  votary  of  sin 
Mny  lurk  unseen  ;  and  to  that  eye  alone 
Which  penetrates  the  heart,  may  stand  revealed.** 

The  hypocrite  is  very  often  an  exceedinglv  neat  imitation  of  the  Christian. 
To  the  common  observer  he  is  so  good  a  counterfeit  that  he  entirely 
escapes  suspicion.  Like  base  coins  which  are  cunningly  made,  you  cau 
scarcely  detect  them  by  their  ring;  it  is  only  by  more  searching  tests  that 
you  are  able  to  discover  that  they  are  not  pure  gold,  the  current  coin  of 
the  realm.  It  would  be  difficult  to  say  how  nearly  any  man  might  resemble 
a  Christian,  and  yet  not  be  **  in  Christ  a  new  creature;"  or  how  closely 
he  might  imitate  all  the  virtues,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  possess  none 
of  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  as  before  the  judgment  of  a  heart-searching 
God.  In  almost  all  deceptions  thcro  is  a  weak  point  somewhere.  Never 
is  a  lying  stoiy  told  but,  if  you  be  keen  enough,  you  may  from  internal 
evidence  somewhere  or  other  detect  the  flaw.  Though  Satan  himself 
has  been  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of  impostures  for  thousands  of 
years,  yet  whether  through  the  lack  of  skill  on  his  part,  or  through  the 
folly  of  bis  agents,  he  always  leaves  a  weak  point ;  his  flattering  state- 
ments are  a  little  too  strongly  scented  and  smell  of  a  lie ;  and  his  mimic 
Christians  are  so  overdone  in  one  place,  and  slovenly  in  another,  that 
their  falsehood  betrays  itself.  Now,  in  discriminating  between  saints 
and  hypocrites,  one  great  test-point  is  prayer.  "  Behold,  he  prayeth,"  was 
to  the  somewhat  sceptical  mind  of  Ananias  demonstration  enough  that 
Paul  was  really  converted.  If  he  prays,  it  may  be  safely  inferred  that  the 
breath  of  prayer  arises  from  the  life  of  faith.  The  process  of  spiritual 
quickening  has  at  least  begun.  Hence  the  hyi>ocrite  feigns  to  possess 
that  vital  action.  If  the  Christian  prays,  he  will  betake  himself  to  the 
like  exercise :  if  the  Christian  calls  upon  God,  the  deceiver  takes  care 
that  he  will  likewise  make  mention  of  the  name  of  the  Lord.  And  yet, 
between  the  prayer  of  the  truly  converted  man  and  the  prayer  of  the 
hypocrite  there  is  a  difference  as  radical  as  between  life  and  death,  although 
it  is  not  apparent  to  everybody.  No  one,  it  may  be,  at  first  can  be  aware 
of  it  except  the  man  himself,  and  sometimes  even  he  scarcely  perceives  it 
Many  ave  deceived  by  the  fine  expressions,  by  the  apparent  warmth,  and 
by  the  excellent  natural  disposition  of  the  hypocrite,  and  they  think 
when  they  hear  him  call  upon  God  that  his  supplications  are  sufficient 
evidence  that  he  is  truly  a  quickened  child  of  God.  Prayer  is  always 
the  tell-tale  of  spiritual  life.  No  right  prayer,  then  is  there  no  grace 
within.  Slackened  prayer,  then  is  there  a  decrease  of  grace.  Prayer 
stronger,  then  the  whole  man  also  is  stronger.  Prayer  is  as  good  a  test 
of  spiritual  life  and  health  as  the  pulse  is  of  the  condition  of  the  human 
frame.  Hence  I  say  the  hypocrite  imitates  the  action  of  prayer  while 
he  does  not  really  possess  the  spirit  of  prayer. 

Our  text  goes  deeper  than  the  surface,  and  enquires  into  vital  matters. 
Prayer  is  a  test,  but  here  is  a  test  for  the  test — a  trial  even  for  prayer 
itself.  "  Will  he  always  call  upon  G od ?"  There  is  the  point.  He  does 
call  upon  God  now,  and  he  appears  to  be  intensely  devout ;  he  says  he 


THE  T0UCH8T0NB  OP   GODLY  SINCERITY.  207 

3  converted  in  the  late  revival ;  he  is  very  fervid  in  expression,  and 
y  forward  in  manneif  at  present.  But  willit  wear?  Will  it  wear?  Will 
ast?  His  prayerfalness  has  sprung  up  like  Jonah's  gourd  in  a  night. 
11  it  perish  in  a  night  ?  It  is  beautiful  to  look  upon,  like  the  early 
w  that  glistens  in  the  sunlight  as  though  the  morning  had  sown  the 
th  with  orient  pearl ;  will  it  pass  away  like  that  dew?  or  will  it  always 
ide?  "Will  he  always  call  upon  God?"  There  is  the  point.  Othat 
;h  one  of  us  now  may  search  ourselves,  and  see  whether  we  have  those 
ribntes  connected  with  our  prayer  which  will  prove  us  not  to  be  hypo- 
tes,  or  whether,  on  the  contrary,  we  have  those  sad  signs  of  base  dis- 
abling and  reckless  falsehood  which  will  before  long  discover  us  to  be 
pes  of  Satan,  impostors  before  heaven. 

'*  Will  he  always  call  upon  God?"  This  question,  simple  as  it  is,  I 
nk  involves  several  pertinent  enquiries.  The  first  point  which  it 
ses  is  that  of  consistency.  Is  the  prayer  occasional,  or  is  it  con- 
nt?  Is  the  exercise  of  devotion  permanent  and  regular,  or  is  it 
ismodic  nnd  inconstant  ?  Will  this  man  call  upon  God  in  all  seasons  of 
lyer  f  There  are  certain  times  when  it  is  most  fit  to  pray,  and  a 
mine  Christian  will  and  must  pray  at  such  periods.  Will  this  hypocrite 
ly  at  all  such  times,  or  will  he  only  select  some  of  the  seasons  for  prayer  ? 
ill  he  only  be  found  praying  at  certain  times  and  in  selected  places?  Will 
always,  in  all  fit  times,  be  found  drawing  near  to  God  ?  For  instance, 
prayed  standing  at  the  corners  of  the  streets  where  he  was  seen  of 
m, :  he  prayed  in  the  synajrogue,  where  everybody  could  mark  his 
ency  and  his  fervour,  but  will  he  pray  at  home?  Will  he  enter  into 
\  closet  and  shut  to  the  door  ?  Will  he  there  speak  unto  the  Father  who 
areth  in  secret  ?  Will  he  there  pour  forth  petitions  as  the  natural 
tflow  of  his  soul  ?  Will  he  walk  the  field  at  eventide,  in  lonely  medita- 
n,  like  Isaac,  and  pray  there  ?  Will  he  go  to  the  housetop  with  Peter, 
d  pray  there  ?  Will  he  seek  his  chamber  as  Daniel  did,  or  the  soli- 
ie  of  the  garden  as  did  our  Lord  ?  Or  is  he  one  who  only  prays  in 
blic,  who  has  the  gift  of  prayer  rather  than  the  spirit  of  prayer,  who 
laent  in  utterance  rather  than  fciTent  in  feeling  ?  Oh,  but  this,  this 
one  of  the  surest  of  tests,  by  which  we  may  discern  between  the  pre- 
lUB  and  the  vile.  Public  prayer  is  no  evidence  of  piety:  it  is  practised 
an  abundance  of  hypocrites;  but  private  prayer  is  a  thing  for  which 
5  hypocrite  has  no  heart — and  if  he  gives  himself  to  it  for  a  little  time 
soon  finds  it  too  hot  and  heavy  a  business  for  his  soulless  soul  to 
rsevere  in,  and  he  lets  it  drop.  He  will  sooner  perish  than  continue 
private  prayer.  0  for  heart  searchings  about  this !  Do  I  draw  near 
Ixod  alone  ?  Do  I  pray  when  no  eye  sees,  when  no  ear  heai's  ?  Do  I 
Jte  a  conscience  of  private  prayer?  Is  it  a  delight  to  pray?  For 
lay  gather  that  if  I  never  enjoy  private  prayer  I  am  one  of  those  hypo- 
tea  who  will  not  always  call  upon  God. 

The  tjue  Christian  will  pray  in  business ;  he  will  pray  in  labour ;  ho 
11  pray  in  his  ordinary  calling  :  like  sparks  out  of  the  smithy  chimney 
MTt  prayers  fly  up  all  day  long  from  truly  devout  souls.  Not  thus  is 
with  the  mere  pretender.  The  hypocrite  prays  at  prayer-meetings, 
i  his  voice  is  heard  in  the  assembly,  stmetinics  at  tedious  length ; 
t  will  he  pray  with  ejaculatory  prayer?  Will  he  speak  with  God  at 
8  counter?    Will  he  draw  near  to  God  in  the  field?    "Will Vv^ ^Ve^^ 


208  METROPOLITAN  TABERKACLE  PULPIT. 

with  hiG  Lord  in  the  busy  street  with  noiseless  pleadinp^s  ?  When  he  finds 
that  a  difRcultj  has  occurred  in  his  daily  life,  will  he  withoot  saying  a 
word  breathe  his  heart  into  the  ear  of  God  ?  Ah,  no  !  hypocrites  know 
nothing  of  what  it  is  to  be  always  praying,  to  abide  in  the  spiiit  of  prayer. 
This  is  a  choice  part  of  Christian  experience  with  which  they  do  not  meddle. 
Bat  be  sure  of  this — where  there  is  genuine  religion  within,  it  will  be 
more  or  less  habitual  to  the  soul  to  pray.  Some  of  us  can  say  that  to  be 
asking  blessings  from  God  in  brief,  wordless  prayers,  comes  as  natural  to 
US  as  to  eat  and  drink,  and  breathe.  We  never  encounter  a  difficulty  now 
but  wc  resolve  it  by  appealing  to  the  wisdom  of  God — never  meet  with 
any  opposition  but  what  we  overcome  it  by  leaning  upon  the  power  of 
God.  To  wait  upon  the  Lord  and  speak  with  him  has  become  a  habit 
with  us — not  because  it  is  a  duty — we  have  left  legal  bondage  far  behind — 
bqt  because  we  cannot  help  it,  our  soul  is  inwardly  constrained  thereto. 
The  nature  within  as  naturally  cries  to  God  as  a  child  cries  after  ita  mother. 
The  hypocrite  prays  in  his  fashion  because  it  is  a  task  allotted  to  him : 
the  Christian  because  it  is  a  part  of  his  very  life.  Herein  is  an  ever- 
standing  mark  of  distinction  by  which  a  man  may  discern  himself.  If 
yonr  prayer  is  only  for  certain  hours,  and  certain  places,  and  certain  times, 
beware  lest  it  turn  out  to  be  an  abomination  before  the  Lord.  The 
fungus  forced  by  artificial  heat  is  a  far  diiferent  thing  from  the  rosy 
fruit  of  a  healthy  tree,  and  the  unreal  devotions  of  theunspiritual  differ 
widely  from  the  deep  inward  groanings  of  renewed  hearts.  If  you 
pray  by  the  almanack,  obfeerving  days  and  weeks,  you  may  well  fear 
that  your  religion  never  came  from  the  great  Father  of  Lights,  with 
w  horn  are  no  changing  moons.  If  you  can  pray  by  the  cIock,your  religion 
is  more  niechnnical  than  vital.  The  Christian  docs  not  fast  because  it  is 
Lent;  if  his  Lord  reveals  his  face  ho  cannot  fast  merely  because  a 
church  commands  him.  Neither  can  he  therefore  feast  because  it 
happens  to  be  a  festival  in  the  calendar.  The  Spirit  of  God  might  make 
his  soul  to  be  feasting  on  Ash -Wednesday,  or  his  soul  might  be  humbled 
within  him  at  Easter  ;  he  cannot  be  regulated  by  the  dominical  letttf, 
and  the  new  moons  and  days  of  the  month.  He  is  a  spiritual  character, 
and  he  leaves  those  who  have  no  spiritual  life  to  yield  a  Fpecious  con- 
formity to  such  ecclesiastical  regulations,  his  new-bom  nature  spurns  such 
childish  bonds.  The  living  soul  prays  evermore  with  groanings  that 
cannot  be  uttered,  and  believingly  rejoices  evermore  with  joy  unspeakable 
and  full  of  glory. 

A  second  point  in  debate  is  that  of  continuance.  "Will  he  always 
call  upon  God  ? "  There  are  trying  periods  and  sifting  seasons;  those 
who  hold  on  through  these  are  the  true,  but  those  who  suspend  prayer 
at  these  test  intervals  are  the  false.  Now  times  of  joy  and  sorrow  are 
equally  critical  seasons.  Let  us  look  at  them  in  turn.  Will  the  bypo- 
crite  call  upon  God  in  times  of  pleasure  ?  No  ;  if  he  indulges  himaeV  in 
what  he  calls  pleasure,  he  dares  not  pray  at  night  when  he  comes  home. 
He  goes  to  places  where  he  would  think  it  a  degradation  of  prayer  to 
think  of  praying.  The  genuine  Christian  prays  always,  because  if  there 
be  any  spot  where  he  dares  not  pray,  just  there  he  dares  not  be  found ;  or 
if  there  be  any  enga<ieiuent  about  which  he  could  not  pray,  it  is  an 
engagement  that  shall  never  ensnare  him.  Some  one  once  proposed  to 
write  a  collect  to  be  said  by  a  pious  yovipg  lady  when  attending  a  theatre^ 


THIS  aX)UCHSIONE  OF  GODLY  filKCERITT.  209 

ftnd  anotberio  be  repeated  bj  a  Chnstian  gentleman  when  slinffling  a  pack 
of  cards.  There  might  be  another  form  of  prayer  to  be  oifered  by  a  pious 
bnrglar  when  he  is  breaking:  open  a  door,  or  by  a  religions  assassin  when 
he  is  about  to  commit  murder.  There  are  things  about  which  you  cannot 
pray :  they  have  nothing  to  do  with  prayer.  Many  tolerated  amnsements 
leaa  to  outrages  upon  the  morals  of  earth,  and  are  an  insult  to  the  holiness 
of  heaven.  Who  could  think  of  praying  about  them  ?  Herein  is  the 
hypocrite  discerned;  he  does  that  which  he  could  not  ask  a  blessing 
upon.  Poor  as  is  the  conscience  he  owns,  he  knows  it  is  ridiculons  to 
offer  prayer  concerning  certain  actions  wliich,  notwithstanding,  he  has 
the  hardihood  to  peribrm.  The  Christian  avoids  things  which  he 
could  not  pray  about;  and  so  he  feels  it  a  pleasure  to  pray  always. 

Equally  trying  is  the  opposite  condition  of  depression  and  sorrow. 
There,  too,  we  try  the  question,  "Will  he  always  call  upon  God?''  No;  the 
hypocrite  will  not  pray  when  m  a  desponding  stale.  He  breathed  awhile  the 
atmosphere  of  enthusiasm.  His  passions  were  stirred  by  the  preacher,  and 
fermented  by  the  contn^iions  zeal  of  the  solemn  assembly.  But  now  a 
damp  cold  mist  obscures  his  view,  chills  his  feelings,  settles  in  his  heart. 
Others  are  growing  cold,  and  he  is  among  the  firet  to  freeze.  He  is 
down-hearted  and  discouraged.  Forthwith,  like  King  Saul,  he  succumbs 
to  the  evil  spirit.  Were  he  a  Christian  indeed,  he  would  follow  in  the 
wake  of  David,  and  say:  **Wliy  art  thou  cast  down,  0  my  soul?  and 
why  art  thou  disquieted  within  me?  hope  in  God:  for  I  shall  yet 
praise  him,  who  is  the  health  of  my  countenance,  and  my  God ; "  but  he 
Das  no  heart  to  hope  on  in  ill  weather.  He  built  up  his  hopes  tastefully, 
and  he  admired  the  structure  which  was  of  his  own  piling ;  but  the 
rain  descended,  the  floods  came,  and  the  winds  blew,  and  down  it  all 
went ;  and  therefore,  being  a  hypocrite,  he  said  within  himself:  "Now 
I  have  no  enjoyment  of  religion :  it  has  lost  its  novelty ;  T  have 
worn  out  its  delights  ;  I  have  now  no  comfort  from  it;  1  will  give 
it  up.*'  Thus  in  the  trying  hoar  the  deceiver  is  laid  bai*e.  Look 
at  the  real  Christian  when  a  storm  bursts  over  him  which  shakes  his 
confidence  and  spoils  his  joy :  what  does  he  do?  He  prays  more  than 
ever  he  did.  When  his  mountain  stood  firm,  and  he  said,  "  I  shall  not 
be  moved,"  he  perhaps  grew  too  slack  in  prayer ;  but  now,  when  all 
God's  waves  and  billows  are  going  over  him,  and  he  hardly  knows 
whether  he  is  a  child  of  God  or  not,  and  questions  whether  he  has  any 
part  or  lot  in  the  matter,  he  proves  that  all  is  right  within,  by  crying 
unto  God  in  the  bitterness  of  his  soul,  "0  God,  have  mercy  upon  me, 
and  deliver  me  from  going  down  into  the  pit."  A  Christian's  despair 
makes  him  pray ;  it  is  a  despair  of  self.  A  worldling's  despair  makes  liim 
rave  against  God,  and  give  up  prayer.  Mark  then,  bow  in  the  opposite 
seasons  of  joy  and  sorrow  prayer  is  put  into  the  crucible  and  tested. 
All  our  times  of  pleasure  ought  to  be  times  of  prayer  ;  Job  accounted 
his  family  festivities  opportune  for  calling  his  children  together  for 
special  devotion.  No  less  should  our  periods  of  despondency  become 
incentives  to  prayer;  every  funeral  knell  should  ring  us  to  our  knees. 
The  hypocrite  cannot  keep  these  statutes  and  ordinances,  but  the  tiue 
Christian  follows  them  out ;  for  he  is  alike  at  home  in  seeking  the  Lord, 
calling  upon  his  name,  and  asking  counsel  and  guidance  at  his  mercy- 
seat,  in  any  variety  of  experience,  and  every  diversity  of  circumstance. 


210  UETROFOUTAlf  TABERNAOLl  FDLFIT. 

"Will  he  always  call  upon  God?"    Here  is  the  qnestion  of  OQV- 
STANCT.    Will  he' pray  constantly  ?     It  seems  to  most  men  a  Teiy 
difficult  thin^  to  be  praying  always,  to  continue  in  prayer,  to  pray 
without  censing.    Yes:  and  herein  a^ain  is  there  a  great  distmctioa 
between  the  living  child  of  God  and  the  mere  pretender.    The  liring 
child  of  God  soon  finds  that  it  is  not  so  much  his  dnty  to  pray, 
as  his  privilege,  his  joy,  a  necessity  of  his  being.     What  moment  is 
there  when  a  Christian  is  safe  without  prayer  7    Where  is  there  a  place 
wherein  he  would  find  himself  secure  if  he  ceased  to  jMiiy  ?      Just 
think  of  it.    Every  moment  of  my  life  I  am  dependent  upon  the  will 
of  God  as  to  whether  I  shall  draw  another  breath  or  not  Nothing  stands 
bitween  me  and  death  but  the  will  of  God.    An  angel's  arm  could  not 
save  me  from  the  grave,  if  now  the  Lord  willed  me  to  depart.     Solemn, 
then,  is  the  Christian's  position :   ever  standing  by  an  open  tomb. 
Should  not  dyin«^  men  pray  ?  We  are  always  dying.   As  life  is  bnt  a  long 
dying,  should  it  not  be  also  a  long  praying?     Should  we  not  be  in- 
ces<iantly  acknowledging  to  God  in  prayer  and  praise  the  continnance 
of  our  being,  which  is  due  to  his  grace?     Brethren,  every  moment 
that  we  live  we  are  receiving  favours  and  benefits  from  God.    There 
is  never  a  minute  in  which  we  are  not  recipients  of  his  bounty.  We  are 
wont  to  thank  God  for  his  mercies  as  if  we  thought  they  came  at  certain 
set  times;  so  in  truth  they  do:  they  are  new  every  morning;  great  is 
his  faithfulness ;  and  they  soothe  us  night  by  night,  for  his  compassion 
faileth  not,  but  there  arc  mercies  streaming  on  in  one  incessant  flow. 
We  never  cease  to  need  ;  he  never  ceases  to  supply.    We  want  constant 
protection,  and  he  that  keepcth  Israel  neither  slumbers  nor  sleeps.    Lest 
any  hurt  us,  he  keeps  us  night  and  day.   The  river  of  God  rolls  on  with  un- 
diniiniished  volume  and  unimpeded  velocity.    How  greatly  doth  he  enrich 
us  thereby !    Should  we  not  be  ever  careful  to  secure  his  gifts,  to  reap  the 
harvest  he  provides,  and  as  his  people  to  tnke  tiiese  good  things  from  his 
gracious  hands  ?    But,  oh  !  let  us  take  heed  to  mingle  prayer  with  all  oar 
thanksj^ivinir,  lest  he  nhould  curse  the  boon  over  which  we  have  tfsked  no 
blessing;  blight  the  crops,  of  which  we  have  dedicated  to  him  no  first- 
fruits;  or  smite  us  with  the  rod  of  his  anger,  while  the  food  is  yet  in 
our  mouth.    Our  cravings  know  no  abatement,  our  dependence  on  God 
knows  no  limit ;  therefore  our  prayers  should  know  no  intermission. 
Speak  of  beggars,  we  are  always  beggars.     Is  it  not  better  for  us,  then, 
to  be  regular  pensioners  than  mere  casuals?     Whatever  God  has  given 
us  we  are  as  needy  still ;  we  are  always,  if  taken  apart  from  him,  naked, 
and  poor,  and  miserable,  altogether  dependent  upon  him,  as  well  for  the 
soul  as  for  the  body ;  for  good  thoughts,  for  spiritual  aspirations,  for 
holy  graces,  ay.  and  for  the  breath  of  our  nostrils  and  the  bread  of 
our  mouths ;  always  nteding  temporals,  always  needing  spirituals.    If 
we  are  always  needing,  we  should  be  always  pleading.  Besides  that,  dear 
friends,  we  are  always  in  danger;  we  are  in  an  enemy's  country,  behind 
every  bush  there  is  a  foe  ;  we  cannot  reckon  ourselve^i  to  be  secure  in 
any  place.    The  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil  constantly  assail  us. 
Arrows  are  shot  from  beneath  us,  and  from  around  us,  while  the  poison  of 
our  own  corruption  rankles  within  us.     At  any  moment  temptation  may 
get  the  mastery  over  us,  or  we  ourselves  may  go  astray  and  be  onr  own 
tempters.    Storms  mav  drive  us.  whirlpools  suck  us  down,  quicksands 


THE  TOUCHSTONE  OF  GODLY  SINCERITY.  211 

en^nilf  us,  and  if  none  of  these  accomplish  our  shipwreck  we  may 
founder  of  ourselres,  or  perish  of  spiritual  dry-rot.  We  need,  then, 
each  hour  to  watch,  and  each  separate  moment  to  pray,  "  Hold  thou 
me  np,  and  I  shall  be  safe."  Are  ye  wealthy  ?  Pray  God  that  your 
silver  and  your  gold  bring  no  spiritual  plague  with  them  I  Do  not  let 
your  money  stick  to  your  hand  or  your  heart,  for  in  proportion  as  it  glues 
Itself  to  you  it  poisons  you.  Pray  God  to  sanctify  your  abundance,  so 
that  you  may  know  how  to  abound ;  a  difficult  piece  of  knowledge  to 
attain.  Are  ye  poor?  Then  ask  to  be  kei)t  from  envy,  from  discontent, 
and  all  the  evils  that  haunt  the  narrow  lanes  of  poverty.  Pray  that 
as  you  are  each  in  danger  one  way  or  another,  you  may  all  be  kept 
hour  by  hour  by  the  constant  grace  of  God.  If  we  knew  what  poor, 
weak,  helpless  creatures  we  are,  wc  should  not  want  to  be  told  always 
to  pray ;  we  should  wonder  how  we  could  think  of  living  without  prayer. 
How  can  I,  whose  legs  are  so  feeble,  try  to  walk  without  leaning  on  my 
Father's  hand?  How  can  I,  who  am  so  sickly,  wish  to  be  a  day 
without  the  Good  Physician's  care  ?  The  hypocrite  does  not  see  this; 
he  does  not  discern  these  perpetual  needs  and  perpetual  gifts,  these 
perpetual  dangers  and  perpetual  preservations— not  he.  He  thinks  he 
nas  prayed  enough  when  he  has  had  his  few  minutes  in  the  morning 
and  his  few  minutes  at  night.  He  trots  through  his  form  of  morning 
devotion  just  as  he  takes  has  morning  wash,  and  has  he  not  settled  the 
bosiness  for  the  day  ?  If  at  evening  he  says  his  prayers  with  the 
same  regnlarity  with  which  he  puts  on  his  slippers,  is  it  not  all  he 
needs  ?  He  almost  thinks  that  little  turn  at  his  devotions  to  be 
a  weariness.  As  to  his  heart  going  up  in  prayer  to  God,  he  does  not 
understand  it ;  if  he  be  spoken  to  concerning  it,  it  sounds  like  an 
idle  tale,  or  mere  cant. 

Dear  brethren,  "  wc  ought  always  to  pray,  and  not  to  faint,"  be- 
cause we  are  always  sinning.  If  I  were  not  evermore  sinninir,  if  I 
could  pause  in  that  constant  aberration  of  mind  from  the  pure,  the 
unselfish,  the  holy,  perhaps  I  might  suspend  confession,  and  relax 
supplication  awhile;  but  if  unholiness  stains  even  my  holy  things — 
if  in  my  best  endeavours  there  is  something  of  error,  something  of  sin — 
ought  I  not  to  be  continually  crying  to  God  for  pardon,  and  invoking 
his  grace  ?  And  are  we  not  constantly  liable  to  new  temptations  ?  May 
we  not  fall  into  grosser  sins  than  we  have  hitherto  committed,  unless 
we  are  preserved  by  a  power  beyond  our  own?  0  pray  perpetually,  for 
you  know  not  what  temptations  may  assail  you.  Pray  that  ye  enter  not 
mto  temptation.  If  perchance  in  some  favoured  moment  we  could 
imagine  ourselves  to  have  exhausted  all  the  list  of  our  needs,  were  we 
enjoying  complete  pardon  and  full  assurance,  did  we  stand  upon  the 
mountain's  brow,  bathing  our  foreheads  in  the  sunlight  of  God's  favour, 
if  we  had  no  fear,  no  care,  no  trouble  of  our  own  to  harass  us,  yet 
we  might  not  therefore  cease  to  pray.  The  interests  of  others,  our 
kindred,  our  neighbours,  our  fellow  creatures  might — ah !  must — then 
start  up  before  us,  and  claim  that  we  should  bear  upon  our  breasts  their 
memorial  Think  of  the  sinners  around  you  hardening  in  trans- 
gression, some  of  them  dying,  seared  with  guilt  or  frenzied  with  despair. 
O  brethren,  how  could  you  cease  to  intercede  for  others,  were  it  |K)8sible, 
which  it  is  not,  that  you  should  have  no  further  need  to  supplicate  for 


J^ 


210  UETROFOUTAlf  TABERNAOLl  FDLFIT. 

"Will  he  always  call  upon  God?"    Here  is  the  qnestion  of  OQV- 
BTAKcy.    Will  he'  pray  constantly  ?     It  seems  to  most  men  a  Tery 
difficult  thinj^  to  be  praying  always,  to  continue  in  prayer,  to  pray 
wibhont  ceasing.    Yes;  and  herein  a^ain  is  there  a  great  distmction 
between  the  living  child  of  God  and  the  mere  pretender.    The  iinng 
child  of  God  soon  finds  that  it  is  not  so  much  his  dnty  to  pray» 
as  his  privilege,  his  joy,  a  necessity  of  his  being.     What  moment  is 
there  when  a  Christian  is  safe  without  prayer  ?    Where  is  there  a  place 
wherein  he  wonld  find  himself  secure  if  he  ceased  to  pray  ?      Just 
think  of  it.    Every  moment  of  my  life  I  am  dependent  upon  the  will 
of  God  as  to  whether  I  shall  draw  another  breath  or  not.  Nothing  stands 
between  me  and  death  but  the  will  of  God.    An  angel's  arm  could  not 
save  me  from  the  grave,  if  now  the  Lord  willed  me  to  depart.    Solemn, 
then,  is  the  Christianas  position :   ever  standing  by  an  open  tomb. 
Should  not  dying  men  pray  ?  We  are  always  dying.   As  life  is  but  a  long 
dying,  should  it  not  be  also  a  long  praying?     Should  we  not  be  in- 
cessantly acknowledging  to  God  in  prayer  and  praise  the  continuance 
of  our  being,  which  is  due  to  his  grace?     Brethren,  every  moment 
that  we  live  we  are  receiving  favours  and  benefits  from  God.    There 
is  never  a  minute  in  which  we  are  not  recipients  of  his  bounty.  We  are 
wont  to  thank  God  for  his  mercies  as  if  we  thought  they  came  at  certain 
set  times;  so  in  truth  they  do:  they  are  new  every  morning;  great  is 
his  faithfulness ;  and  they  soothe  us  night  by  night,  for  his  compassion 
faileth  not,  but  there  are  mercies  streaming  on  in  one  incessant  flow. 
Wc  never  cease  to  need  ;  he  never  ceases  to  supply.    We  want  constant 
protection,  and  he  that  keepcth  Israel  neither  slumbers  nor  sleeps.    Lest 
any  liurt  us,  he  keeps  us  night  and  day.   The  river  of  God  rolls  on  with  un- 
diminished volume  and  unimpeded  velocity.    How  greatly  doth  he  enrich 
us  thereby !    Should  we  not  be  ever  careful  to  secure  his  gifts,  to  reap  the 
harvest  he  provides,  and  as  his  people  to  tnke  these  good  things  from  his 
gracious  hands  ?    But,  oh  !  let  us  take  heed  to  mingle  prayer  with  all  oar 
thanksgivincr,  lest  he  nhould  curse  the  boon  over  which  we  have  tfsked  no 
blessing;  blight  the  crops,  of  which  we  have  dedicated  to  him  no  first- 
fruits;  or  smite  us  with  the  rod  of  his  anger,  while  the  food  is  yet  in 
our  mouth.     Our  cravings  know  no  abatement,  our  dependence  on  God 
knows  no  limit ;  therefore  our  prayers  should  know  no  intermission. 
Speak  of  beggars,  wc  are  always  beggars.    Is  it  not  better  for  us,  then, 
to  bo  regular  pensioners  than  mere  casuals?    Whatever  God  has  given 
us  we  are  as  needy  still ;  we  are  always,  if  taken  apart  from  him,  naked, 
and  poor,  and  miserable,  altogether  dependent  upon  him,  as  well  for  the 
soul  as  for  the  body ;  for  good  thoughts,  for  spiritual  aspirations,  for 
holy  ^»race8,  ay,  and  for  the  breath  of  our  nostrils  and  the  bread  of 
our  mouths ;  always  nteding  temporals,  always  needing  spirituals.    If 
we  arc  always  needing,  we  should  be  always  pleading.  Besides  that,  dear 
friends,  we  are  always  in  danger;  we  are  in  an  enemy's  country,  behind 
every  bush  there  is  a  foe  ;  we  cannot  reckon  ourselve^i  to  be  secure  in 
any  place.    The  world,  the  fiesh,  and  the  devil  constantly  assail  us. 
Arrows  are  shot  from  beneath  us,  and  from  around  us,  while  the  poison  of 
our  own  corruption  rankles  within  us.    At  any  moment  temptation  may 
get  the  mastery  over  us,  or  we  ourselves  may  go  astray  and  be  our  own 
temptera.    Storms  may  drive  us.  whirlpools  suck  us  down,  qnickiands 


THE  TOUCHSTONE  OF  GODLY  BINCERITT.  211 

minilf  Hg,  and  if  none  of  these  accomplish  our  shipwreck  we  may 
bunder  of  onrsekes,  or  perish  of  spiritual  drj-rot.  We  need,  then, 
!ach  hour  to  watch,  and  each  separate  moment  to  pray,  "  Hold  thou 
ne  np,  and  I  shall  be  safe/*  Are  ye  wealthy  ?  Pray  God  that  your 
rilver  and  your  gold  bring  no  spiritual  plague  with  them  I  Do  not  let 
ronr  money  stick  to  your  hand  or  your  heart,  for  in  proportion  as  it  glues 
tself  to  you  it  poisons  you.  Pray  God  to  sanctify  your  abundance,  so 
liat  you  may  know  how  to  abound ;  a  difficult  piece  of  knowledge  to 
ittain.  Are  ye  poor?  Then  ask  to  be  kept  from  envy,  from  discontent, 
ind  all  the  evils  that  haunt  the  narrow  lanes  of  poverty.  Pray  that 
IB  you  are  each  in  danger  one  way  or  another,  yon  may  all  be  kept 
lour  by  hour  by  the  constant  grace  of  God.  If  we  knew  what  poor, 
ireak,  helpless  creatures  we  are,  we  should  not  want  to  be  told  always 

0  pray ;  we  should  wonder  how  we  could  think  of  living  without  prayer. 
Bow  can  I,  whose  legs  are  so  feeble,  try  to  walk  without  leaning  on  my 
Father's  hand?  How  can  I,  who  am  so  sickly,  wish  to  be  a  day 
rithont  the  Good  Physician's  care  ?  The  hypocrite  does  not  see  this; 
16  does  not  discern  these  perpetual  needs  and  perpetual  gifts,  these 
)erpetual  dangers  and  perpetual  preservations— not  he.  He  thinks  he 
las  prayed  enough  when  he  has  had  his  few  minutes  in  the  morning 
md  his  few  minutes  at  night.  He  trots  through  his  form  of  morning 
leTotion  just  as  he  takes  his  morning  wash,  and  has  he  not  settled  the 
insiness  for  the  day  ?  If  at  evening  he  says  his  prayers  with  the 
ame  regularity  with  which  he  puts  on  his  slippers,  is  it  not  all  he 
leeds  ?     He  almost  thinks  that  little  turn   at  his  devotions  to   bo 

1  weariness.  As  to  his  heart  going  up  in  prayer  to  God,  he  does  not 
mderstand  it ;  if  he  be  spoken  to  concerning  it,  it  sounds  like  an 
die  tale,  or  mere  cant. 

Dear  brethren,  "  we  ought  always  to  pray,  and  not  to  faint,"  be- 
ause  we  are  always  sinning.  If  I  were  not  evermore  sinninir,  if  I 
jould  pause  in  that  constant  aberration  of  mind  from  the  pure,  the 
mselfish,  the  holy,  perhaps  I  might  suspend  confession,  and  relax 
tupplication  awhile;  but  if  unholiness  stains  even  my  holy  things — 
fin  my  best  endeavours  there  is  something  of  error,  something  of  sin — 
mght  I  not  to  be  continually  crying  to  God  for  pardon,  and  invoking 
lis  grace  ?  And  are  we  not  constantly  liable  to  new  temptations  ?  May 
re  not  fall  into  grosser  sins  than  we  have  hitherto  committed,  unless 
re  are  preserved  by  a  power  beyond  our  own?  0  pray  perpetually,  for 
rou  know  not  what  temptations  may  assail  you.  Pray  that  ye  enter  not 
nto  temptation.  If  perchance  in  some  favoured  moment  we  could 
magine  ourselves  to  have  exhausted  all  the  list  of  our  needs,  were  we 
mjoying  complete  pardon  and  full  assurance,  did  we  stand  upon  the 
Qountain's  brow,  bathing  our  foreheads  in  the  sunlight  of  God's  favour, 
f  we  had  no  fear,  no  care,  no  trouble  of  our  own  to  harass  us,  yet 
re  might  not  therefore  cease  to  pray.  The  interests  of  othei's,  our 
:indred,  our  neighbours,  our  fellow  creatures  might — ah !  must — then 
tart  np  before  us,  and  claim  that  we  should  bear  upon  our  breasts  their 
Demorial.  Think  of  the  sinners  around  you  hardening  in  trans- 
Tession,  some  of  them  dying,  seared  with  guilt  or  frenzied  with  despair, 
)  brethren,  how  could  you  cease  to  intercede  for  others,  were  it  possible, 
diich  it  is  not,  that  you  should  have  no  further  need  to  supplicate  for 


212  METKOFOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

yonrselves?  The  grand  old  canse  which  we  haye  esponsed,  and  the  Chrisl 
who  hath  espoused  oar  cause^ — both  these  demand  our  prayers.  Bj  the 
truth  whose  banner  waves  above  us,  by  the  king  who  has  ennobled  os^ 
love  to  whose  person  fires  ns  this  day  with  ardonr  for  his  cross,  and 
zeal  for  his  gospel,  we  are  constrained  to  nnwarering  devotion.  So 
spake  the  gospel  of  old,  and  so  doth  the  Spirit  of  Ood  prompt  ns  now. 
*^  Prayer  also  shall  be  made  for  him  continually ;  and  daily  snail  he  be 
praised."  0  that  in  our  case  the  prediction  might  be  verified,  the 
promise  fulfilled  I  Not  so  the  hypocrite  :  he  will  not  have  it  on  this 
fashion.  Enough  for  him  to  have  prayers  on  the  Sunday ;  enough  to 
get  through  family  prayers  at  any  rate,  and  if  that  does  not  please  you, 
the  morning  prayer  and  the  evening  prayer  shall  be  said  by  rote  at  the 
bedside;  will  not  these  sufiice?  Praying  all  daylong,  why  he  con* 
siders  that  it  would  be  almost  as  bad  as  heaven,  where  they  are  singing 
without  ceasing.  So  he  turns  on  his  heel,  and  saith  he  will  have  none  rf 
it.  Nor  shall  he ;  for  where  Ood  is  he  shall  not  come,  but  the  Lord  will 
tell  him,  "  I  never  knew  you  :  depart  from  me,  thou  worker  of  iniquity." 
•*  Will  he  always  call  upon  God  ?  "  The  question  may  be  an  enquiry 
as  to  IMPORTUNITY.  Will  the  hypocrite  pray  importunately  ?  He  will 
do  no  such  thing.  I  have  heard  farmers  talk  about  the  way  to  know  a 
eood  horse.  It  will  scltc  mo  to  illustrate  the  way  to  tell  a  good  Christian. 
Some  horses  when  they  get  into  the  traces  pull,  and  when  they  feel  the 
load  move  they  work  with  all  their  might,  but  if  they  tug  and  the  lodA 
does  not  stir,  they  are  not  for  drawing  any  longer.  There  is  a  breed  of 
really  good  horses  in  Suffolk  which  will  tug  at  a  dead  weighty  and  if  they 
were  harnessed  to  a  post,  thev  would  pull  till  they  dropped  though  nothing 
stirred.  It  is  so  with  a  lively  Christian.  If  he  is  seeking  a  great  fi&vonr 
from  God,  he  prays,  whether  he  gets  it  or  not,  right  on :  he  cannot  take  a 
denial ;  if  he  knows  his  petition  to  be  according  to  God*s  will  and  promise, 
he  pleads  the  blood  of  Jesus  about  it;  and  if  he  does  not  get  an  answer 
at  once,  he  says,  "My  soul,  wait" — tcail/  a  grand  word — "wait  then  onl^ 
upon  God;  lor  my  expectation  is  from  him."  As  for  the  hypocrite,  if 
lie  gets  into  a  church,  and  there  is  a  prayer-meeting,  and  he  feels,  "  Well, 
there  is  a  fire  kindling,  and  an  excitement  getting  up  '* — ah !  how  that 
man  cmu  pray,  the  waggon  is  moving  behind  him,  and  he  is  very  willing  to 
pulL  But  tlie  sincere  believer  says,  '*  I  do  not  perceive  any  revival  yet  I 
do  not  hear  of  mauy  conversions.  Never  mind,  we  have  prayed  that  God 
will  glorify  his  dear  Son :  we  will  keep  on  praying.  If  the  blessing  does 
not  come  in  one  week,  we  will  try  three;  if  it  does  not  come  in  three  weeks, 
we  >\  ill  try  three  months;  if  it  does  not  come  in  three  months,  we  shall 
still  keep  on  for  three  years  ;  and  if  it  does  not  come  in  three  years,  we 
will  plead  on  for  thirty  years ;  and  if  it  does  not  come  then,  we  will  say, 
'  Let  thy  work  appear  unto  thy  servants,  and  thj  glory  unto  their  children.' 
Wc  will  plead  on  until  we  die,  and  mingle  with  those  who  beheld  the 
promise  alar  off,  were  persuaded  of  it,  prayed  for  it,  and  died  believing  it 
would  be  fulfilled."  Such  prayer  would  not  be  wasted  breath.  It  is 
treasure  put  out  to  interest;  seed  sown  for  a  future  harvest;  rather 
it  is  the  aspiration  of  saints  kindled  by  the  inspiration  of  God.  The 
genuine  believer  knows  how  to  tug.  Jacob,  when  he  came  to  Jabbok, 
fouud  that  the  angel  was  not  easily  to  be  couquered.  He  laid  hold  of  him, 
but  the  angel  did  not  yield  the  blessing :  something  more  most  be  done* 


THE  TOUCHSTOXE  OF  GODLY  SINCERITY.  t>l"» 

Had  Jacob  been  a  hypocrite  he  would  have  lei;  the  angel  loose  at  once, 
bat  being  one  of  the  Lord's  own,  he  said,  **  I  will  not  let  thee  go,  except 
then  bless  me."  When  the  angel  touched  him  in  the  hollow  of  his  thigh, 
and  made  the  sioew  shrink,  had  he  been  a  hypocrite  he  would  have  thought, 
'*I  hare  had  enough  of  this  already;  1  may  be  made  to  shrink  all  over ; 
I  cannot  tell  what  may  happen  next.  I  will  have  no  more  of  this  m  idnigh  t 
enoonnter  with  an  unknown  visitor.  I  will  get  me  back  to  inv  tent.*' 
But  no;  he  meant  to  prevail,  and  though  he  felt  the  pain,  yet  he 
said— 

"With  thee  all  night  I  menn  to  stay, 
And  wrestle  till  the  break  of  day.** 

He  did  so,  and  became  a  prince  from  that  night.  Will  you  take  a 
denial  from  God,  you  shall  have  it ;  but  if  you  will  not  be  denied, 
neither  shall  you.  0  importunate  Christian,  you  are  he  whom  God 
loves !  Alas  for  those  who  only  give,  as  it  were,  runaway  knocks  at 
the  door  of  heaven,  like  boys  in  the  street  that  knock  and  run  away — 
they  ahall  never  find  the  blessing.  Oh,  to  continue  in  prayer  1  it  is  the 
very  test  of  sinceritv.  Hence  of  the  hypocrite  it  is  said,  ''Will  he 
always  call  upon  God  ?  "  A  hypocrite  leaves  off  praying  in  either  case ; 
he  leaves  off  if  he  does  not  get  what  he  asks  for,  as  I  have  shown  you; 
and  he  leaves  off  if  he  does  get  what  he  nsks  for.  Has  he  asked  to 
be  recovered  from  sickness  when  ill  ?  If  he  gets  well,  what  cares  he 
for  praying  again  ?  Did  he  pray  that  he  might  not  die  ?  Oh,  what 
m  long  face  he  drew,  and  what  drawling  professions  of  repentance  he 
groaned  out!  But  when  his  health  is  regained,  and  his  nerves  braced,  his 
spirits  are  cheered,  and  his  manly  vigour  has  come  back  to  him  ;  where 
are  bis  prayers  ?  where  are  the  vews  his  soul  in  anguish  made  ?  He  has 
forgotten  them  all.  That  he  is  a  hypocrite  is  palpable,  for  he  leaves  off 
praying  if  he  does  not  get  heard,  and  if  he  does.  There  is  no  keeping 
this  man  up  to  God's  statute  or  his  own  promise ;  he  has  not  the  heart 
for  true  devotion,  and  soon  fails  in  the  attempt  to  exercise  it. 

"Will  he  always  call  upon  God?"  Here  is  the  trial  of  perseverance. 
Will  he  always  continue  to  pray  in  the  future  ?  Will  he  pray,  in  years 
to  come,  as  he  now  professes  to  do  ?  I  call  to  see  him,  and  he  is  veiy 
sick;  the  doctor  gives  a  very  poor  account  of  him;  his  wife  is 
weeping ;  all  over  the  house  there  is  great  anxiety.  I  sit  down  by 
his  bedside;  I  talk  to  him,  and  he  says,  "Oh,  yes,  yes,  yes;"  he 
agrees  with  all  I  say,  and  he  tells  me  he  believes  in  Jesus.  And  when 
be  can  sit  up,  he  cries,  ''  God  be  merciful  to  me."  His  dear  friends 
arc  godly  people;  they  feel  so  pleased;  they  look  forward  to  his 
recovery,  and  reckon  upon  seeing  him  a  new  creature,  a  disciple  of 
Christ.  Besides,  he  has  told  them,  when  he  gets  up,  how  earnest  he  will 
be  in  a  life  of  faith  and  obedience  to  the  Lord.    He  will  not  be  a  mere 

Sofessor,  he  means  to  throw  his  whole  soul  into  the  Master's  service. 
ow  mark  him.  He  recovers ;  and  when  he  breaks  forth  from  that  sick 
diamber,  and  can  dispense  with  the  ministry  of  those  gentle  patient 
women  who  nursed  him  and  prayed  for  him,  what  does  the  hypocrite 
do  ?  Oh,  he  says  he  was  a  fool  to  think  and  speak  as  he  did.  He 
ajmitB  he  was  frightened,  but  he  disclaims  every  pious  expression  as 
an  'nfirmity  of  his  distracted  brain,  the  delirium  of  his  malady,  not  the 


21  1  METROPOLITAN  TABEIIXACLK  PULPIT. 

utterance  of  his  reason ;  and  he  recants  all  his  confessions  like  the 
atlxMst  in  Addition's  **  Spcr-tator/'  Addison  tells  us  that  certain  sailors 
hcjird  that  an  atheist  was  on  board  their  vessel :  they  did  not  know  what 
an  iitht'ist  was,  but  thoj  thought  it  must  be  some  odd  fish  ;  and  when 
toid  it  was  a  man  who  did  not  believe  in  God,  they  said,  *^  Captain,  it  would 
be  an  uncommonly  good  thing  to  pitch  him  overboard.*'  Presently  a 
storm  comes  on,  and  the  atheist  is  dreadfully  sick  and  very  fearfhl; 
there,  on  the  deck,  he  is  seen  crying  to  God  for  mercy,  and  whining 
like  a  child  that  he  is  afraid  lie  will  be  lost  and  sink  to  hell.  This  i8 
the  usual  courage  of  atheism  !  But  when  the  coward  reached  the  shore, 
he  beirged  the  gentlemen  who  heard  him  pray  to  think  nothing  of  it, 
for  indeed  he  did  not  know  what  he  was  sayinu:,  he  had  no  doubt  uttered 
a  givat  deal  of  nonsense.  There  are  plenty  of  that  sort — ^who  pray  in 
danirer,  but  brag  when  they  got  clear  of  the  tempest.  Hereby  the 
hvi)<>crite  is  discovered.  Once  take-nwav  from  him  the  trouble  and 
you  do  away  with  the  motive  for  which  he  put  on  the  cloak  of  religion, 
fie  is  like  a  boy's  top,  which  will  spin  so  long  as  you  whip  it.  The 
man  will  pray  while  he  smarts,  hut  not  one  whit  longer.  The 
hy})()('rite  will  pray  to-day  in  society  congenial  for  prayer,  but  he 
will  discard  prayer  to-morrow  when  ho  gets  laughed  at  for  it  in  his 
busiiK'ss.  Some  old  friend  of  his  dro])s  in,  who  has  heard  that  he 
has  been  converted,  and  he  begins  to  ridicule  him.  He  asks  him 
whether  he  has  really  turned  a  ^lethodist?  The  next  thing  he  expects 
to  hour  is,  that  he  is  dipjKid.  lie  makes  some  coarse  remarks  rather  to 
the  chagrin  of  our  courageous  friend,  till  he,  who  set  out  so  boldly  to 
heaven  with  his  prayers,  feels  quite  small  in  the  presence  of  the  sceptic 
If  he  were  right  in  heart,  he  would  not  only  have  a  proper  answer  to 
give  to  the  mocker,  but  in  all  probability  he  would  carry  the  war  into 
the  enemy's  countiy,  and  make  his  antagonist  feel  the  folly  of  his  sins 
and  tiie  insanity  of  his  conduct  in  living  without  a  God  and  without  a 
B.iviour.  The  meet  object  of  ridicule  and  contempt  is  the  godless,  the 
Christless  man.  The  Christian  need  never  be  ashamed  or  lower  his 
colours.  The  hypocrite  may  well  blush  and  hide  his  head,  for  if  there 
w  any  creatuie  that  is  contemptible,  it  is  a  man  who  has  not  his  heart 
where  he  professes  it  to  be. 

Neither  will  such  a  one  always  call  upon  Cod  if  he  gets  into  com- 
pany where  he  is  much  llattered ;  he  feels  then  that  he  has  degraded 
liimself  somewhat  by  associating  with  such  low,  mean  people  as  those 
who  make  up  the  church  of  God.  And  if  he  prosjKjrs  in  business,  then 
he  considers  that  the  {)cople  he  once  w^orshipped  with  are  rather  inferior 
to  himself:  he  must  go  to  the  workrs  church  :  he  must  find  a  fiishion- 
able  place  where  he  can  hear  a  gospel  that  is  not  for  the  poor  and  needy, 
but  lor  those  who  have  the  key  of  aristrocatic  drawing-rooms  and  the 
select  assemblies.  His  principles — well,  he  is  not  very  particular — ^he 
swallows  them  ;  probably  his  nonconformity  was  a  mistake.  The  veri- 
ties which  his  fathers  sutiered  martjrrdom  to  defend,  for  which  they  were 
mulcted  ot  their  possessions,  driven  as  exiles  from  their  country,  or  cast 
into  prison,  he  flings  away  as  though  they  were  of  no  value  whatever. 
Many  have  fallen  from  us  through  the  temptations  of  prosperity  who 
stood  Jirmly  enough  under  persecution  and  adversity.  It  is  anotlx^ 
form  of  the  same  test,  **  Will  he  always  call  upon  God  ?  " 


THE  TOUCHSTONE  OF  GODLY  BIKCERITY.  215 

eaides,  if  none  of  these  tkinps  should  occur  the  man  who  is  not 
nglj  converted  and  a  genuine  Chriatian,  generally  gives  up  his 
l^ion  after  a  time  because  the  novelty  of  it  dies  ofiT.  He  is  like  the 
J  ground  that  received  the  seed,  and  because  there  was  no  depth  of 
h  the  sun  could  play  upon  it  with  great  force,  and  up  it  sprang  in 
kt  haste,  but  because  there  was  no  depth  of  earth,  therefore  it  soon 
scorched.  So  this  man  is  easily  impressible,  feels  quickly,  and  acts 
nptly  under  the  influence  of  a  hijrhly  emotional  nature.  Says  he, 
38, 1  will  go  to  heaven,"  as  he  inwardly  responds  to  the  appeal  of  some 
lest  minister.  He  thinks  he  is  converted,  but  we  had  better  not  be 
e  60  sure  as  he  is.  <*  Wait  a  bit,  wait  a  bit."  He  cools  as  fast  as  he 
heated.  Like  thorns  under  a  pot  that  crackle  and  blaze  and  die  out, 
log  but  a  handful  of  ashes,  so  is  it  with  all  his  godliness.  Ere  lon^;; 
^ets  tired  of  relijjion,  he  cannot  away  with  it — what  a  weariness  it  is. 
e  perseveres  awhile,  it  is  no  more  pleasure  to  him  than  a  pack  is  to  a 
c  horse;  he  keeps  on  as  a  matter  of  formality:  he  has  got  into  it  and 
Iocs  not  see  how  to  break  away,  but  he  likes  it  no  better  than  an  owl 
s  daylight.  He  holds  on  to  his  forms  of  prayer  with  n&  heart  for 
rev — and  what  a  wretched  thing  that  is  I  I  have  known  people  who 
bound  to  keep  up  their  respectability  when  they  had  little  or  no 
►me.  Their  debts  were  always  increasing,  their  respectability  was 
lys  tottering,  and  the  strain  upon  their  dignity  was  exhausting  their 
est  resources.  Such  persons  I  have  considered  to  be  the  poorest  of 
poor.  An  unhappy  life  they  lead,  they  never  feel  at  ease.  But 
.t  an  awful  thing  it  is  to  have  to  keep  up  a  spiritual  respectability 
1  no  spiritual  income;  to  overflow  with  gracious  talk  when  there  is 
well  of  living  water  springing  up  within  the  soul ;  to  be  under  the 
gation  to  pay  court  to  the  sanctuary  while  the  heart  is  wandering 
.he  mountain ;  to  be  bound  to  speak  gracious  words  and  yet  possess 
gracious  thoughts  to  prompt  their  utterance.  0  man,  thou  art 
of  the  devil's  double  martyrs,  because  thou  hast  to  snfler  for  him 
i  in  the  distaste  and  nausea  of  thy  hypocritical  profession,  and  then 
1  will  be  made  to  suffer  hereafter  also  for  having  dared  to  insult 
,  and  ruin  thy  soul  by  being  insincere  in  thy  profession  of  faith  in 
18  Christ ! 

may  be  coming  very  close  home  to  some  persons  before  me:  I 
certainly  pressing  my  own  conscience  very  severely.  I  suppose 
«  is  no  one  amongst  us  who  does  not  feel  that  this  is  a  very 
ching  matter.    Well,  dear  friends,  if  our  hearts  condemn  us  not, 

I  have  we  peace  towards  God;  but  if  our  hearts  condemn  us,  God 
reater  than  our  hearts  and  knoweth  all  things.    Let  us  confess  to 

all  past  failures,  and  though  we  may  not  be  conscious  of  hypocrisy 

I I  trust  we  are  not  so),  jet,  let  us  say,  **  Lord,  search  and  try  me, 
know  my  ways ;  see  if  there  be  any  wicked  way  in  me,  and  lead 
in  the  way  everlasting."  I  was  speaking  with  a  gentleman  last 
it.  and  I  said  to  him,  "You  are  a  director  of  such  a  Life 
irance  Company,  are  you  not?  "  **  Yes,"  he  said.  "  Well,"  I  said, 
urg  i»  a  poor  society,  is  it  not  ? "  **  It  is  a  very  pood  one,"  he 
•ed;  "  a  very  good  one."  "  But  it  is  very  low  down  in  the  list."  "What 
•  -  that  ?  "  "  Why,  the  list  that  has  been  sent  round  by  certain 
'^'\  to  let  the  public  see  the  condition  of  the  life  assurance 


216  METROPOIJTAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

companies.**  "  Well,"  said  he, "  where  is  it  to  be  seen  ?"  "  Oh,  never  mind 
where  it  is  to  be  seen :  is  it  true  V*  "  No,  it  is  not  true ;  our  society  slandR 
well — admirably  well."  **How  so?"  "Well,  you  know  snchaman, 
he  is  an  excellent  actuary  and  a  man  of  honour."  **Ye8."  "Well, 
when  we  employed  him  to  go  over  our  accounts,  we  said  just  this  to  hira : 
*  Take  the  fijinires,  examine  them  thoroughlv,  sift  our  accounts,  and  tell 
us  where  the  fijniresland  you;  tell  us  just  that,  neither  less  nor  more,  do 
not  shirk  the  truth  in  the  slightest  degree.  If  we  are  in  a  bankrupt 
state,  tell  us ;  if  we  are  flourishing,  tell  us  so/  "  My  friend  has  con- 
Tinced  me  that  his  office  is  not  what  I  feared  it  was.  I  have  much 
confidence  In  any  mon*s  business  when  he  wishes  to  know  and  to  publish 
the  unTamished  truth.  I  have  great  confidence  in  the  sincerity  of  any 
Christian  man  who  says  habitually  and  truthfully,  "  Lord,  let  me  know 
the  very  worst  of  my  case,  whatever  it  is.  Even  if  all  my  fair  prospects 
and  bright  ideals  should  be  but  dreams — the  fabric  of  a  vision ;  if  yon- 
der prospect  before  me  of  green  fields  and  flowing  rills  should  be  but 
an  awful  mirage,  and  on  the  morrow  should  change  into  the  hot 
burning  desert  of  an  awful  reality  ;  so  be  it,  only  let  me  know  the 
truth ;  lead  me  in  a  plain  path  ;  let  me  be  sincere  before  thee,  O  thou 
heart-searching,  rein-trying  God  ! "  Let  us,  with  such  frank  candour, 
such  ingenuous  simplicity,  come  before  the  Lord.  Let  as  many  of  us 
as  fear  ihe  Lord  and  distrust  ourselves,  take  refuge  in  his  omniscience 
against  the  jealousies  and  suspicions  which  haunt  our  own  breasts.  And 
let  us  do  better  still,  let  us  hasten  anew  to  the  cross  of  Jesus,  and  thus 
end  our  difficulties  by  accepting  afresh  the  sinners'  Saviour.  When 
I  have  a  knot  to  untie  as  to  my  evidence  of  being  a  child  of  God,  and 
I  cannot  untie  it,  I  usually  follow  Alexander's  example  with  the  Gordian 
knot,  and  cut  it  How  cut  it?  Why,  in  this  way.  Thou  saycst, 
0  conscience,  this  is  wrong,  and  that  is  wrong.  Thou  sayest,  0 
Sntnn,  thy  faith  is  a  delusion,  thy  experience  a  Action,  thy  profession 
a  lie.  Be  it  so  then,  I  will  not  dispute  it,  I  end  that  matter;  if  I  am  no 
saint,  I  am  a  sinner  ;  there  can  be  no  doubt  about  that !  The  devil 
himself  is  defied  to  question  that.  Then  it  is  written  that  ''Jesus 
Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners,"  and  to  sinners  is  the  gospel 

E reached,  **He  that  believeth  on  him  is  not  condemned."  I  do 
elieve  on  him ;  if  I  never  did  before  I  will  now,  and  all  my  transgressions 
are  therefore  blotted  out.  And  now.  Lord,  grant  me  grace  to  begin 
again,  and  from  this  time  forth  let  me  live  the  life  of  faith,  the  life  of 
prayer ;  let  me  be  one  of  those  who  will  pray  always,  let  me  be  one  of 
those  who  will  pray  when  they  are  dying,  having  prayed  all  their  lives. 
Prayer  is  our  very  life:  ceasing  prayer  we  cease  to  live.  As  long  as  we 
are  here  preserved  in  spiritual  life  we  must  pray.  Lord,  grant  it  may 
be  BO  with  each  one  here  present,  through  the  power  of  thy  Spirit,  and 
the  merit  of  Jesus'  blood.    Amen,  and  Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon— Job  xxvii. 


X   » 


ietrirplitmi  SCakmarfe 


YIOTOE  EMMANUEL,   EMANOIPATOE. 


gl  ^txmon 


DSLIYEBED  BT 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT    THB    XBTBOPOLITAK    TABERNACOJS,    KEWINQTON. 


"  To  open  the  Uind  eyes,  to  bring  out  the  prisoners  from  the  prison,  and  them 
that  ait  in  darknesi  out  of  the  prison  house."— Isaiah  xlii.  7. 

Ov  a  former  occtsion*  we  contemplated  the  unconverted  man  as  being 
Ixmnd  by  the  cords  of  his  sins.  It  was  a  yery  solemn  and  sorrowful 
topic  I  trust  it  bumbled  us  all,  and  made  those  of  us  whom  the  Son 
hag  made  free,  feel  renewed  gratitude  for  the  glorious  liberty  of  the 
children  of  God.  Sad  was  the  spectacle  of  the  dungeon  and  the  fetters, 
and  the  felon  bound  therewith,  a  man,  a  brother,  the  imas^e  of  our- 
selves. It  is  a  great  relief  to  turn  to  another  subject  akin  to  that, 
but  full  of  cheerfulness  and  joy.  We  showed  you  the  prisoner : 
we  hare  now  to  speak  of  him  who  came  to  set  the  prisoners 
free.    We  decribed  the  captive's  cords  and  bonds ;  we  have  now  to  tell 

Jon  of  him  whose  mighty  touch  liberates  the  bond-slaves,  and  signs  the 
[agna  Charta  of  eternal  emancipation.  The  case  of  manhood  bound 
like  Prometheus  to  the  rock,  and  preyed  upon  by  the  vulture  of  hell, 
appeared  utterly  hopeless,  and  the  more  so  because  the  prisoner  was 
hu  own  fetter,  and  disdained  to  be  free.  Aflcr  all  that  has  been  done 
for  man,  by  the  tenderness  of  God,  th-)  simplicity  of  the  gospel,  and  the 
clear  and  plain  command;  yes,  and  after  all  the  thuudei-s  of  threatening, 
followed  by  the  wooing  notes  of  mercy,  the  captive  continues  still  the 
willing  slave  of  sin,  and  his  liberation  appeares  utterly  hopeless.  But 
things  impossible  with  men  are  possible  with  God,  and  where  human 
agency  fails,  divine  agency  delights  to  illustrate  its  own  extraordinary 
enenry.  We  i^ladly  survey  at  this  time  the  effectual  operations  of  Jesus 
the  Saviour,  the  true  Victor  Emmanuel,  who  comes  to  set  men  free 
from  the  bondage  of  their  sins,  to  whose  name  be  honour  and  glory 
world  without  end. 

I.  Looking  at  the  first  verses  of  this  chapter,  we  shall  consider  who 
rr  IS  THAT  BENDS  Jesus  Christ  to  accomplish  the  ubehation  op 
THE   80XS  OF  MEN,  because  much  will  depend  upon   the   liberator's 


*  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  Pulpit,  No.  915.    "  Singers  Bound  with  thf  Cords  of 
Sin.- 


218  METIIUPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

crecVntials,  tlie  authority  by  which  he  is  warranted,  and  the  power  by 
which  ho  is  backed. 

Wo  flin»  for  joy  of  heart  as  we  see  that  the  Infinite  God  bimself 

commissioned  the  Lord  Jesus  to  be  the  deliverer  of  men ;  and  he  did 

this,  first,  in  his  capncit)/  as  Creator,     Read  the  fifth  verse,  and  behold 

the  ^cat  author  of  the  Redeemer's  commission :  "  Thus  saith  Jehovah, 

he  that  created  the  heavens,  and  stretclied  them  ont ;  he  that  spread 

forth  the  ejirth,  and  that  which  cometh  out  of  it."     He,  then,  who 

spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  sent  him  forth  on  the  embassage  of  love,  is 

Jehovah,  who  has  made  the  heavens  a  pavilion  of  azure,  gilded  with 

the  sun,  and  bedecked  with  stars;  the  self-same  all-sustaining  One  who 

bears  up  the  pillars  of  the  universe,  and  impels  the  earth  in  its  majestic 

circuit.     He  who  gave  its  lustre  to  every  precious  stone  from  the  mine, 

its  life  to  every  blade  of  grass,  its  fruit  to  every  tree,  its  motion  to  eveiy 

benst  and  winged  fowl — lor  all  these  may  be  said  to  come  out  of  the 

earth;  he  it  is  who  sent  the  Incfimate  God  to  open  the  two-leared 

gates,  and  cut  the  bars  of  iron  asunder,  thnt  the  slaves  of  Satan  might 

escape  from  the  thraldom  of  their  sins.    Jesus,  the  Son  of  God,  comes 

armed  with  the  ])ower  of  the  Creator  himself.     Rejoice,  then,  ye  that 

are  lost,  for  surely  the  power  which  spake  all  things  out  of  nothing,  can 

ncw-create  you,  thou^^h  there  be  nought  of  good  within  you  to  aid  the 

godlike  work.     Rejoice,  ye  that  are  marred  avd  broken,  like  vessels 

spoiled  upon  the  potter's  wheel,  your  great  Creator  puts  his  hand  a 

second  time  to  the  work,  and  resolves  to  form  you  for  himself  that  yon 

may  show  forth  his  praise.    He  by  whom  you  were  made  in  secret,  and 

curiously  wrought   in  the  lowest  parts  of  the  earth,  is  able  by  his 

mysterious  working  to  create  in  you  a  new  heart,  and  infuse  into  you 

a  right  spirit.     Is  there  not  hope  for  the  dark  chaos  of  your  fallen  nature, 

and  that  heart  of  yours  which  is  now  without  form  and  void?     Is 

anything  too  hard  for  the  Lord  ?     Is  there  any  restraint  of  his  power? 

It  is  true  your  fellow-creatures,  be  they  exalted  never  so  highly  by 

office  or  character,  cannot  regenerate  you,  the  ver}'  idea  is  blasphemy 

against  the  prerogative  of  him  who  alone  can  create  or  destroy ;  but 

where  the  will  of  man,  and.  blood,  and  birth  ail  fail,  the  Spirit  of  the 

Lord  achieves  the  victory.     Thus  saith  the  Lord,  "  Behold,  I  create 

new  heavens  and  a  new  eailh :  and  the  former  shall  not  be  remembered, 

nor  come  into  mind.     But  be  ye  glad  and  rejoice  for  ever  in  that 

which  I  create  :  for,  behold,  I  create  Jerusalem  a  rejoicing,  and  her 

people  a  joy.**    What  has  John  written  in  the  book  of  his  vision?     Is 

it  not  to  the  same  purpose?     He  that  sat  upon  the  throne  saith, 

"  Behold,  I  make  all  things  new.'*    He  who  made  the  light  can  open 

your  eyes.     He  who  bade  the  rivers  flow,  can  open  springs  of  penitence 

within  your  souls.     He  who  clothed  the  earth  with  verdure,  can  make 

your  barren   minds  fruitful  to  liis  praise.    If  he  piled  yon  Alpine 

summits,  balanced  the  clouds  which  float  about  them,  and  formei*  the 

valleys  which  laugh  at  their  feet,  he  can  yet  create  within  the  little 

world  of  man  thou^^hts  that  aspire  to  l:caven,  desires  that  ascend  to  the 

realms  of  purity,  and  ^^ood  works  whirh  arc  the  lair  products  of  bis 

Spirit.     Has  the  Creator  sent  forth  a  liberator  to  captive  men?     Then 

is  there  hope  indeed  ! 

lie  who  sent  forth  the  Lord  Jesus  as  his  Elect  One  to  restore  our 


VICTOR  EMMANUEIi,    EMANCIPATOR.  219 

fallen  race,  also  describes  himself  as  the  life  giver ;  for  returning  to 
the  fifth  verse  of  the  chapter  before  ub,  we  read,  "  He  that  giveth  breath 
nnto  the  people  upon  it,  and  spirit  to  them  that  walk  therein."  The  Lord 
creates  animal  life :  he  puts  breath  into  the  nostrils  of  men  and 
beasts;  he  gives  also  mental  life — the  life  which  thinks,  imagines, 
doubts,  fears,  understands,  desires.  All  life  comes  from  the  central 
fountain  of  self-existence  in  the  great  I  Am,  in  whom  we  live,  and 
move,  and  have  our  being.  This  Eternal  One,  who  has  life  in 
himself,  has  sent  forth  his  8on  to  give  life  to  those  who  are  dead  in 
trespasses  and  sins,  and  he  has  girded  him  with  his  own  power,  ''For  as 
the  Father  hath  life  in  himself ;  so  hath  he  given  to  the  Son  to  have 
life  in  himBelf."  It  is  by  the  word  of  Jesus  that  the  dead  sliall  rise, 
'*  for  the  hour  is  coming,  in  the  which  all  that  are  in  the  graves  shall 
hear  his  voice,  and  shall  come  forth."  Arrayed  in  such  life-givinjy  power 
no  case  of  Iraman  corruption  can  be  beyond  the  Redeemer's  skill;  even 
th«.^8e  who  rot,  like  Lazarus,  shall  come  forth  when  he  calls  them,  and 
the  bonds  of  death  and  hell  shall  be  loosed.  Thus  saith  tlie  Lord  of 
life  :  "  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  He  that  heareth  my  word,  and 
believeth  on  hhn  that  sent  me,  hath  everlasting  life,  and  sliall  not  come 
into  condemnation ;  but  is  passed  from  death  unto  life."  The  vision 
of  Ezekiel's  valley  has  become  a  fact  since  Jesus  has  appeared ;  and  it 
is  no  marvel  that  it  should  be  so,  since  the  Eternal  and  Ever-living 
God  has  sent  him.  He  can  breathe  the  Holy  Spirit  into  the  dead  soul, 
and  give  the  heart  that  palpitates  with  penitence,  and  leaps  with  desires 
after  God.  He  can  give  eves  to  the  blind  and  feet  to  the  lame.  All 
that  belongs  to  life  he  can  bestow — the  hearing  ear,  the  speaking  tongue, 
the  grasping  hand.  The  great  obstacle  in  his  way  is  spiritual  death, 
and  as  with  a  word  he  can  remove  it,  the  salvation  of  mnn  is  no  longer 
a  difficulty.  Rejoice,  ye  heavens ;  and  be  glad,  0  earth ;  for  among 
the  graves  of  our  sins,  and  in«to  the  very  charnel-house  of  our  corrup- 
tion, the  Quickener  has  descended,  and  is  quickening  whomsoever  he 
wilL 

Nor  is  this  all;  for  he  who  sent  the  Redeemer  is  represented  in  the 
sixth  verse  as  the  faithful  God.  **  I  the  Lord  have  called  thee  in 
righteousness;  "  that  is  to  say,  the  God  who  sends  Christ  the  Saviour  is 
not  one  who  plays  with  words,  and  having  given  a  promise  to-day, 
retracts  it  to-morrow.  "  He  is  not  a  man,  that  he  should  lie ;  neither  the 
son  of  man,  that  he  should  repent."  Immutable  are  his  promises  and 
purposes,  for  they  are  founded  in  righteousness.  He  wno  has  com- 
missioned his  chosen  messenger  is  not  unrijihteous  to  forget  his  word. 
Hath  he  said,  and  shall  he  not  do  it?  Hath  he  spoken,  and  shall  it 
not  ceme  to  pass?  Hence, my  dear  brethren,  every  gospel  promise  has 
the  stamp  of  the  divine  righteousness  upon  it,  that  you  may  know  it 
to  be  true.  Jesus  assures  us  that,  if  we  believe  in  him,  we  shall  be 
delivered.  God,  who  cannot  lie,  sets  his  seal  to  the  promise.  **  He 
that  believeth  and  is  baptised  shall  be  saved,''  is  not  only  the  declara- 
tion of  Christ,  but  God  himself  confirms  it.  Then,  "  Amtn,  so  let  it 
be ! "  The  vilest  sinner  that  believeth  shall  find  life  and  pai'don, 
acceptance  and  blessedness  in  Christ  Jesus.  Thou  hast  not  to  deal, 
0  trembler,  with  one  who  will  interpret  his  promise  at  a  lower  point 
than  thou  dost  understand  it  at;  but  thou  hast  to  deal  with  One  who 


220  BIETROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

means  more  than  words  can  express,  whose  thoughts  arc  as  lii<»:h  aboTC 
your  thoughts,  even  when  enlightened  by  his  Word,  sis  the  heavens  aie 
above  the  earth.  **  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason  together,  Faith  the 
Lord :  though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow; 
though  they  be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool."  He  who  utters 
these  words  is  the  Lord,  the  faithful  Promiser,  who  has  sent  forth 
Christ,  not  to  deceive  you  with  specious  pretences,  but  in  very  deed  aud 
truth  to  bring  abundance  of  grace  to  those  who  trust  hiro. 

Beading  further  in  the  same  verse,  you  will  perceive  that  the  ever- 
blessed  sender  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  omnipotent,  for  is  it  not  added, 
*'  And  will  hold  thine  hand,  and  will  keep  tnee  "  ?  By  which  is  meant 
that  Ood  will  give  to  the  Mediator  all  his  power.  Christ  is  the  power 
of  Ood.  Omnipotence  dwells  in  him  who  once  was  slain,  but  now  ever 
liveth,  and  he  is  able  to  save  unto  the  uttermost  them  that  come  onto 
Ood  by  him.    In  the  gospel  of  Christ  there  is  a  putting  forth  of  divine 

Siwer  as  manifest  as  in  the  creation  and  in  the  upholding  of  the  worid. 
ere  is  our  comfort  under  all  the  assaults  with  which  the  Christian 
faith  is  threatened,  and  under  all  the  disappointments  which  the 
Christian  church  has  hitherto  undergone;  Emmanuel,  God  with  us,  is 
still  our  strength.  We  are  persuaded  that  the  ultimate  victory  of  the 
cross  is  absolutely  ceitain,  for  "  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  be  revealed, 
and  all  flesh  shall  see  it  together:  for  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath 
spoken  it."  The  creation  was  a  work  of  omnipotence,  and  yet  it  was 
not  accomplished  all  at  once.  The  Lord  could,  if  he  had  so  willed  it, 
have  fashioned  this  habitable  globe  in  one  second  of  time,  and  have 
furnished  all  its  chambers  by  a  single  word  of  his  mouth.  Instead 
of  this,  we  have  reason  to  believe  that  he  lingered  in  the  first 
formation  of  it,  in  tho  beginning,  when  he  created  the  heavens  and 
the  earth;  and  arranged  and  disarranged  it  many  times  before  he 
came  to  the  final  constitution  of  it  in  the  first  six  days  of  time, 
wherein  he  modelled  it  to  be  a  fit  abode  for  man.  Even  then  when 
be  came  to  the  final  work,  not  in  one  day  did  he  build  up  chaos  into 
the  beautiful  house  of  humanity.  Not  at  first  did  the  firmament  divide 
the  waters,  or  the  dry  land  apjxjar  above  the  seas.  Not  till  the  third 
day  did  the  earth  bring  forth  grass  and  the  herb  yielding  seed,  nor  did 
sun  and  moon  divide  the  empire  of  day  and  night  till  the  fourth  day 
had  dawned ;  while  the  fowl  that  fiy  in  the  open  firmament  of  heaven, 
and  the  living  creatures  that  move  in  the  waters,  owned  a  yet  later 
birth.  Everything  was  gradual.  Step  by  step  the  Maker  advanced, 
yet  was  there  never  anvthing  less  than  omnipotence  in  every  step  of  his 
progress.  So,  my  brethren,  the  Lord  might  as  easily  have  converted 
the  whole  world  to  Christ  on  the  dav  of  Pentecost  as  not,  but  not  so 
had  his  decrees  appointed.  A  step  was  taken  in  apostolic  times,  and 
the  light  shone  forth  in  darkness ;  further  on,  the  great  division  between 
the  heavenly  and  the  earthly  became  marked  and  clear,  and  the  church 
rose  like  the  dry  land  above  tho  sens  of  sin,  while  the  plants  of  the 
Lord's  right-hand  planting  brought  foilh  their  seed  and  their  fruit.  Even 
now  the  appointed  lights  make  glad  the  sky,  and  the  time  hastens  on 
when  the  Lord  shall  more  evidently  bless  his  living  ones,  and  say,  *'Be 
fruitful,  and  multiply, and  fill  the  earth;"  but  all  is  done  by  degrees  as 
he  appoints.    Our  impatience  would  fain  stand  at  the  Eternal  elbow, 


VlCrOU  EXUAKUEL,  EBfAKOIPATOH.  221 

find  Bay,  "Master,  complete  thy  work,  and  let  our  eyes  behold  the 
Second  Adam  in  a  world  restored  into  a  second  Eden."  But  he  tarries 
for  awhile,  and  waits  while  his  great  appointed  evenings  and  roomings  fill 
np  Ilia  week  of  glorious  work.  He  delights  in  this  noblest  labour. 
of  his  hands,  and  is  not  as  the  hireling  who  earnestly  desireth  the 
shadow  that  his  toilsome  task  niay  be  ended.  Ho  lingers  lovingly,  and 
his  long  suffering  is  salvation.  The  Lord's  decrees  tarry  not  so  long 
but  what  in  the  divine  reckoning,  and  according  to  the  Lord's  own 
estimate,  the  end  will  come  quickly,  but  to  the  presumptuous  who 
dare  to  say, ''  where  is  the  promise  of  his  coming?"  he  seems  to  linger 
long.  How  blessed  will  be  the  grand  finale  of  redemption  work ;  then 
shall  the  morning  stars  sin?  together,  and  all  the  sons  of  God  shout  for 
joy.  The  seventh  day  of  redemption  shall  eclipse  the  Sabbath  of 
nature,  even  as  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth  shall  outshine  the 
former:  a  river  purer  than  Hiddckel  shall  water  the  new  Eden,  the 
tree  of  life  of  richer  fruit  shall  grow  in  the  midst  of  the  garden,  and 
then  shall  be  fulfilled  the  saying  which  is  written,  '*  Sing,  O.ye  heavens; 
for  the  Lord  hath  done  it :  shout,  ye  lower  parts  of  the  earth  :  break 
forth  into  singinsr,  ye  mountains,  0  forest,  and  every  tree  therein :  for 
the  Loid  hath  redeemed  Jacob,  and  glorified  himself  in  Israel."  As  we 
i€ad  the  promise,  ''I  will  hold  thine  hand,  and  will  keep  thee,"  we  see 
the  certamty  that  the  Saviour  girt  with  the  allsufficicncy  of  divine 
strength,  will  accomplish  the  work  of  human  salvation.  Be  of  good 
cheer,  0  children  of  God,  and  comfort  vourselves  with  the  belief,  "  that 
he  shall  see  his  seed,  he  shall  prolong  his  days,  and  the  pleasure  of  the 
Lord  shall  prosper  in  his  hand."  His  church  has  no  reason  fur  fear, 
but  every  ground  of  confidence  as  to  her  future.  Rejoice,  0  daughter 
of  Zion;  for  great  is  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  in  the  midst  of  thee. 

"  Fear  not,  though  many  a  mighty  foe 
Against  thy  walls  advance  ; 
Jehovah's  arm  will  lay  them  low 
For  thy  deliverance. 

Oh,  take  him  at  his  royal  word. 

That  word  which  cannot  He  ; 
Thy  shield  and  sword  is  Israel's  Lord, 

Almighty  sovereignty.'* 

I  know  you  will  tell  me,  **  most  men  sny  that  the  world  will  end  in  a 
few  years ;  is  it  not  written  that  the  Bridcj^room  cometh  quickly  V  Yes, 
but  remember  that  eighteen  hundred  years  ago  it  was  written  that  he 
would  come  quickly,  and  there  have  been  prophets  in  all  ages  who  have 
concluded  from  this  that  the  end  was  near,  while  many  believers  have 
b&SD.  like  the  Thessalonians,  to  whom  Paul  wrote :  **  Now  we  beseech  you, 
brethren,  by  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  by  our  gathering 
together  unto  him,  that  ye  be  not  soon  shaken  in  mind,  or  be  troubled, 
neither  by  spirit,  nor  by  word,  nor  by  letter  as  from  us,  as  that  the 
day  of  Cnrist  is  at  hand."  We  have  been  instructed  by  certain  pre- 
tended expositors  to  expect  the  time  of  the  end  fbr  the  last  seven  years, 
and  yet  it  is  possible  that  it  may  not  arrive  for  the  next  seventy  thousand 
years.  Perhaps  human  history,  as  yet  written,  is  but  the  fii*st  stanza 
of  a  wondrous  poem,  which  shall  be  unfolded  page  by  page  for  many 
an  age  to  come,  and  it  may  be  possible  far  more  rapt  urous  strains  of  divine 


222  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

mercy  and  [p*aco  in  the  conversion  of  men  are  yet  to  be  read  by  angels 
and  glorified  spirits.     If  it  be  so  it  will  still  be  true  that  he  comes 
quickly,  for  what  will  time  be  compared  with  eternity?     Even  if  the 
space  taken  up  by  the  world's  history  be  not  a  brief  six  thousand  yean, 
but  sixtj  thousand  times  six  thousand  years,  yet  will  it  be  but  as  a  drop 
of  a  bucket  compared  with  the  years  of  the  right  hand  of  the  Most 
High,  the  lifetime  of  the  Ancient  of  Days.     Fight  on  hopefully,  my 
brethren,  and  be  not  distressed  with  rumours  of  times  and  seasons,  bnt 
believe  ye  this,  that  God  is,  in  Christ  Jesus,  reconciling  the  world  unto 
himself,  and  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  shall  see  the  salvation  of  oar  God. 
Watch  daily  for  the  l^ord's  coming,  but  yet  struggle  to  advance  his  em- 
pire, for  **  he  shall  have  dominion  also  from  sea  to  sea,  and  from  the  river 
unto  the  ends  of  the  earth.*'  The  Lord  has  not  withdrawn  his  hand  from 
his  **  elect,  in  whom  his  soul  deligliteth."     He  will  subdue  nations 
before  him,  he  will  loose  the  loins  of  kings,  to  open  before  him  the  two- 
leaved  gates.    With  such  a  deliverer  so  gloriously  upheld,  there  is  no 
room  for  fear  of  failure.     Our  hope  and  faith  joyfully  rest  in  him  to 
whom    the  Eternal  gives  his  almightincss  wherewith  to  subdue  all 
things  unto  himself. 

II.  We  will  now  advance  a  little  further,  the  Lord  helping  ns. 
Having  contemplated  the  glorious  One  who  sent  Jesus  to  the  work  of 
man's  emancipation,  let  us,  in  the  second  place,  consider  the  sent  One 

HIMSELF. 

AVe  have  him  described  in  the  first  verse  of  this  chapter,  and  the  first 
words  which  we  will  select  from  the  description  inform  us  that  Jesus  is 
a  chosPH  one.    "  Mine  elect,  in  whom  my  soul  delighteth."    God  has  been 
pleased  to  set  apart  his  well-beloved  Son  to  be  the  Suviour  of  sinners, 
and  in  every  way  he  is  most  snitu))le.     As  man  he  is  supremely  adapted 
for  the  work  ;  no  other  of  woman  born  was  fitted  for  the  enterprise. 
Born  in  a  peculiar  manner,  without  taint  or  blemish,  he  alone  of  human 
kind  possessed  the  holy  nature  needful  to  make  him  God*s  messenger  of 
love.     I  tried  to  show  just  now  that  God  has  girded  our  Lord  with 
his  omnipotence,  and  this  ought  to  leaii  every  sinner  to  feel  that  Christ 
can  save  him,  for  what  (tannot  Omnipotence  do  ?     AYe  may  not  talk  of 
imiK)ssil)ilities  or  even  diiliculties  whuu  we  have  almightincss  before  ns. 
No  sinner  can  be  ditllcult  to  save,  no  bonds  hard  to  remove,  when  God, 
the  Almighty  One,  comes  forth  to  cave.     Kow  look  at  the  other  side  of 
the  i)icture,  and  remember  that  Christ  Jesus  was  the  most  suitable  per- 
son in  whom  the  Father  could  place  the  fulness  of  his  saving  power. 
In  his  complex  person  he  is  every  way  adapted  to  stand  as  Mediator 
between  God  and  man.     He  who  laid  help  upon  one  that  is  mighty, 
and  exalted  one  chosen  out  of  the  people,  was  guided  by  infallible  wisdom 
in  his  choice.     None  other  was  so  fit  as  he;  in  fact  there  was  no  other. 
"Other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  that  is  laid."     Other  door 
of  hope  can  no  man  open  than  that  which  God  has  opened  in  the 
ix'rson  of  Christ.      0  sinner,  I  beseech  thee  accept  what  God  has 
wisely  chosen.    Let  God's  choice  be  thy  willing  choice.     At  this  hour, 
constrained  by  the  grace  of  God,  say,  *'If  God  has  chosen  the  Ijord 

ns  to  be  a  propitiation  for  sin,  my  heart  accepts  him  as  the  atone- 
for  my  sin,  feeling  that  he  alone  can  save  me."  If  thus  thou  dost 
the  Lord's  elect  One,  thou  shalt  find  him  precious. 


VICTOE  EMMAKUEL,   EMANCIPATOR.  ^23 

But  we  are  also  told  in  the  first  verse  that  the  Lord  Jesna  is  anointed 
to  this  workj  as  well  as  a  choice  one  for  it.  "  I  have  put  my  Spirit  upon 
him."  Now,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  greatest  of  all  actors  in  the  world  of 
mind.  He  it  is  who  can  illuminate,  persuade,  and  control  the  spirits  of 
men.  He  doeth  as  he  wills  with  mind,  even  as  in  the  first  creation  the 
Lord  wrought  as  he  willed  with  matter.  Now,  if  Jesus  Christ  has  the 
fhlness  of  the  Holy  Spirit  resting  upon  him,  it  is  not  supposable  that 
any  sinner  shall  be  so  desperately  enslaved  that  he  cannot  set  him  free. 
We  are  about  to  speak  of  blind  eyes  to  be  opened,  but  in  the  light  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  what  eye  need  remain  blind  ?  We  shall  speak  of  cap- 
tives to  be  liberated,  but  with  God's  free  Spirit  to  loose  him  what  soul 
need  be  bound  ?  Bold  men  have  taught  doctrines  which  have  emanci- 
pated the  minds  of  their  fellows  from  the  slavery  of  superstition,  but 
the  Holy  Ghost's  teachino^s  deliver  minds  from  bondage  of  every 
kind,  and  make  men  free  before  the  living  God.  Trembling  sinner, 
accept  Christ  as  your  Saviour ;  God  appoints  him  ;  God  anoints 
him.  Are  not  these  two  reasons  sufiicient  to  make  him  acceptable  to 
your  soul  ? 

Furthermore,  the  Kedeemer  is  spoken  of  as  being  gentle  and  lowly  of 
hearty  which  should  commend  him  much  to  every  lowly  and  contrite 
spirit.  **  A  bruised  reed  shall  he  not  break,  and  the  smoking  flax  shall 
he  not  quench."  We  need  a  Saviour  who  can  be  touched  with  the 
feeling  of  our  infirmities,  and  Jesus  is  such.  Souls  conscious  of  sin 
are  very  tender,  and  agitated  with  many  fears;  to  cure  a  wounded 
conscience  is  no  fool's  work,  but  fit  lal)our  for  the  most  experienced 
physician.  See  you,  then,  how  fitted  Christ  is.  He  never  yet  said  an 
unkind  word  to  a  soul  that  desired  to  find  mercy  at  his  hands.  In  the 
records  of  his  life  you  may  find  him  try,  but  you  shall  never  see  him  repel, 
an  anxious  spirit.  When  feeble  faith  could  only  touch  the  hem  of  his 
garment,  yet  virtue  flowed  from  him.  Wlien  the  leper  paid,  "Lord,  if 
thou  wilt,  thou  canst  make  me  clean,"  it  was  hut  poor  faiih,  but  that 
faith  saved  him.  Though  you  cannot  yet  believe  as  you  would,  yet 
say,  '*  Lord,  I  believe  ;  help  thou  mine  unbelief,"  and  he  will  not  reject 
you.  Look  at  the  smoking  candle-wick  which  yields  no  light,  but 
makes  much  offensive  smoke  ;  yet,  perchance,  a  living  fire  lingers 
in  it,  and  therefore  the  tender  Saviour  will  not  quench  .it,  but  will 
even  fan  it  to  a  fiame.  And  that  bruised  reed,  how  it  mars  the 
music  of  the  pipes  ;  draw  it  out  and  break  it.  So  would  men  do,  but 
not  so  the  sinner's  Friend.  He  makes  it  perfect  yet  again,  and  pours 
the  music  of  his  love  through  it.  0  thou  who  art  in  thine  own 
esteem  utterly  worthless,  only  fit  to  be  thrown  away,  unfit  to  live  and 
unfit  to  die  ;  Jesus  Christ,  the  gentle  One,  will  give  thee  mercy,  if  thou 
seek  him,  and  in  giving  he  will  not  upbraid  thee.  0  wandering  child, 
Jesus  will  introduce  thee  to  his  Father,  who  will  kiss  thee  with  the 
kisses  of  his  love,  and  take  off"  thy  rags  of  sin,  and  clothe  thee  with 
glorious  robes  of  righteousness.  Only  come  thou  to  him,  for  he  is  such 
an  one  that  he  cannot  reject  thee.  **  How  can  I  come  ?  "  saith  one.  A 
prayer  will  bring  thee ;  an  anxious  desire  will  be  as  a  chariot  to  thee. 
A  trust  in  him  hath  brought  thee,  and  Christ  is  thine,  if  thou  dost  now 
accept  him.  If  thy  soul  is  truly  willing  to  have  Christ,  Christ  hath 
made  thee  willing,  and  has  already  begun  to  set  thee  free.     May  these 


224  METSOFOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

thoni^hts  concemiDg  the  great  Emancipator  cheer  thee  on  to  confidence 
in  bin. 

One  point  more  in  this  direction.  The  Christ  ^rho  has  oome  to  saTe 
the  sons  of  men  is  persevering  to  the  last  degree,  "  He  shall  not  fail, 
nor  be  disconraged,  till  he  have  set  judgment  in  the  earth :  and  the 
isles  shall  wait  for  his  law.**  Men  are  nnwilling  to  be  saved;  thej  ia 
not  desire  to  be  brooght  ont  of  their  prison-houses ;  bnt  Jesus  Ghiiic 
will  not  cease  to  teach,  nor  cease  to  seek,  nor  cease  to  save,  till  eveij 
one  of  his  elect  is  redeemed  from  the  ruin  of  the  fall,  and  until  s 
multitude  bevond  all  count  shall  surround  the  Father's  throne.  I  tdl 
thee,  soul,  if  Christ  wills  to  save  thee,  he  will  save  thee.  He  will  tnck 
thj  footsteps,  wander  where  thou  mayst  If  thou  shouldest  escipe 
time  after  time,  from  the  arrows  of  conviction,  and  plunge  again  and 
again  into  sin,  yet  will  he  seek  thee  out  and  find  thee  jet.  0  delay 
not,  but  yield  to  his  power !  I  pray  that  he  may  stretch  ont  his 
sovereign  arm  at  this  moment,  and  rescue  thee  from  thyself.  If  diy 
heart  were  as  adamant,  or  as  the  nether  millstone,  he  can  dissolve  it 
with  a  touci).  0  that  the  rock-breaking  hammer  would  come  down 
upon  thee  now  !  lie  is  mighty  to  save;  may  he  prove  his  mightiness 
in  thee ! 

III.  It  is  time  that  we  expound  the  text  itself,  and  review  the  work 

ITdKLF. 

According  to  the  text,  the  Mcssiah*s  work  of  grace  is  divided  into  three 
parts,  of  which  the  first  is,  to  open  t/ie  blind  eyes.  Here  is  a  notable 
work  which  brings  much  glory  to  our  Lord.  Man's  understanding  is 
I)erverted  from  the  knowledge  of  God,  from  a  trne  sense  of  sin,  from  a 
realisation  of  divine  justice,  from  a  light  estimate  of  salvation.  The 
underbtnnding,  which  is  the  eye  of  the  soul,  is  darkened.  But  when 
the  anointed  Saviour  comes,  he  removes  the  scales  of  our  mental 
ophthalmia,  and  in  the  light  of  God  we  see  light,  and  then  the  sinner 
is  humbled  and  bowed  down,  for  he  perceives  liis  guilt  and  the  justice 
of  God.  Moreover,  he  is  filled  with  alarm,  for  he  sees  the  bleeding 
Saviour  bearing  Jehovah's  wrath,  and  rightly  judges  that  in  every  case 
sin  must  receive  a  recompense  of  wrath;  for  if  sin  laid  on  Christ  was 
punished,  how  much  more  mu>t  ))crs()nal  sin  involve  banishment  frOm  the 
presence  of  the  Most  High  ?  The  thinner  is  then  made  to  see  that  the 
only  way  in  which  sin  can  be  removed  is  through  the  expiatory  sufferings 
of  a  substitute.  He  is  led  to  sec  that  the  atonement  avails  for  him 
upon  his  believing.  He  is  led  to  understand  what  believing  is.  He 
does  believe;  he  trusts,  and  then  in  trusting  he  is  made  to  see  the 
completeness  of  pardon,  and  the  glory  of  the  justification  which  comes 
to  us  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  You  may  think  that  this  is  an  easy 
thin^formen  to  see,  trained  in  the  doctrine  of  it  from  their  chil^ 
hood,  and  hearing  it  incessantly  from  the  pulpit;  but,  believe  me, 
simple  as  it  seems  to  be,  no  man  receives  it  unless  it  has  been  given 
him  from  heaven.  We  may  say  to  each  one  who  has  seen  all  this, 
**  Blessed  art  thou,  for  flesh  and  blood  hath  not  revealed  it  unto  thee." 
Many  of  us  heard  the  gospel  from  our  childhood,  but  until  the  Holy 
Spirit  explained  to  us  what  it  was  to  be  a  sinner,  and  what  it  was  to 

lieve  in  Jesus,  we  did  not  know  even  the  rudiments  of  the  gospel.  We 
in  darkness  ourselves,  though  the  light  shone  round  about  us;  and 


VICTOR  EMMANUEL,   EMANCIPATOR.  225 

well  mi<rht  we  be,  for  our  eyes  were  not  opened.  When  Jesus  came 
we  saw  it  all,  and  we  understood  the  mystery.  Our  once  blind  eyes 
dearly  saw  ourselves  lost,  and  Christ  suffering  instead  of  us  ;  we  believed 
io  him,  oar  sins  disappeared,  and  we  were  accepted  in  the  Beloved.  My 
d^ar  friend,  if  thou  art  seeking  rest,  I  pray  the  Lord  to  open  thine  eyes  to 
see  Hie  simplicities  of  the  gospel  One  touch  of  his  finger  will  make 
thee  wise  nnto  salvation.  There  is  no  need  for  thee  to  study  the 
iwenfcy-one  folio  volumes  of  Albertns  Magnus,  or  even  the  fifty-two 
Tolnmes  of  John  Calvin,  for  the  whole  secret  of  the  gospel  lies  in  these 
few  words,  **  Believe  and  live ;"  yet  thou  canst  not  open  the  casket 
imiess  the  Lord  give  thee  the  secret  key.  It  needs  an  opened  eye  to 
see  even  through  a  glass  window ;  the  clear  witness  of  the  gospel  is 
dark  to  blind  eyes. 

The  next  work  of  the  Messiah,  according  to  the  text,  is  io  bring  out 
the  prisoners  from  the  prison.  This,  I  think,  relates  to  the  bondage 
under  which  a  man  lies  to  his  sins.  Habits  of  sin,  like  iron  nets,  surround 
the  sinner,  and  he  cannot  escape  their  meshes.  The  man  sins,  and 
ima^nes  that  he  cannot  help  sinning.  How  often  do  the  ungodly  tell 
as  that  they  cannot  renounce  the  world,  cannot  break  off  their  sins  by 
rigfateoosness,  and  cannot  believe  in  Jesus  ?  Let  all  men  know  that  the 
Saviour  has  come  on  purpose  to  remove  every  bond  of  sin  from  the 
eaptive,  and  to  set  him  free  from  every  chain  of  evil.  I  have  known 
men  strive  against  the  habit  of  blasphemy,  others  against  unchaste 
passions,  and  many  more  against  a  haughty  spirit,  or  an  angry  temper; 
and  when  they  have  striven  manfully  but  unsuccessfully  in  their  own 
strength,  they  have  been  filled  with  bitter  chagrin  that  they  should  have 
been  so  betrayed  by  themselves.  When  a  man  believes  in  Jesus  his 
resolve  to  become  a  freeman  is  to  a  great  extent  accomplished  at  once. 
Some  sins  die  the  moment  we  believe  in  Jesus,  and  trouble  us  no  more; 
others  hang  on  to  us,  and  die  by  slow  degrees,  but  they  are  overcome 
so  as  never  again  to  get  the  mastery  over  us.  0  struggler  after  mental, 
moral,  spiritual  liberty,  if  thou  wouldst  be  free,  thine  only  possible 
fireedom  is  in  Christ.  If  thou  wouldst  shake  off  evil  habits  or  any 
other  mental  bondage,  I  shall  prescribe  no  remedy  to  thee  but  this,  to 
commit  thyself  to  Christ  the  Liberator. 

"  The  gates  of  brass  before  him  burst, 
The  iron  fetters  yield/* 

Love  him,  and  thou  shalt  hate  sin.  Trust  him,  and  thou  shalt  no  more 
brast  thyself.  Submit  thyself  to  the  sway  of  the  incarnate  God,  and  he 
will  break  the  dragon's  head  within  thee,  and  hurl  Satan  beneath  thy 
feet.  Nothing  else  can  do  it.  Christ  must  have  the  glory  of  thy  con- 
quest of  self.  He  can  set  thee  free  from  sin's  iron  yoke.  He  never 
felled  yet,  and  he  never  shall.  I  earnestly  entreat  any  man  who  desires 
to  break  off  his  sins  (and  we  must  break  them  off  or  perish  by  them),  to 
try  this  divine  remedy,  and  see  if  it  does  not  give  him  holy  liberty. 
Ask  the  thousands  who  have  already  believed  in  Jesus,  und  their  testi- 
mony will  confiim  my  doctrine.  Faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  is  the  end  of 
bondage  and  the  dawn  of  freedom. 

Tho  last  part  of  this  divine  work   is,  bringing  iJiem   thai  nit  in 
darkness  out  of  the  ji^'i^on-house.     This  we  will  refer  to  those  who  are 


220  METliOPOLITAN  TABERNACLK  PULPIT. 

truly  emancipated,  and  yet  by  reason  of  despondency  sit  down  in  the 
dark  dunp:eon.  Wc  have  in  our  pastoral  duties  constantly  to  cooBok 
persons  who  are  free  from  their  sins,  having:  by  divine  ^n'ace  got  tin 
mastery  over  them,  but  yet  they  are  in  sadness.  The  door  is  open,  the 
bars  are  broken,  but  with  strange  obstinacy  of  despondency  they  remiin 
in  the  cell  of  fear,  in  which  there  is  no  necessity  for  them  to  ccmtiiiM 
for  a  moment.  They  cannot  believe  that  these  good  things  an  tnu 
to  them.  They  forgiven?  They  could  believe  everybody  else  to  be 
pardoned  but  themselves.  They  made  the  children  of  God?  Niy, 
they  could  hope  for  their  sisters ;  they  have  joy  in  knowing  that  tbor 
father  is  a  child  of  God,  but  as  to  themselves— can  8ii(£  blessingi 
really  fall  to  the  tot  of  such  unworthy  ones?  We  have  talked  with 
hundreds  of  such  and  tried  to  console  them,  but  we  have  only  learned 
our  own  unskilfulness  in  the  art  of  consolation.  They  are  rich  in 
inventions  for  self-torture,  inijcnious  in  escaping  comfort.  Bat>  ah! 
the  blessed  Master  of  our  souls,  whose .  business  it  has  been  nnoe 
Adam  fell  to  bind  up  broken  he-arts,  is  never  foiled.  When  hie 
eternal  Spirit  comes  to  anoint  with  the  oil  of  joy,  he  soon  gives  beaotj 
for  ashes.  The  mournful  sentinel  of  tlie  night-watches  mast  re}(Noe 
when  the  dav  breaketli  and  the  Sun  of  rij^hteousness  shines  forth. 

Although  I  speak  to  you  in  very  common-place  language,  yet  the 
theme  is  rich.     This  one  thought  alone  ought  to  make  our  hearta  danoe 
for  joy,  to  think  that  the  Christ  of  God  undertakes  to  lift  up  desponding 
and  despairing  spirits  into  ho[)e  and  joy  once  more.    I  know  who  will 
rejoice  to  hear  this.     It  is  yonder  good  woman,  who  these  many  yean 
has  been  in  spiritual  bondage.    It  is  yonder  young  man,  who  has 
carried  a  secret  burden  month  after  month.     It  is  yonder  aged  man, 
who  longs  to  find  Christ  ere  he  gathers  up  his  feet  in  his  dying  bed,  and 
who  thinks  that  his  hour  of  grace  has  passed.     Man,  it  is  not  sa 
Christ  is  still  mighty  to  save.    Still  doth  the  message  run  :  "  He  that 
believeth  on  him  is  not   condemned."     "Whosoever    will,    let  him 
take  the  water  of  life  freely."     **Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth,  come 
ye  to  the  waters,  and  he  that  hath  no  money;  come  ye,  buy,  and  eat;  yea, 
come,  buy  wine  and  milk  without  money  and  without  price."     Prisoners 
of  hope,  your  liberator  is  near  at  Jiand.     Trust  him  and  be  free. 
Though  it  seem  a  venturesome  believing,  yet  venture  on  him.     He  can- 
not, will  not  reject  you;    he  will  proclaim  a  jubilee,  and  set  each 
bondslave  free. 

See,  then,  how  the  great  Redeemer  blessed  us :  Jesus  the  Chriit 
does  all  things  well;  he  clears  the  understanding;  he  breaks  the  power 
of  sinful  habits  ;  he  removes  the  load  of  despondency  ;  he  doth 
it  all.  Christ  Jesus,  Mary's  son  and  Jehovah's  son ;  man,  bone 
of  our  bone  and  flesh  of  our  flesh,  yet  God  over  all,  blei!sed  for 
ever ;  he  who  died  on  Calvary,  whose  precious  blood  is  the  panacea 
for  all  human  ills,  he  it  is,  and  he  only,  who  is  the  Liberator  of  our 
fallen  race. 

IV.  What  is  the  design  of  God  in  all  this? 

This  question  is  answered  in  the  next  verse  to  the  text :  "  I  am  the 
Lord  :  that  is  my  name :  and  my  glory  will  I  not  give  to  another." 
The  great  end  of  God  in  Christ  was  the  manifestation  of  his  own 
nrlorions  attributes — a  simple  truth,  but  big  with  comfort,  for  should 


VICTOR  EMMANUEL,   EMANCIPATOR.  227 

tKfe  sinner  who  has  been  an  atrocions  offender  against  laws  hnraan 

and    divine  conceive   himself  to  be  an   improper    subject    for    the 

grace   of  God,  I   would  take  him  by  the  hand,   and,   lest  despair 

drive  him  to  farther  sin,- 1  wonld  put  this  truth  clearly  before  him. 

Where  is  mercy  most  glorified  ?    Is  it  not  in  passing  by  the  greatest 

offences  ?    Thou  hast  great  oflPences ;  there  is  room  in  Ihee  for  mercy 

to  be  greatly  displayed.     Where ^is  grace  glorified?    Is  it  not  in 

conqnering   the    most  violent    passions  ?      Thou  hast    such ;    grace 

may   therefore    be  glorified    in    thee.      Why,   great  sinner,   instead 

of  not  being  a  fit  subject  for  grace,   I   will   venture  to  say  that 

thou  art  in  all  respects  one  of  the  most  suitable.     There  is  elbow- 

joom  in  thee  for  grace  to  work.    There  is  room  in  thine  emptiness 

for  God's  fulness.      There  is  a  clear  stage  in  thy  sinfulness    for 

God*s  superabonnding  grace.     But  you  have  been  a  ringleader  in  the 

dttvirs  army.    Yes,  and  how  can  God  strike  a  more  telling  blow  against 

the  hosts  of  darkness  than  by  capturing  you?     But  you  tell  me  that 

you  are  an  enormous  sinner.     How  will  the  Lord  of  love  encourage 

other  sinners  to  come  better  than  by  calling  you?     For  it  will   be 

nunoured  about  among  your  fellow-sinners : — **  Have  you  heard  that 

such  an  one  is  saved  ?  "    I  know  they  will  jeer,  but  still,  in  their  secret 

hearts,  they  will  think  it  over,  and  they  will  say,  "  How  is  this  ?  "  and 

they  will  be  led  to  enquire  into  the  wajs  of  God's  grace.    A  brother 

told  the  church,  a  short  time  since,  a  little  of  his  historv,  and  it 

caused  us  all  to  rejoice  in  sovereign  grace.    He  had  lived  in  all  manner 

of  sin  and  iniquity ;  his  profession  had  been  for  some  years  that  of  a 

public  runner,  and  in  that  course  of  life  he  was  brought  into  collision 

with  the  scum  of  society.     He  was  practised,  also,  in  the  pugilistic  art, 

and  that,  we  all  know,  is  the  very  reverse  of  having  an  elevating  tendency. 

But  he  came  to  the  Tabernacle,  and  here  Jesus  met  with  him,  and  he 

rejoices  now  to  teach  to  others  the  gospel  which  he  once  rejected.    But 

vhat,  think  you,  has  he  been  accustomed  to  do  these  three  years?   Some 

of  our  brethren  preach  in  the  streets,  and  he  gops  with  them,  and  after 

thpy  have  told  of  what  the  grace  of  God  can  do,  he  humbly  and  yet 

boldly  rises  and  says,  **  I  am  a  living  witness  to  what  grace  can  do ; 

I  can  declare  to  you  what  God*s  love  has  done  for  me."     If  the  sermon 

vhich  precedes  his  little   speech  has  not  interested  the  people,  they 

are  quite  certain  to  be  struck  with  his  personal  testimony,  for  in  some 

localities  many  of  tlie  street  folk  know  him,  and  as  they  look  at  him 

they  say,  "  Why,  that  is  old  So-and-so.   I  knew  him  when  he  was  this 

and  that,  and  here  he  is  converted ; "  and  his  witness-bearing  works 

mightily   among  his  old  friends   and  acquaintances.      I   say,   then, 

if  now  i  speak  to  any  other  who  has  been  tTj^reat  offender,  a  drunkard, 

or  what  not,  if  my  Master  does  but  set  you  free  and  enlist  you  in  his 

»nny,  there  will  be  such  a  shout  go  up  in  the  hosts  of  Israel  as  shall 

make  heaven  ring,  while  the  Philistines  shall  tremble,  for  their  Goliath 

shall  be  slain,  and  a  new  champion  raised  up  from  his  dead  body  to 

fight  for  the  Lord  of  hosts.     If  the  Lord  saved  men  because  of  their 

merits,  there  would  be  no  hope  for  great  sinners,  nor  indeed  for  any  one ; 

hat  if  he  saves  us  for  his  own  glory,  that  he  may  magnify  his  grace  and 

his  mercy  among  the  sons  of  men,  then  none  need  despair.    Up  to  the 

^ery  gates  of  hell  would  I  preach  the  gospel,  and  between  tbe  ^?k.^^  ^t 


2:28  HETBOFOLITAN  l^A^BEftNACLE  FULPIT. 

death  would  I  proclaim  it.  God  to  glori^  his  grace  sets  free  the 
captives,  then  why  should  not  the  most  hell-deserrinp:  sinner,  whose 
heart  is  like  hardened  steel,  yet  become  a  monument  of  Christ's  power 
to  save?  I  remember  one  who  used  to  saf  that  if  God  would  but  hsTe 
mercy  on  him  he  should  never  hear  the  last  of  it,  and  it  may  well  be 
the  resolve  of  all  of  us,  that  earth  and  heaven  shall  never  hear  the  last 
of  our  praises  if  grace  shall  but  save  us.  As  one  of  our  hjmos  paU 
it — 

^  Then  loudest  of  the  crowd  1*11  sing, 
While  heaven*8  resounding  mansions  ring 
With  shouts  of  sovereign  grace/* 

Yes,  we  will  each  sing  loudest,  each  owing  most,  each  desiring,  there- 
fore, to  bend  the  lowest  and  to  praise  the  most  heartily,  the  grace 
which  has  set  us  free. 

Time  flies  with  us ;  days  are  rushing  past ;  years  are  hastening 
away.  How  long  shall  it  be  ere  Christ  shall  gain  your  hearts  ?  How 
long  shall  ye  hear  of  him,  and  continue  to  refuse  his  grace  ?  How  long, 
ye  unconverted  ones,  will  ye  hug  your  chains  and  kiss  yourfettos? 
"  Turn  ye,  turn  ye  from  your  evil  ways;  for  why  will  ye  die,  0  houM 
of  Israel?"  "Seek  ye  the  Lord  while  he  may  be  found,  call  ye  upon 
him  while  he  is  near:  let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and  the 
unrighteous  man  his  thoughts :  and  let  him  return  unto  the  Lord, 
and  he  will  have  mercy  upon  him;  and  to  our  God,  for  he  trill 
abundantly  pardon." 


Portion  of  Scripturb  read  before  Sermon— Isaiah  xliL 


*^THE   TREASURY  OF   DAVID.'' 

BY  C.  H.  SPURGEON.      Vols.  L  &  IL 

This  Work  U  the  substance  of  many  Libraries.  It  contains  the  essence  of  all  ths 
commentators  upon  the  Psalms,  both  ancient  and  modem.  Besides  containing 
original  observations  by  the  Author,  it  is  crowded  with  the  wisdom  of  hundreds  of 
the  most  eminent  writers.  Reviewers  pronounce  the  work  to  be  of  the  higb^ 
value.  The  volumes  are  published  at  Ss.  each,  and  contain  far  more  matter  tbtn  is 
generally  sold  for  half  a  guinea.     Vol.  L  is  now  in  the  fourth  thousand. 

Published  by  Passmorf:  &  Alabaster,  Paternoster  Row,  and  may  be  bad 

of  all  Booksellers. 


1 


Pctr0p0fitait  Sfalrcmatle  f  ttlpit. 


MARA.H;  OE,  THE  BITTER  WATERS  SWEETENED. 


%  ^txmon 


Deuvebed  on  Lobd's-bat  Mobninq,  Apbil  23rd,  1871,  BY 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT     THE     METROPOLITAN     TABERNACLE,     NEWINGTON. 


*'  And  when  they  came  to  Marah,  they  could  not  drink  of  the  waters  of  Marah, 
or  they  were  bitter :  therefore  the  name  of  it  was  called  Marah.  And  the  pcoplo 
■nrmiured  against  Moses,  saying,  What  shall  we  drink  P  And  ho  cried  unto  the 
Uttd;  and  the  Lord  showed  him  a  tree,  which  when  he  had  cast  into  the  watered, 
he  waters  were  made  sweet." — Exodus  xv.  23,  24,  25. 

KThat  a  sudden  change  from  the  sound  of  the  timbrel  to  the  voice  of 
nnimoring  !  You  saw  the  maidens  dancing  three  days  ago,  and  you 
ifctle  dreamed  that  they  would  make  part  of  yonder  clamorous  throng 
irho  surround  the  servant  of  God,  and  cry,  "What  shall  we  drink?  " 
Such  are  the  changes  of  our  outward  conditions  and  of  our  inward 
[eelings ;  so  fickle  and  so  mutable  is  man.  What  is  there  that  can  be 
rested  upon  in  this  mortal  life  ?  We  say  to-day,  "My  mountain  standetli 
firm,  I  shall  never  be  moved  ;"  to-morrow,  ierra  firma  there  is  none, 
and  we  are  tossed  upon  a  stormy  sea.  Our  life  is  like  an  April  day, 
the  sunshine  alternates  with  the  shower ;  or  like  each  day  of  all  tlie 
year,  the  morning  and  the  evening  are  needful  to  complete  it.  Quick  on 
the  heels  of  light  treads  the  darkness,  followed  with  equal  haste  by 
light  again.  The  sun's  rule,  at  this  golden  hour,  is  but  temporary ; 
he  must  abdicate  in  favour  of  the  usurping  stars,  but  they,  in  their 
turn,  must  give  way  before  his  lordly  presence  yet  again.  This  world, 
which  is  our  inn,  owns  to  the  sign  of  the  "  Chequers  " — the  blacks  and 
whites  are  everywhere.  We  can  be  sure  of  nothing  between  here  and 
heaven  of  the  things  which  are  seen;  but  of  this  we  may  be  certain, 
that  underneath  all  the  outward  change  there  is  the  immutable  love  of 
God  towards  his  people,  and  that,  after  all,  the  change  lies  only  in  the 
fleeming  things,  not  in  the  things  which  truly  are ;  for  the  things  which 
^not  seen  are  eternal  and  changes  come  not  there ;  it  is  but  in  the 
tilings  which  are  seen  that  the  change  occurs.  Let  us  set  the  less  store 
by  ^rth,  because  its  fashion  abides  not.  Let  us  prize  heaven  more, 
because  it  cannot  fade. 

L  The  text  directs  your  attention,  first  of  all,  to  the  evils  of  the 
Wilderness.  We  need  not  spend  much  time  in  thinking  of  these  evils, 
because  they  throw  themselves  in  our  way  often  enough;  and  tlie 
^dency  of  our  mind  is  unduly  to  exaggerate  them.    Notice  tliat  the 

No.  987. 


230  METEOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

perils  and  trials  of  the  wilderness  occar  very  early  in  Ihe  pilgrim  /ijft. 
It  is  a  notion,  I  have  no  doubt,  of  very  young  Christians  who  still  have 
the  shell  upon  their  heads  and  are  scarce  hatched,  that  their  trials  are 
over  now  that  they  have  become  winged  ^vith  faith;  they  had  far  better 
have  reckoned  that  their  taials  have  begun  with  tenfold  force,  now  that 
they  are  numbered  with  the  servants  of  the  Most  Hipjh.    Whatever  else 
comes  not  to  thee,  0  servant  of  God,  this  will  surely  be  fulfilled,  "  In 
the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation,'*      "  What  son  is  he  whom  the 
Father  chasteneth  not  ? "     Some  privileges  are  not  common  to  all  the 
adopted,  but  the  privilege  of  chastisement  is  universal  to  all  true  sons. 
It  is  the  token  of  bastardy  if  the  rod  be  escaped,  but  scourging  is  the 
sure  pledge  of  paternal  love.    I  say,  however,  that  these  trials  come  very 
soon.    Israel  was  no  sooner  across  the  Red  Sea  than  they  went  three 
days  into  the  wilderness  of  Shur,  but  found  no  water ;  and  on  the  third 
day,  when  they  did  arrive  at  a  fountain,  they  found  worse  than  no  water, 
for  it  was  so  brackish,  so  altogether  unfit  for  drinking,  that  though 
they    thoue[ht    they  would    have    drunk    anything,  they  could  not 
possibly  drink  this.    What,  in  three  days,  must  they  that  sang  unto 
the  Lord  because   he  triumphed  gloriously,   nauseate  the  water  for 
which  their  thirst  makes  them  pant?    In  three  days  shall  they  be 
reduced  to  such  straits  that  they  must  drink  or  die,  and  yet  feel  that 
they  should  die  if  they  were  to  drink  of  such  nauseous  streams  ?    Ah 
yes,  with  some  of  us  our  delight  at  conversion  was  very  great,  our 
exhilaration  at  finding  the  Saviour  was  something  never  to  be  for- 
gotten, and  yet  only  a  day  or  so  after  we  were  stumbled  with  great 
temptation,  amazed  at  the  discovery  of  the  evil  of  our  hearts,  or  tried 
by  the  coldness  of  our  fellow  Christians,  or  the  cruelty  of  the  outside 
world,  so  that  we  found  we  had  come  to  Marah.    And  this  was  all  the 
severer  trial,  because  some  of  us  had  found  a  degree  of  pleasure  in  the 
ways  of  sin,  and  now  it  stumbled  us  to  find  sorrow  in  the  ways  of  God. 
When  Israel  was  in  Egyjjt,  they  drank  of  the  river  Nile.     No  ordinary 
water  that.    To  tliis  day  the  dwellers  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile  assert 
that  the  water  has  a  peculiar  taste  not  to  be  discovered  in  any  other 
stream,  and  they  prefer  the  waters  of  the  Nile  to  all  the  waters  in  the 
world  besides.     What  a  change  from  the  sweetness  of  the  Nile  to  the 
bitterness  of  Marah  !     Did  not  the  suggestion  rise  in  their  hearts,  "  It 
was  better  with  us  in  the  bondage  of  Egypt,  with  water  in  abundance, 
than  it  is  now  in  the  liberty  of  the  wilderness  with  the  bitterness  of 
Marah?"     The  devil  tempted  some  of  us  at  the  very  first  by  saying: 
"  Sec  what  you  have  got  by  being  a  Christian.   While  you  were  as  others 
are,  your  mind  had  mirth ;  now  you  have  come  out  and  followed  the 
Crucified,  you  have  lost  the  liveliness  of  your  spirits,  the  brightness 
of  your  wit — that  which  made  life  worth  having  is  taken  away  from 
you.''    Young  Christian,  is  that  your  case  to-day  ?     Be  not  stumbled, 
neither  believe  the  enemy.    Man,  it  were  better  to  die  at  Marah  free, 
than  live  a  slave  by  the  sweet  Nile.    Even  men  that  know  not  the  Spirit 
of  God  have  felt  it  were  better  to  die  free  than  live  slaves,  and  truly  to 
be  a  slave  to  Satan  is  so  degrading  a  thing,  that  if  this  mouth  were  for 
ever  filled  with  Marah*s  bitterness,  yet  were  it  better  to  be  so  than  to  be 
enchanted  with  the  pleasures  of  sin.    Yet  these  early  trials  are  very 
severe,  and  need  much  grace  lest  they  cause  us  great  mischiet 


MA£AH;    OB,   THE  BITTEB  WATERS  SWEETENED.  231 

Secondly,  these  evils  assume  varied  shapes.  You  noticed  that  for  the 
fest  three  days  in  the  wilderness  they  found  no  water;  that  is  one  trial. 
But  the  next  day,  or  at  the  end  of  the  third  day,  they  found  water.  Now 
they  thonght  their  trial  was  over  :  alas !  it  had  only  changed  its  shape. 
They  found  water,  but  it  was  too  bitter  to  drink.  Do  not  be  in  a  hurry  to 
change  your  trials,  dear  friends.  We  have  heard  of  some  who  have 
repined  that  they  had  no  children,  and,  like  Rachel,  their  cry  was,  "  Give 
me  children,  or  else  I  die."  Ere  long  they  have  had  children  who  proved 
to  be  far  worse  than  none.  Better  no  son  than  an  Absalom.  We  have 
known  those  who  were  in  good  health,  but  discontented  because  they  had 
no  wealth;  they  have  gained  wealth  at  last,  but  with  an  injured 
constitution,  they  have  had  no  power  to  enjoy  it.  If  we  could  choose 
our  trials,  we  might  well  remember  the  wisdom  of  the  old  philo- 
sopher, who  told  the  people  oppressed  by  a  tyrant  to  be  content  with 
his  tyranny,  "  for,"  said  he,  "  it  is  with  oppressors  as  with  mosquitoes, 
let  those  suck  which  are  now  upon  you,  for  if  you  drive  those  off,  the 
fresh  ones  which  will  succeed  them  will  be  hungrier  than  those  that  are 
there  now  :  better  be  content  with  the  tyranny  you  have,  than  seek  a  new 
one."  It  is  much  the  same  with  the  trials  we  now  feel  ;  you  will  get 
used  to  them  by  degrees :  they  will  spend  their  force.  Desire  for  a 
<;hange  of  trials  may  only  be  a  wish  for  a  worse  affliction,  for  whether 
was  the  worse,  to  have  no  water,  or  to  have  the  water  and  to  find  it  so 
bitter  that  you  could  not  drink  it  ? 

Yet  when  God  changes  the  trial  be  well  satisfied  that  it  should  be 
changed.  You  may  anticipate,  Christian,  that  you  will  have  your  trial 
changed :  indeed,  you  must  reckon  that  it  is  so.  I  mean,  that  if  to-day 
it  is  smooth  sailing  with  you,  though  yesterday  waves  rolled  mountains 
high,  it  is  only  a  change  of  trial  ;  you  are  now  tried  by  prosperity, 
•which  may  prove  to  be  a  more  severe  test  for  you  than  adversity.  Is 
the  wind  balmy,  blows  it  from  the  south  ?  Is  it  but  another  trial  for 
thee,  be  sure  of  that,  for  they  who  have  withstood  the  northern  blast 
and  grown  the  ruddier  and  stronger  for  its  influence,  have  often  grown 
feint  and  weary  under  softer  airs.  Watch  thou  in  all  things,  thy  trials 
are  with  thee  constantly ;  the  crucible  is  changed,  the  fire  still  burns. 

Note  again,  that  as  the  trials  of  the  wilderness  came  soon,  and 
assumed  various  shapes,  so  often  do  the  trials  of  the  Christian  touch 
very  vital  ^natters.  They  found  no  water,  or  finding  it,  it  was  bitter.  It 
is  not  said  they  found  no  wine — a  small  trial  indeed  ;  it  is  not  said  they 
found  no  milk,  yet  might  the  infant  children  have  been  sorely  troubled 
by  such  a  want;  but  they  found  no  drinkable  water.  Here  was  a 
denial  of  an  essential  of  life.  They  must  have  water,  it  was  no  luxury, 
it  was  a  necessity;  with  the  hot,  burning  sand  beneath  them  reflect- 
ing the  fierce  heat  of  a  cruel  sun,  not  to  have  water  in  the  wilderness 
is  to  feel  an  urgent  necessity  producing  a  terrible  pain.  God  may 
tench  ns,  and  probably  has  done  so  or  mil,  in  points  most  vital.  To 
he  tried  in  the  loss  of  some  of  your  superfluities,  ray  brethren,  is 
but  little ;  but  to  lose  even  the  little  that  you  had  to  live  upon,  to 
be  brought  to  straitness  of  bread,  this  is  real  tribulation.  To 
have  the  hand  put  forth  to  touch  your  bone  and  your  flesh,  this  is 
affliction.  Believe  me,  our  vii-tues  and  gi'aces  look  very  fine,  and  we 
think  much  of  them  until  they  undergo  that  ordeal,  but  that  test 


222  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

mercy  and  grace  in  the  conversion  of  men  are  yet  to  be  read  by  mgeb 
and  glorifie<l  spirits.     If  it  be  so  it  will  still  be  true  that  he  comes 
quickly,  for  what  will  time  be  compared  with  eternity?     Even  if  the 
space  taken  up  by  the  world's  history  be  not  a  brief  six  thousand  yean^ 
but  sixty  thousand  times  six  thousand  years,  yet  will  it  be  but  as  a  drop 
of  a  bucket  compared  with  the  years  of  the  right  hand  of  the  Hort 
High,  the  lifetime  of  the  Ancient  of  Days.    Fight  on  hopefully,  my 
brethren,  and  be  not  distressed  with  rumours  of  times  and  seasons,  bot 
believe  ye  this,  that  God  is,  in  Cinist  Jesus,  reconciling  the  world  anto 
himself,  and  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  shall  see  the  salvation  of  oar  God. 
Watt^h  daily  for  the  Lord's  coming,  but  yet  struggle  to  advance  his  em- 
pire, for  **he  shall  have  dominion  also  from  sea  to  sea,  and  from  the  riycr 
unto  the  ends  of  the  earth.**  The  Lord  has  not  withdrawn  his  hand  from 
his  **  elect,  in  whom  his  soul  delighteth."     He  will  subdue  nations 
before  him,  he  will  loose  the  loins  of  kings,  to  open  before  him  the  two- 
leaved  gates.    With  such  a  deliverer  so  gloriously  upheld,  there  is  no 
room  for  fear  of  failure.     Our  hope  and  faith  joyfully  rest  in  him  to 
whom    the  Eternal  gives  his  almightiness  wherewith  to  subdue  all 
things  unto  himself. 

II.  We  will  now  advance  a  little  further,  the  Lord  helping  us. 
Having  contemplated  the  glorious  One  who  sent  Jesus  to  the  work  of 
man's  emancipation,  let  us,  in  the  second  place,  consider  the  sent  Ohb 

HIMSELF. 

AVe  have  him  described  in  the  first  verse  of  this  chapter,  and  the  first 
words  which  we  will  select  from  the  description  inform  us  that  Jesus  is 
a  chasm  one.    "  Mine  elect,  in  whom  my  soul  deli<ihteth."     God  has  be«D 
plcjisod  to  set  apart  his  wcll-bcloved  Son  to  be  the  Saviour  of  sinners, 
and  in  every  way  he  is  most  suitable.     As  man  he  is  supremely  adapted 
for  the  work  ;  no  other  of  woman  born  was  fitted  for  the  enterprise. 
Born  in  a  peculiar  manner,  without  taint  or  blemish,  he  alone  of  human 
kind  possessed  the  holy  nature  needful  to  make  him  God's  raessengerof 
love.     1  tried  to  show  just  now  that  God  has  girded  our  Lord  with 
his  omnipotence,  and  this  ought  to  lead  every  sinner  to  feel  that  Christ 
can  save  him,  for  what  cannot  Omnipotence  do?     We  may  not  talk  of 
imi)ossil)ilities  or  even  dilliculties  when  we  have  almightiness  before  us. 
No  sinner  can  be  dithcult  to  save,  no  bonds  hard  to  remove,  when  God, 
the  Almighty  One,  comes  forth  to  -rave.    Kow  look  ati  the  other  side  of 
the  picture,  and  remember  that  Christ  Jesus  was  the  most  suitable  per- 
son in  whom  the  Father  could  place  the  fulness  of  his  saving  power. 
In  his  complex  person  he  is  every  way  adapted  to  stand  as  Mediator 
between  God  and  man.     He  who  laid  help  upon  one  that  is  mighty, 
and  exalted  one  chosen  out  of  the  people,  was  guided  by  infallible  wisdom 
in  his  choice.     None  other  was  so  tit  as  he;  in  fact  there  was  no  other. 
"Other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  that  is  laid.'*     Other  door 
of  hope  can  no  man  open  than  that  which  God  has  opened  in  the 
person  of  Christ.      0  sinner,  I  beseech  thee  accept  wnat  God  has 
wiselv  chosen.     Let  God's  choice  be  tliv  willing  choice.     At  this  hour, 
constrained  by  the  grace  of  God,  say,  **If  God  has  chosen  the  liOrd 
Jesus  to  bo  a  propitiation  for  sin,  my  heart  accepts  him  as  the  atone- 
meut  lor  my  sin,  feeling  that  he  alone  can  save  me."     If  thus  thoudoet 
elect  the  Lord's  elect  One,  thou  shalt  find  him  precious. 


VICTOB  EMHAKUEL,   EMANCIPATOR.  ^23 

But  we  are  also  told  in  the  first  verse  that  the  Lord  Jeenn  is  anointed 
1o  this  warkf  as  well  as  a  choice  one  for  it.  "  I  have  put  my  Spirit  upon 
him."  Now,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  greatest  of  all  actors  in  the  world  of 
mind.  He  it  is  who  can  illuminate,  persuade,  and  control  the  spirits  of 
men.  He  doeth  as  he  wills  with  mind,  even  as  in  the  first  creation  the 
Lord  wrought  as  he  willed  with  matter.  Now,  if  Jesus  Christ  has  the 
fulness  of  the  Holy  Spirit  resting  upon  him,  it  is  not  supposable  that 
any  sinner  shall  be  so  desperately  enslaved  that  he  cannot  set  him  free. 
We  are  about  to  speak  of  blind  eyes  to  be  opened,  but  in  the  light  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  what  eye  need  remain  blind  ?  We  shall  speak  of  cap- 
tives to  be  liberated,  but  with  God's  free  Spirit  to  loose  him  what  soul 
need  be  bound  ?  Bold  men  have  taught  doctrines  which  have  emanci- 
pated the  minds  of  their  fellows  from  the  slavery  of  superstition,  but 
the  Holy  Ghost's  teach injrs  deliver  minds  from  bondage  of  every 
kind,  and  make  men  free  before  the  living  God.  Trembling  sinner, 
accept  Christ  as  your  Saviour ;  God  appoints  him  ;  God  anoints 
him.  Are  not  these  two  reasons  sufiicient  to  make  him  acceptable  to 
your  soul  ? 

Furthermore,  the  Kedeemer  is  spoken  of  as  being  gentle  and  lowly  of 
heart,  which  should  commend  him  much  to  every  lowly  and  contrite 
spirit.  **  A  bruised  reed  shall  he  not  break,  and  the  smoking  flax  shall 
he  not  quench."  We  need  a  Saviour  who  can  be  touched  with  the 
feeling  of  our  infirmities,  and  Jesus  is  such.  Souls  conscious  of  sin 
are  very  tender,  and  agitated  with  many  fears;  to  cure  a  wounded 
conscience  is  no  fool's  work,  but  fit  lahour  for  the  most  experienced 
phvsician.  See  you,  then,  how  fitted  Christ  is.  He  never  yet  said  an 
nnkind  word  to  a  soul  that  desired  to  find  mercy  at  his  hands.  In  the 
records  of  his  life  you  may  find  him  try,  but  you  shall  never  see  him  repel, 
an  anxious  spirit.  When  feeble  faith  could  only  touch  the  hem  of  his 
garment,  yet  virtue  flowed  from  him.  When  the  leper  said,  "Lord,  if 
thou  wilt,* thou  canst  make  me  clean/'  it  was  but  poor  faith,  but  that 
faith  saved  him.  Though  you  cannot  yet  believe  as  you  would,  yet 
say,  '*  Lord,  I  believe  ;  help  thou  mine  unbelief,"  and  he  will  not  reject 
yon.  Look  at  the  smoking  candle-wick  which  yields  no  light,  but 
makes  much  oifensive  smoke  ;  yet,  perchance,  a  living  fire  lingers 
in  it,  and  therefore  the  tender  Saviour  will  not  quench  it,  but  will 
even  fan  it  to  a  flame.  And  that  bruised  reed,  how  it  mars  the 
music  of  the  pipes  ;  draw  it  out  and  break  it.  So  would  men  do,  bat 
not  so  the  sinner's  Friend.  He  makes  it  perfect  yet  again,  and  pours 
the  music  of  his  love  through  it.  0  thou  who  art  in  thine  own 
esteem  utterly  worthless,  only  fit  to  be  thrown  away,  unfit  to  live  and 
unfit  to  die ;  Jesus  Christ,  the  gentle  One,  will  give  thee  mercy,  if  thou 
seek  him,  and  in  giving  he  will  not  upbraid  thee.  0  wandering  child, 
Jesus  will  introduce  thee  to  his  Father,  who  will  kiss  thee  with  the 
kisses  of  his  love,  and  take  off  thy  rags  of  sin,  and  clothe  thee  with 
glorious  robes  of  righteousness.  Only  come  thou  to  him,  for  he  is  such 
an  one  that  he  cannot  reject  thee.  **  How  can  I  come  ?  "  saith  one.  A 
prayer  will  bring  thee ;  an  anxious  desire  will  be  as  a  chariot  to  thee. 
A  trust  in  him  hath  brought  thee,  and  Christ  is  thine,  if  thou  dost  now 
accept  him.  If  thy  soul  is  truly  willing  to  have  Christ,  Christ  hath 
made  thee  willing,  and  has  already  begun  to  set  thee  free.     May  these 


224  HETBOFOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

thon<^ht8  concerning  the  g:reat  Emancipator  cheer  thee  on  to  confidenee 
in  hirn. 

One  point  more  in  this  direction.    The  Christ  ^rho  has  oome  tx>  safe 
the  sons  of  men  is  persevering  to  the  last  degree.     "  He  shall  not  fail, 
nor  be  discouraged,  till  he  have  set  judgment  in  the  earth :  and  Uw 
isles  shall  wait  for  his  law.*'    Men  are  unwilling  to  be  saved;  they  do 
not  desire  to  be broaght  out  of  their  prison-houses;  but  Jesna  Gnrisc 
will  not  cease  to  teach,  nor  cease  to  seek,  nor  cease  to  save,  till  eveiy 
one  of  his  elect  is  redeemed  from  the  ruin  of  the  fall,  and  until  a 
multitude  beyond  all  count  shall  surround  the  Father's  throne.    I  tell 
thee,  soul,  if  Christ  wills  to  save  thee,  he  will  save  thee.    He  will  trKk 
thy  footsteps,  wander  where  thou  mayst.    If  thou  shouldest  escape 
time  afler  time,  from  the  arrows  of  conviction,  and  plunge  again  and 
again  into  sin,  yet  will  he  seek  thee  out  and  find  thee  yet     0  delay 
not,  but  yield  to  his  power !     I  pray  that  he  may  stretch   out  his 
sovereign  arm  at  this  moment,  and  rescue  thee  from  thyself.     If  thy 
heart  were  as  adamant,  or  as  the  nether  millstone,  he  can  dissolve  it 
with  a  touch.    0  that  the  rock-breaking  hammer  would  come  down 
upon  thee  now !    He  is  mighty  to  save ;  may  he  prove  hia  mightiness 
in  thee ! 

III.  It  is  time  that  we  expound  the  text  itself,  and  review  the  work 

ITSKLF. 

According  to  the  text,  the  Messiah's  work  of  grace  is  divided  into  three 
parts,  of  which  the  first  is,  to  o})en  /lie  blind  eyes.  Here  is  a  notable 
work  which  brings  much  glory  to  our  Lord.  Man's  understanding  is 
perverted  from  the  knowledge  of  God,  from  a  true  sense  of  sin,  from  a 
realisation  of  divine  justice,  from  a  right  estimate  of  salvation.  The 
understanding,  which  is  the  eye  of  the  soul,  is  darkened.  But  when 
the  anointed  Saviour  comes,  he  removes  the  scales  of  our  mental 
ophthalmia,  and  in  the  light  of  God  we  see  light,  and  then  the  sinner 
is  humbled  and  bowed  down,  for  he  perceives  liis  guilt  and  the  justice 
of  God.  Moreover,  he  is  filled  with  alarm,  for  he  sees  the  bleeding 
Saviour  bearing  Jehovah's  wrath,  and  rightly  judges  that  in  every  case 
sin  must  receive  a  recompense  of  wrath;  for  if  sin  laid  on  Christ  was 
punished,  how  much  more  must  ))crs()nal  sin  involve  banishment  frcm  the 
presence  of  the  Most  High  ?  The  firmer  is  then  made  to  see  that  the 
only  way  in  which  sin  can  be  removed  is  through  the  expiatory  sufferings 
of  a  substitute.  He  is  led  to  see  that  the  atonement  avails  for  him 
upon  his  believing.  He  is  led  to  understand  what  believing  is.  He 
does  believe;  he  trusts,  and  then  in  trusting  he  is  made  to  see  the 
completeness  of  pardon,  and  the  glory  of  the  justification  which  comes 
to  us  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  You  may  think  that  this  is  an  ea^ 
thiui^:  for  men  to  see,  trained  in  the  doctrine  of  it  from  their  child- 
hood, and  hearing  it  incessantly  from  the  pulpit;  but  believe  me, 
simple  as  it  seems  to  be,  no  man  receives  it  unless  it  has  been  given 
him  from  heaven.  We  may  say  to  each  one  who  has  seen  all  this, 
*'  Blessed  art  thou,  for  flesh  and  blood  hath  not  revealed  it  unto  thee." 
Miiny  of  us  heard  the  gospel  from  our  childhood,  but  until  the  Holy 
Spirit  explained  to  us  what  it  was  to  be  a  sinner,  and  what  it  was  to 
believe  in  Jesus,  we  did  not  know  even  the  rudiments  of  the  gospel.  We 
were  in  darkness  ourselves,  though  the  light  shone  round  about  us;  and 


VICTOR  EMMANUEL,   EMANCIPATOR.  225 

well  mijrht  we  be,  for  our  eyes  were  not  opened.  When  Jesus  came 
we  saw  it  all,  and  we  understood  the  mystery.  Our  ouce  blind  eyes 
clearly  saw  ourselves  lost,  and  Christ  suffering  instead  of  us  ;  we  believed 
in  him,  oar  sins  disappeared,  and  we  were  accepted  in  the  Beloved.  My 
dear  friend,  if  tbon  art  seeking  rest,  I  pray  the  Lord  to  open  thine  eyes  to 
see  tbe  simplicities  of  the  gospel.  One  touch  of  his  finger  will  make 
thee  wise  nnto  salvation.  There  is  no  need  for  thee  to  study  the 
iwoity-one  folio  volumes  of  Albertns  Magnus,  or  even  the  fifby-two 
Tolnmes  of  John  Calvin,  for  the  whole  secret  of  the  gospel  lies  in  these 
few  words,  ^* Believe  and  live;"  yet  then  canst  not  open  the  casket 
nnless  the  Lord  give  thee  the  secret  key.  It  needs  an  opened  eye  to 
see  even  through  a  glass  window;  the  clear  witness  of  the  gospel  is 
dark  to  blind  eyes. 

The  next  work  of  the  Messiah,  according  to  the  text,  is  to  hring  out 
Ike  prisoners  from  ths  prison.  This,  I  think,  relates  to  the  bondage 
under  which  a  man  lies  to  his  sins.  Habits  of  sin,  like  iron  nets,  surround 
the  sinner,  and  he  cannot  escape  their  meshes.  The  man  sins,  and 
im^ines  that  he  cannot  help  sinning.  How  often  do  the  ungodly  tell 
ns  that  they  cannot  renounce  the  world,  cannot  break  off  their  sins  by 
righteousness,  and  cannot  believe  in  Jesus?  Let  all  men  know  that  the 
Savioor  has  come  on  pui-pose  to  remove  every  bond  of  sin  from  the 
captive,  and  to  set  him  free  from  every  chain  of  evil.  I  have  known 
men  strive  against  the  habit  of  blasphemy,  others  ap;ainst  unchaste 
passions,  and  many  more  against  a  haughty  spirit,  or  an  angry  temper; 
and  when  they  have  striven  manfully  but  unsuccessfully  in  their  own 
strength,  they  have  been  filled  with  bitter  chagrin  that  they  should  have 
been  so  betrayed  by  themselves.  When  a  man  believes  in  Jesus  his 
resolve  to  become  a  freeman  is  to  a  great  extent  accomplished  at  once. 
Some  sins  die  the  moment  we  believe  in  Jesus,  and  trouble  us  no  more; 
others  hang  on  to  us,  and  die  by  slow  degrees,  but  they  are  overcome 
so  as  never  again  to  get  the  mastery  over  us.  0  struggler  after  mental, 
moral,  spiritual  liberty,  if  thou  wouldst  be  free,  thine  only  possible 
freedom  is  in  Christ.  If  thou  wouldst  shake  off  evil  habits  or  any 
other  mental  bondage,  I  shall  prescribe  no  remedy  to  thee  but  this,  to 
oommit  thyself  to  Christ  the  Liberator. 

"  The  gfttes  of  braso  before  him  burst, 
The  iron  fetters  yield." 

Love  him,  and  thou  shalt  hate  sin.  Trust  him,  and  thou  shalt  no  more 
imst  thyself.  Submit  thyself  to  the  sway  of  the  incarnate  God,  and  he 
will  break  the  dragon's  head  within  thee,  and  hurl  Satan  beneath  thy 
feet.  Nothing  else  can  do  it.  Christ  must  have  the  glory  of  thy  con- 
quest of  self.  He  can  set  thee  free  from  sin's  iron  yoke.  He  never 
fiuled  yet,  and  he  never  shall.  I  earnestly  entreat  any  man  who  desires 
to  break  off  his  sins  (and  we  mnst  break  them  off  or  perish  by  them),  to 
try  this  divine  remedy,  and  see  if  it  does  not  give  him  holy  liberty. 
Ask  the  thousands  who  have  already  believed  in  Jesus,  and  their  testi- 
mony will  confii  m  my  doctrine.  Faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  is  the  end  of 
bondage  and  the  dawn  of  freedom. 

The  last  part  of  this  divine  work  is,  bringing  tJiem  that  lit  in 
darkness  cut  of  the  pison-home.     This  we  will  refer  to  those  who  are 


22  G  METllOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

truly  emancipated,  and  yet  by  reason  of  despondency  sit  down  in  tiie 
dark  dunjjeon.  We  have  in  our  pastoral  duties  constantly  to  confiole 
persons  who  are  free  from  their  sins,  having  by  divine  ^rrace  got  the 
mastery  over  them,  but  yet  they  are  in  sadness.  The  door  is  open,  the 
bars  are  broken,  but  with  strange  obstinacy  of  despondency  they  renudn 
in  the  cell  of  fear,  in  which  there  is  no  necessity  for  them  to  continiie 
for  a  moment.  They  cannot  believe  that  these  good  things  are  irae 
to  them.  They  forgiven?  They  could  believe  everybody  else  to  be 
pardoned  but  themselves.  They  made  the  children  of  God  ?  Nay, 
they  could  hope  for  their  sisters ;  they  have  joy  in  knowing  that  their 
father  is  a  child  of  God,  but  as  to  themselves— can  sum  blessings 
really  fall  to  the  tot  of  such  unworthy  ones?  We  have  talked  with 
hundreds  of  such  and  tried  to  console  them,  but  we  have  only  learned 
our  own  nnskilfulness  in  the  art  of  consolation.  They  are  rich  ia 
inventions  for  self-torture,  ingenious  in  escaping  comfort.  Bot^  ah! 
the  blessed  Master  of  our  souls,  whose .  business  it  has  been  sinoe 
Adam  fell  to  bind  up  broken  hearts,  is  never  foiled.  When  his 
eternal  Spirit  comes  to  anoint  with  the  oil  of  joy,  he  soon  gives  beauty 
for  ashes.  The  moiimful  sentinel  of  tlie  night-watches  mnst  rejoice 
when  the  day  breaketh  and  the  Sun  of  rii^hteousness  shines  forth. 

Although  I  s]x»ak  to  you  in  very  common-place  language,  yet  the 
theme  is  rich.  This  one  thought  alone  ought  to  make  our  hearts  danoe 
for  joy,  to  think  that  the  Christ  of  God  undertakes  to  lift  up  desponding 
and  despairing  spirits  into  hope  and  joy  once  more.  I  know  who  will 
rejoice  to  hear  this.  It  is  yonder  good  woman,  who  these  many  yean 
has  been  in  spiritual  bondage.  It  is  yonder  young  man,  who  has 
carried  a  secret  burden  month  after  month.  It  is  yonder  aged  man, 
who  longs  to  find  Christ  ere  he  gathers  up  his  feet  in  his  dying  bed,  and 
who  thinks  that  his  hour  of  grace  has  passed.  Man,  it  is  not  so. 
Christ  is  still  mighty  to  save.  Still  doth  the  message  run  :  "  He  that 
believeth  on  him  is  not  condemned."  "Whosoever  will,  let  him 
take  the  water  of  life  freely."  **Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth,  come 
ye  to  the  waters,  and  he  that  Iiath  no  money;  come  ye,  buy,  and  eat;  yea, 
come,  buy  wine  and  milk  without  money  and  without  prioe.*'  Prisoners 
of  hope,  your  liberator  is  near  at  Jiand.  Trust  him  and  be  free. 
Though  it  seem  a  venturesome  believing,  yet  venture  on  him.  He  can- 
not, will  not  reject  you;  he  will  proclaim  a  jubilee,  and  set  each 
bondslave  free. 

See,  then,  how  the  great  Redeemer  blessed  us :  Jesns  the  Christ 
does  all  things  well;  he  cleare  the  understanding;  he  breaks  the  power 
of  sinfnl  habits  ;  he  removes  the  load  of  despondency  ;  he  doth, 
it  all.  Christ  Jesus,  Mary's  son  and  Jehovah's  son ;  maH,  bone 
of  our  bone  nnd  flesh  of  our  flesh,  yet  God  over  all,  blessed  for 
ever;  he  who  died  on  Calvary,  whose  precious  blood  is  the  panacea 
for  all  human  ills,  he  it  is,  and  he  only,  who  is  the  Liberator  of  om: 
fallen  race. 

IV.  What  is  the  desigx  of  God  in  all  this? 

This  question  is  answered  in  the  next  verse  to  the  text :  "I  am  the 
Lord  :  that  is  my  name :  and  my  glory  will  I  not  give  to  another." 
The  great  end  of  God  in  Christ  was  the  manifestation  of  his  own 
glorious  attributes — a  simple  truth,  but  big  with  comfort,  for  should 


VICTOR  EMMAKUEIj,  EMANCIPATOR.  227 

th%  sinner  \?ho  hns  been  an  atrocions  offender  against  laws  hnman 
and  divine  conceive  himself  to  be  an  improper  subject  for  the 
fCThce  of  God,  I  wonld  take  him  bj  the  hand,  and,  lest  despair 
driye  him  to  farther  sin,- 1  wonld  pnt  this  truth  clearly  before  him. 
Where  is  mercy  most  glorified  ?  Is  it  not  in  passing  by  the  greatest 
olTences  ?  Thon  hast  great  offences ;  there  is  room  in  Ihee  for  mercy 
to  be  greatly  displayed.  Where ^is  grace  glorified?  Is  it  not  in 
oonqnering  the  most  violent  passions?  Then  hast  such  ;  grace 
may  therefore  be  glorified  in  thee.  Why,  great  sinner,  instead 
of  not  being  a  fit  subject  for  grace,  I  will  venture  to  say  that 
thou  art  in  all  respects  one  of  the  most  suitable.  There  is  elbow- 
room  in  thee  for  grace  to  work.  There  is  room  in  thine  emptiness 
for  Ood's  fulness.  There  is  a  clear  stage  in  thy  sinfulness  for 
Qod*8  superabounding  grace.  But  \ou  have  been  a  ringleader  in  the 
devil's  army.  Yes,  and  how  can  God  strike  a  more  telling  blow  against 
the  hosts  of  darkness  than  by  capturing  you?  But  you  tell  me  that 
you  are  an  enonnous  sinner.  How  will  the  Lord  of  love  encourage 
other  sinners  to  come  better  than  by  calling  you  ?  For  it  will  be 
rumoured  about  among  your  fellow-sinners : — **  Have  yon  heard  that 
such  an  one  is  saved  ?  "  I  know  they  will  jeer,  but  still,  in  their  secret 
hearts,  they  will  think  it  over,  and  they  will  say,  "  How  is  this  ?  "  and 
they  will  be  led  to  enquire  into  the  ways  of  God's  grace.  A  brother 
told  the  church,  a  short  time  since,  a  little  of  his  history,  and  it 
caused  us  all  to  rejoice  in  sovereign  grace.  He  had  lived  in  all  manner 
of  sin  and  iniquity;  his  profession  liad  been  for  some  years  that  of  a 
public  runner,  and  in  that  course  of  life  he  was  brought  into  collision 
with  the  scum  of  society.  He  was  practised,  also,  in  the  pugilistic  art, 
and  that,  we  all  know,  is  the  very  reverse  of  having  an  elevating  tendency. 
But  he  came  to  the  Tabernacle,  and  here  Jesus  met  with  him,  and  he 
rejoices  now  to  teach  to  others  the  gospel  which  he  once  rejected.  But 
what,  think  you,  has  he  been  accustomed  to  do  these  three  years?  Some 
of  onr  brethren  preach  in  the  streets,  and  he  goes  with  them,  and  after 
they  have  told  of  what  the  grace  of  God  can  do,  he  humbly  and  yet 
boldly  rises  and  says,  **  I  am  a  living  witness  to  what  grace  can  do ; 
I  can  declare  to  you  what  God*s  love  has  done  for  me."  If  the  sermon 
which  precedes  his  little  speech  has  not  interested  the  peoi)le,  they 
arc  quite  certain  to  be  struck  with  his  personal  testimony,  for  in  some 
lcK:alities  many  of  the  street  folk  know  him,  and  as  they  look  at  him 
they  say,  "  Why,  that  is  old  So-and-so.  I  knew  him  when  he  was  this 
and  tliat,  and  here  he  is  converted ; "  and  his  witness-bearing  works 
mightily  among  his  old  friends  and  acquaintances.  I  say,  then, 
if  now  t  speak  to  any  other  who  has  bccntTjrrcat  offender,  a  drunkard, 
or  what  not,  if  my  Master  does  but  set  you  free  and  enlist  you  in  his 
army,  there  will  be  such  a  shout  go  up  in  the  hosts  of  Israel  as  shall 
make  heaven  ring,  while  the  Philistines  shall  trerahie,  for  their  Goliath 
shall  be  slain,  and  a  new  champion  raised  up  from  his  dead  body  to 
fight  for  the  Lord  of  hosts.  If  the  Lord  saved  men  because  of  their 
merits,  there  would  be  no  hope  for  great  sinners,  nor  indeed  for  any  one; 
bot  if  he  saves  us  for  his  own  glory,  that  he  may  magnify  his  grace  and 
his  mercy  among  tl>e  sons  of  men,  then  none  need  despair.  Up  to  the 
very  gates  of  hell  would  I  preach  the  gospel,  and  between  the  jaws  of 


228  HETROFOLITAN  l^ABEBNACLE  PULPIT. 

death  would  I  proclaim  it.  God  to  gloriiV  his  grace  sets  free  tbe 
captives,  then  why  should  not  the  most  hell-deserrinp:  sinner,  whose 
heart  is  like  hardened  steel,  yet  become  a  monument  of  Christ's  power 
to  save  ?  I  remember  one  who  used  to  saf  that  if  God  would  but  hare 
mercy  on  him  he  should  never  hear  the  last  of  it,  and  it  may  well  be 
the  resolve  of  all  of  ns,  that  earth  and  heaven  shall  never  hear  the  last 
of  our  praises  if  grace  shall  but  save  us.  As  one  of  our  hymns  puts 
it— 


**  Then  loudest  of  the  crowd  Til  sing, 
^hile  heaYen*8  resoanding  mansions  ring 
With  shouts  of  sovereign  grace.** 

Tes,  we  will  each  sing  loudest,  each  owing  most,  each  desiring,  thaie- 
fore,  to  bend  the  lowest  and  to  praise  the  most  heartily,  the  grace 
which  has  set  us  free. 

Time  flies  with  us ;  days  are  rushing  past ;  years  are  hastening 
away.  How  long  shall  it  be  ere  Christ  shall  gain  your  hearts  ?  How 
long  shall  ye  hear  of  him,  and  continue  to  refuse  his  grace  ?  How  long, 
ye  unconverted  ones,  will  ye  hug  your  chains  and  kiss  your  fetters? 
"  Turn  ye,  turn  ye  from  your  evil  ways;  for  why  will  ye  die,  0  bouse 
of  Israel?"  "Seek  ye  the  Lord  while  he  may  be  found,  call  ye  upon 
him  while  he  is  near:  let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and  the 
unrighteous  man  his  thoughts :  and  let  him  return  unto  the  Lord, 
and  he  will  have  mercy  upon  him;  and  to  our  God,  for  he  irill 
abundantly  pardon." 


Portion  or  Scripture  read  before  SERMON—Isaiah  xliL 


^^THE  TREASURY  OF   DAVID/ 

BY  a  H.  SPURGEON.      Vols.  L  &  IL 

This  Work  is  the  substance  of  many  Libraries.  It  contains  the  essence  of  all  tlie 
commentators  upon  the  Psalms,  both  ancient  and  modem.  Besides  containing 
original  observations  by  the  Author,  it  is  crowded  with  the  wisdom  of  hundreds  of 
the  most  eminent  writers.  Reviewers  pronounce  the  work  to  be  of  the  highest 
ralue.  The  volumes  are  published  at  Ss.  each,  and  contain  far  more  matter  than  is 
generally  sold  for  half  a  guinea.     Vol.  L  is  now  in  the  fourth  thousand. 

Published  by  Passmore  &  Alabaster,  Paternoster  Row,  and  may  be  hid 

of  all  Booksellers. 


^tt^aWm  W>^wmk  f  nlpft. 


MAEAH;  OE,  THE  BITTEE  WATEES  SWEETENED. 


%  ^txmon 


Deuveked  on  Lobd's-sat  Mobnikg,  Apbii.  23rd,  1871,  BY 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT     THE     METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,     NEWINGTON. 


*'  And  when  they  came  to  Marah,  they  could  not  drink  of  the  waters  of  Marah, 
for  they  were  bitter :  therefore  the  name  of  it  was  called  Marah.  And  the  pcoplo 
mrmiired  against  Moses,  saying,  What  shall  wo  drink  F  And  he  cried  unto  the 
Lord ;  and  the  Lord  showed  him  a  tree,  which  when  he  had  cast  into  the  waters, 
!ihc  waters  were  made  sweet.'* — Exodus  xv.  23,  24,  25. 

What  a  sadden  change  from  the  sound  of  the  timbrel  to  the  voice  of 
Dmrmaring  !  You  saw  the  maidens  dancing  three  days  ago,  and  you 
little  dreamed  that  they  would  make  part  of  yonder  clamorous  throng 
who  surround  the  servant  of  God,  and  cry,  "  What  shall  we  drink  ?  " 
Such  are  the  changes  of  our  outward  conditions  and  of  our  inward 
feelings ;  so  fickle  and  so  mutable  is  man.  What  is  there  that  can  be 
rested  upon  in  this  mortal  life  ?  We  say  to-day,  "My  mountain  standeth 
firm,  I  shall  never  be  moved  ;"  to-morrow,  terra  jirma  there  is  none, 
and  we  are  tossed  upon  a  stormy  sea.  Our  life  is  like  an  April  day, 
the  sunshine  alternates  with  the  shower ;  or  like  each  day  of  all  tlie 
year,  the  morning  and  the  evening  are  needful  to  complete  it.  Quick  on 
the  heels  of  light  treads  the  darkness,  followed  with  equal  haste  by 
light  again.  The  sun's  rule,  at  this  golden  hour,  is  but  temporary ; 
he  must  abdicate  in  favour  of  the  usurping  stars,  but  they,  in  their 
torn,  must  give  way  before  his  lordly  presence  yet  again.  This  world, 
which  is  our  inn,  owns  to  the  sign  of  the  "  Chequers  '* — the  blacks  and 
whites  are  everywhere.  We  can  be  sure  of  nothing  between  here  and 
heaven  of  the  things  which  are  seen;  but  of  this  we  may  be  certain, 
that  underneath  all  the  outward  change  there  is  the  immutable  love  of 
God  towards  his  people,  and  that,  after  all,  the  change  lies  only  in  the 
seeming  things,  not  in  the  things  which  truly  are ;  for  the  things  which 
are  not  seen  are  eternal  and  changes  come  not  there ;  it  is  but  in  the 
things  which  are  seen  that  the  change  occurs.  Let  us  set  the  less  store 
by  earth,  because  its  fashion  abides  not.  Let  us  prize  heaven  more, 
because  it  cannot  fade. 

L  The  text  directs  your  attention,  first  of  all,  to  the  evils  of  the 
WEiDERNESS.  We  neeo  not  spend  much  time  in  thinking  of  these  evils, 
because  they  throw  themselves  in  our  way  often  enough;  and  the 
tendency  of  our  mind  is  unduly  to  exaggerate  them.    Notice  that  the 

No.  987. 


230  METEOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

perils  and  trials  of  the  wilderness  occnr  very  early  in  Ihe  pUgrim  J^t, 
It  is  a  notion,  I  hare  no  doubt,  of  very  young  Christians  who  still  hare 
the  shell  upon  their  heads  and  are  scarce  hatched,  that  their  trials  are 
over  now  that  they  have  become  winged  with  faith;  they  had  far  better 
have  reckoned  that  their  trials  have  begun  with  tenfold  force,  now  that 
they  are  numbered  with  the  servants  of  the  Most  Hi^fh.    Whatever  else 
comes  not  to  thee,  0  servant  of  God,  this  will  surely  be  fulfilled,  **  In 
the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation."      "  What  son  is  he  whom  the 
Father  chasteneth  not  ? "    Some  privileges  are  not  common  to  all  the 
adopted,  but  the  privilege  of  chastisement  is  universal  to  all  true  sons. 
It  is  the  token  of  bastardy  if  the  rod  be  escaped,  but  scourging  is  the 
sure  pledge  of  paternal  love.    I  say,  however,  that  these  trials  come  very 
soon.    Israel  was  no  sooner  across  the  Red  Sea  than  they  went  three 
days  into  the  wilderness  of  Shur,  but  found  no  water ;  and  on  the  third 
day,  when  they  did  arrive  at  a  fountain,  they  found  worse  than  no  water, 
for  it  was  so  brackish,  so  altogether  unfit  for  drinking,  that  though 
they    thouj^ht    they  would    have    drunk    anything,  they  could  not 
possibly  drink  this.    What,  in  three  days,  must  they  that  sang  unto 
the  Lord  because   he  triumphed  gloriously,   nauseate  the  water  for 
which  their  thirst  makes  them  pant?    In  three  days  shall  they  be 
reduced  to  such  straits  that  they  must  drink  or  die,  and  yet  fesl  that 
they  should  die  if  they  were  to  drink  of  such  nauseous  streams  ?    Ah 
yes,  with  some  of  us  our  delight  at  conversion  was  very  great,  our 
exhilaration  at  finding  the  Saviour  was  something  never  to  be  for- 
gotten, and  yet  only  a  day  or  so  after  we  were  stumbled  with  great 
temptation,  amazed  at  the  discovery  of  the  evil  of  our  hearts,  or  tried 
by  the  coldness  of  our  fellow  Christians,  or  the  cruelty  of  the  outside 
world,  so  that  we  found  we  had  come  to  Marah.    And  this  was  all  the 
severer  trial,  because  some  of  us  had  found  a  degree  of  pleasure  in  the 
ways  of  sin,  and  now  it  stumbled  us  to  find  sorrow  in  the  ways  of  God. 
When  Israel  was  in  Egjrpt,  they  drank  of  the  river  Nile.     No  ordinary 
water  that.    To  this  day  the  dwellers  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile  assert 
that  the  water  has  a  peculiar  taste  not  to  be  discovered  in  any  other 
stream,  and  they  prefer  the  waters  of  the  Nile  to  all  the  waters  in  the 
world  besides.     AVhat  a  change  from  the  sweetness  of  the  Nile  to  the 
bitterness  of  Marah  !     Did  not  the  suggestion  rise  in  their  hearts,  "  It 
was  better  with  us  in  the  bondage  of  Egypt,  with  water  in  abundtmce, 
than  it  is  now  in  the  liberty  of  the  wilderness  with  the  bitterness  of 
Marah?"    The  devil  tempted  some  of  us  at  the  very  first  by  saying: 
"  See  what  you  have  got  by  being  a  Chiistian.   While  you  were  as  others 
are,  your  mind  had  mirth;  now  you  have  come  out  and  followed  the 
Crucified,  you  have  lost  the  liveliness  of  your  spirits,  the  brightness 
of  your  wit — that  which  made  life  worth  having  is  taken  away  fi'om 
you."    Young  Christian,  is  that  your  case  to-day  ?     Be  not  stumbled, 
neither  believe  the  enemy.    Man,  it  were  better  to  die  at  Marah  free, 
than  live  a  slave  by  the  sweet  Nile.    Even  men  that  know  not  the  Spirit 
of  God  have  felt  it  were  better  to  die  free  than  live  slaves,  and  truly  to 
be  a  slave  to  Satan  is  so  degrading  a  thing,  that  if  this  mouth  were  for 
ever  filled  with  Marah*s  bitterness,  yet  were  it  better  to  be  so  than  to  be 
enchanted  with  the  pleasures  of  sin.    Yet  these  early  trials  are  very 
severe,  and  need  much  grace  lest  they  cause  us  great  mischiet 


BIABAH;    OB,   THE  BITTEB  WATEBS  SWEETENED.  231 

Secondly,  these  evils  assume  varied  shapes.  You  noticed  that  for  the 
first  three  days  in  the  wilderness  they  found  no  water;  that  is  one  trial. 
But  the  next  day,  or  at  the  end  of  the  third  day,  they  found  water.  Now 
they  thought  their  trial  was  over  :  alas !  it  had  only  changed  its  shape. 
They  found  water,  but  it  was  too  bitter  to  drink.  Do  not  be  in  a  hurry  to 
change  your  trials,  dear  friends.  "We  have  heard  of  some  who  have 
repined  that  they  had  no  children,  and,  like  Rachel,  their  cry  was,  "  Give 
me  children,  or  else  I  die."  Ere  long  they  have  had  children  who  proved 
to  be  far  worse  than  none.  Better  no  son  than  an  Absalom.  We  have 
known  those  who  were  in  good  health,  but  discontented  because  they  had 
no  wealth;  they  have  gained  wealth  at  last,  but  with  an  injured 
constitution,  they  have  had  no  power  to  enjoy  it.  If  we  could  choose 
our  trials,  we  might  well  remember  the  wisdom  of  the  old  philo- 
sopher, who  told  the  people  oppressed  by  a  tyrant  to  be  content  with 
his  tyranny,  "  for,"  said  he,  "  it  is  with  oppressors  as  with  mosquitoes, 
let  those  suck  which  are  now  upon  you,  for  if  you  drive  those  off,  the 
fresh  ones  which  will  succeed  them  will  be  hungrier  than  those  that  are 
there  now  :  better  be  content  with  the  tyranny  you  have,  than  seek  a  new 
one."  It  is  much  the  same  with  the  trials  we  now  feel ;  you  will  get 
nsed  to  them  by  degrees :  they  will  spend  their  force.  Desire  for  a 
change  of  trials  may  only  be  a  wish  for  a  worse  affliction,  for  whether 
was  the  worse,  to  have  no  water,  or  to  have  the  water  and  to  find  it  so 
bitter  that  you  could  not  drink  it  ? 

Yet  when  God  changes  the  trial  be  well  satisfied  that  it  should  be 
changed.  You  may  anticipate,  Christian,  that  you  will  have  your  trial 
changed :  indeed,  you  must  reckon  that  it  is  so.  I  mean,  that  if  to-day 
it  is  smooth  sailing  with  you,  though  yesterday  waves  rolled  mountains 
high,  it  is  only  a  change  of  trial  ;  you  are  now  tried  by  prosperity, 
"wMch  may  prove  to  be  a  more  severe  test  for  you  than  adversity.  Is 
the  wind  baJmy,  blows  it  from  the  south  ?  Is  it  but  another  trial  for 
thee,  be  sure  of  that,  for  they  who  have  withstood  the  northern  blast 
and  grown  the  ruddier  and  stronger  for  its  influence,  have  often  grown 
feint  and  weary  under  softer  airs.  Watch  thou  in  all  things,  thy  trials 
are  with  thee  constantly ;  the  crucible  is  changed,  the  fire  still  burns. 

Note  again,  that  as  the  trials  of  the  wilderness  came  soon,  and 
assumed  various  shapes,  so  often  do  the  trials  of  the  Christian  touch 
very  vital  matters.  They  found  no  water,  or  finding  it,  it  was  bitter.  It 
is  not  said  they  found  no  wine — a  small  trial  indeed  ;  it  is  not  said  they 
found  no  milk,  yet  might  the  infant  children  have  been  sorely  troubled 
by  such  a  want;  but  they  found  no  drinkable  water.  Here  was  a 
denial  of  an  essential  of  life.  They  must  have  water,  it  was  no  luxury, 
it  was  a  necessity;  with  the  hot,  burning  sand  beneath  them  reflect- 
ing the  fierce  heat  of  a  cruel  sun,  not  to  have  water  in  the  wilderness 
is  to  feel  an  urgent  necessity  producing  a  terrible  pain.  God  may 
touch  us,  and  probably  has  done  so  or  will,  in  points  most  vital.  To 
be  tried  in  the  loss  of  some  of  your  superfluities,  ray  brethren,  is 
but  little ;  but  to  lose  even  the  little  that  you  had  to  live  upon,  to 
be  brought  to  straitness  of  bread,  this  is  real  tribulation.  To 
have  the  hand  put  forth  to  touch  your  bone  and  your  flesh,  this  is 
affliction.  Believe  me,  our  virtues  and  graces  look  very  fine,  and  we 
think  much  of  them  until  they  undergo  that  ordeal,  but  that  test 


232  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

often  takes  from  them  their  gloss  and  beanty ;    wo  find  how  great 
onr  weakness  is  when  the  very  marrow  of  our  bones  seems  to  be  a  doi 
in  which  pains,  like  robbers,  hide  themselves.    God  may  touch  yon  in 
the  most  oeloved  object  of  your  heart.    It  is  not  one  child  that  is  taken 
out  of  many,  but  the  only  one ;  it  is  not  a  fi-iend,  or  distant  relative, 
but  the  partner  of  your  bosom  is  laid  low.    Do  not  wonder  if  the 
trial  affects  you  greatly,  and  comes  home  to  your  soul  and  heart.     It  is 
one  of  God*s  dcterminabions  that  trials  shall  not  be  mock  trials  with 
his  servants,  and  the  grace  given  shall  not  be  imaginary,  but  true.    God 
never  plays  at  chastening  his  children.      No  trial  for   the  present 
seemeth  to  be  joyous,  but  grievous.    By  the  blueness  of  the  wound  the 
heart  is  made  better ;  if  it  do  not  bruise,  it  doth  not  benefit.    Venr 
much  in  proportion  to  the  bitterness  felt  will  be  the  benefit  that  win 
come  of  it.    They  found  no  water.     0  my  God,  to  what  straits  dost 
thou  reduce  thine  o\\'n  people ;  thine  own  people  who  carry  with  them 
the  title-deeds  of  a  land  that  flows  with  milk  and  honey !     Jordan  and 
Kishon  are  theirs,  and  yet  they  find  only  Marah  to  drink  while  they  are 
here  ;  thine  own  people  for  whom  thou  hast  appointed  that  they  shall 
dwell  in  a  land  of  brooks  and  rivers  of  water,  where  they  shall  sit  every 
man  under  his  nne  and  fig-tree  ;  these,  thy  darlings,  whom  thou  hast 
brought  out  with  a  high  hand  and  an  outstretched  arm,  are  brought 
to  the  extreme  of  poverty,  and  the  little  that  they  have  has  often  a 
bitter  taste  infused  into  it. 

Notice  once  again,  there  is  a  reason  why  the  earthly  mercies  which 
supply  our  necessities  must  be  more  or  less  bitter,  "When  Israel  received 
water  out  of  the  rock  it  was  not  bitter,  but  this  water  came  out  of  the 
sand.  To  this  day  in  the  desert  water  is  found  in  different  places,  but 
where  it  oozes  up  from  a  sandy  bed  it  is  almost  without  exception  so 
brackish  and  bitter,  by  reason  of  the  sand,  that  it  is  not  fit  for  hnman 
drinking  ;  and  even  the  camels,  unless  they  are  sore  pressed,  turn  away 
from  it  with  great  aversion.  The  sand  has  tainted  it,  the  flavour  of 
earth  has  got  into  the  blessing.  So  it  is  with  most  of  our  blessings ;  by 
reason  of  our  sin  and  infirmity  too  much  of  the  flavour  of  earth  enters 
into  the  gift  of  heaven.  Our  common  mercies,  when  we  receive  them 
direct  from  heaven  as  God  gives  them,  are  mercies  indeed — cool,  flowing 
streams  that  gush  from  the  rock  of  his  favour;  but  we  are  so  apt  to  trace 
them  to  the  creature,  so  ready  to  look  upon  them  as  derived  from  earth 
instead  of  coming  from  heaven;  and  just  in  that  proportion  may  we  expect 
to  find  bitterness  in  them.  What  can  you  hope  for  in  a  wilderness,  but 
productions  congruous  to  it  ?  Canaan  !  who  looks  for  bitterness  there  ? 
Is  it  not  the  land  that  flows  with  milk  and  honey  ?  Sweet  land,  when 
shall  we  reach  thee  ?  Thy  sweetness  is  but  congruous  to  thyself.  But 
here,  in  this  wilderness,  where  we  have  no  continuing  city,  who  looks 
for  the  streams  of  Lebanon  ?  who  hopes  to  find  Canaan's  fruits  in  the 
wilderness  of  Sin  ?  As  well  seek  to  gather  from  the  briny  sea  the 
sweet  fruits  of  the  palm  or  the  luscious  clusters  of  the  vine,  as  hope  to 
find,  amidst  these  changing  scenes,  comforts  that  shall  be  all  comfort- 
able and  joys  that  shall  be  all  joyous.  No,  they  will  be  comforts,  but 
they  will  be  often  embittered ;  they  will  be  joyous  somewhat,  but  the 
earthy  flavour  in  them  will  make  us  remember  that  this  is  not  our  rest. 

I  know  not  that  I  ought  to  detain  you  longer  with  these  evils  of  the 


HASAH;    OB,  THE  BnTER  WATERS  SWEETENED.  233 

wilderness.  I  do  not  feel  it  is  wrong  to  speak  of  them,  for  we  do  not 
mention  them  with  any  view  of  discouraging  those  who  have  set  oat 
on  pilgrimage ;  we  are  not  like  those  who  hold  up  their  hands  and  say, 
'*  Tne  lions,  the  giants,  the  dragons ;  young  pilgrim,  you  will  never 
reach  the  land  of  promise  ;*'  but  yet  we  wonld  imitate  the  Saviour,  who 
said  to  the  follower  who  thought  he  could  follow  him  whithersoever  he 
might  go,  "  Sit  down,  and  count  the  cost."  There  are  trials  for  you,  ye 
followers  of  Christ,  if  there  are  none  for  others— peculiar  trials  for 
yon,  peculiar  joys  ten  thousand  times  outweighing  them,  but  yet 
peculiar  griefs,  new  griefe  of  a  new  life  of  which  it  will  be  a  blessed 
thing  to  have  been  a  participant;  but  there  they  are,  and  we  will  not 
deceive  you.  For  yon  there  will  be  Marahs  that  others  may  not  know, 
and  for  you  there  will  be  long  thirsts  where  others  drink  to  the  full ; 
neyertheless,  we  will  take  Christ  and  his  reproach,  Christ  and  his 
Harah,  rather  than  the  world  with  its  sweetness,  for  with  every  draw- 
back tliat  is  supposable  to  Christ  Jesus,  he  is  better  than  the  world 
with  all  the  additions  that  can  be  invented  by  the  sons  of  mirth.' 

II.  Thus  much  on  the  first  point,  the  evils  of  the  wilderness.  Now, 
secondly,  the  TBNDENcnr  op  human  nature.  The  people  murmured 
against  Moses,  saying,  "  What  shall  we  drink  ?"  Do  not  say  "  human 
nature,"  says  one;  say,  "the  tendency  of  Jewish  nature."  Ah,  but 
if  anything,  I  would  prefer  the  people  in  the  wilderness  to  any  other : 
rest  assured  that  they  were  no  worse  than  we  are.  They  are  an  ex- 
ample to  us  of  what  our  heart  is ;  and  whatever  we  see  in  them  we 
have  but  to  watch  a  little,  and  we  shall  see  it  all  in  ourselves.  It  was 
not  Jewish  nature  that  God  proved  in  the  wilderness  so  much  as 
human  nature  at  its  very  best  estate.  Assuredly,  the  tendency  of 
human  nature  is  to  murmur.  They  murmured,  complained,  found 
feult.  A  very  easy  thing,  for  the  very  word  **  murmur,"  how  simple  it 
is,  made  up  of  two  infantile  sounds — mur  mur.  No  sense  in  it,  no  wit 
in  it,  no  thought  in  it :  it  is  the  cry  rather  of  a  brute  than  of  a  man — 
murmur — just  a  double  groan.  Easy  is  it  for  us  to  kick  against 
the  dispensations  of  God,  to  give  utterance  to  our  griefs,  aud 
what  is  worse,  to  the  inference  we  drew  from  them  that  God  has 
forgotten  to  be  gracious.  To  murmur  is  our  tendency;  but,  my 
dear  brethren  and  sisters  in  Christ,  do  we  mean  to  let  the  tendencies 
of  the  old  nature  rule  us?  Will  we  murmur?  0  that  we  miG:ht 
have  grace  rather  to  say  with  Job,  **  Though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  I 
trust  in  him  ! "  Shall  a  living  man  complain  ?  Have  we  not  received 
so' much  good  from  the  hands  of  the  Lord  that  we  may  well  receive 
evil  without  rebellion  ?  Will  we  not  disappoint  Satan,  and  overrule 
the  tendency  of  the  flesh,  by  saying  in  the  might  of  God's  Spirit,  ^'  The 
Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away ;  blessed  be  the  name  of 
the  Lord."  I  know  we  are  apt  to  say,  "  Well,  that  is  human  nature," 
and  when  we  have  said  it  is  human  nature,  we  suppose  we  have  given  a 
Tery  excellent  excuse  for  doing  it.  But  is  human  nature  to  rule  the 
divine  nature  ?  You,  believer,  profess  to  be  a  partaker  of  the  divine 
nature.  Let  the  superior  force  govern,  let  that  which  cometh  from 
above  be  uppermost,  and  put  the  lower  nature  down ;  let  us  eschew 
murmnrings  and  complainings,  and  magnify  and  adore  the  God  who 
lays  oar  comforts  low. 


23'i  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Observe— and  this  is  worthy  of  note — that  the  murmuring  was  not 
ostensibly  against  God.    They  murmured  against  Moses.    And  have 
you  ever  noticed  how  the  most  of  us,  when  we  are  in  a  murmuring; 
vein,  arc  not  honest  enough  to  murmur  distinctly  against  God«  No :  the 
child  is  dead,  and  we  form  a  conjecture  that  there  was  some  wrong  treat- 
ment on  the  part  of  nurse,  or  surgeon,  or  ourselves  ;  we  lay  our  hold 
on  that  for  which  there  may  not  be  a  shadow  of  proof,  and  the  mur- 
muring is  upon  that  point.    Or  we  have  lost  money,  and  have  been 
brought  down  from  opulence  to  ahnost  poverty  ;  then  some  one  person 
was  dishonest,  a  certain  party  betrayed  us  in  a  transaction  by  failing  to 
fulfil  his  part;  all  the  murmuring  is  heaped  on  that  person.    We  deny, 
perhaps  indignantly,  that  we  murmur  against  God ;  and  to  prove  it  we 
double  the  zeal  with  which  we  murmur  against  Moses.    To  complain 
of  the  second  caiise  is  about  as  sensible  as  the  conduct  of  the  dog, 
which  bites  the  stick  with  which  it  is  beaten.    It  owes  no  anger 
to  the  stick,  but  to  the  person  who  uses  it.    Is  there  evil  in  the  city 
and  the  Lord  hath  not  done  it?     Whoever  is  the  instrument,  the  Lom 
overrules.     In  our  heart  of  hearts  our  rebellion  is  against  the  Lord 
himself.    We  have  not  quite  honesty  enough  to  rail  against  God  openly 
and  avowedly,  and  so  we  hypocritically  cover  up  our  repining  against 
him  by  murmuring  against  some  person,  occasion,  or  event.    "If  I 
had  not  happened  to  go  out  on  such  an  occasion  I  might  not  have  had 
that  cold  and  been  laid  aside."     Thus  we  blame  an  accidental  circum- 
stance, as  if  it  were  not  part  of  the  divine  arrangement.    Is  this  com- 
plaining of  the  second  cause  better  than  railing  against  God  ?    I  trow 
not,  for,  in   very  deed,   it  is  railing  against  God,  and  it  is,  in  addi- 
tion, an  injustice  to  the  second  cause,  so  made  a  butt  o£    When 
Pharaoh  bade  the  Israelites  make  bricks,  and  gave  them  no  straw,  there 
was  injustice;    but  when  the  Israelites  gathered  around  Moses  and 
virtually  told  him  that  he  ought  to  supply  them  with  water,  it  was 
much  the  same  thing.    Whence  should  this  man  have  water  to  give 
them  to  drink  ?     How  could  he  sweeten  Marah  ?    They  knew  right 
well  that  it  was  not  possible  for  him  to  open  a  well  for  them  in  the 
wilderness ;  they  complained,  I  say,  in  their  hearts,  really  against  God^ 
but  they  added  to  this  the  hypocrisy  and  the  injustice  of  veiling  their 
murmuring  against  the  Most  High  by  an  unjust  and  clamourous  com- 
plaint against  his  servant  Moses.    Stop  thy  tongue,  my  brother;  cease 
thy  cavilling  against  this  and  that,  against  him  or  her ;  for  be  sure  that 
thou  art  doing  injustice  to  thy  fellowman  as  well  as  a  wrong  to  thy  God. 

Once  more,  while  we  speak  of  this  tendency  in  human  nature,  1  want 
you  to  observe  how  they  betrayed  an  utter  unbelief  of  God.  They  said 
unto  Moses,  **  What  shall  we  drink  ?"  They  meant  by  it,  "  By  what 
means  can  God  supply  our  want  of  water?  '*  What  a  question !  They 
were  at  the  Red  Sea,  and  God  cleft  the  intervening  gulf  in  twain, 
through  the  depths  thereof  they  marched  dryshod  ;  there  is  Marah'a 
water — shall  it  be  more  difficult  for  God  to  purify  than  to  divide  ?  To 
Bweeten  a  fountain — is  that  more  difficult  than  to  cleanse  a  sea  ?  Is 
anything  too  hard  for  the  Lord  ?  A  great  miracle  had  been  wrought; 
had  they  but  considered  it,  and  exercised  even  the  lowest  degree  of  faith, 
the^  must  have  seen  that  he  who  could  work  such  a  miracle  as  they 
Been  could  work  yet  another  ;  and  they  might  joyously  have  stood  at 


MARAH;     OB,  THE  BITTER  WATERS  SWEETENED.  285 

^arali*B  brink,  and  have  sung,  "  He  who  cast  Pharaoh  and  his  chosen 
^plains  into  the  Red  Sea,  and  delivered  his  people,  can  give  his  chosen 
Lrink ;  therefore  sing  we,  Spring  np,  0  well,  and  let  thy  waters  be 
rweet  and  clean."  0  that  they  had  faith  in  God  but  as  a  grain  of 
nnstard  seed,  and  they  would  have  seen  great  things,  and  glorified  his 
lame.  Do  you  blame  them?  Do  so;  blame  them  much,  but  include 
fonrselves  in  the  censure.  How  often  has  it  been  so  with  us  ?  We  have 
iaid,  "  I  will  never  distrust  my  God  after  this  memorable  deliverance, 
;his  singular  display  of  his  power  has  slain  my  unbelief;"  yet  a  new 
trial  has  occurred  and  our  faith,  where  was  it?  Had  the  Son  of  Man 
liimself  been  on  the  earth  with  those  quick  eyes  to  discern  the  faith 
irbich  he  himself  creates,  could  he  find  faith  in  us  in  the  hour  of  tribu- 
lation ?  Be  humbled  as  ye  see  yourselves  in  this  mirror.  Behold  your 
instability,  which  is  as  water.  How  like  to  reeds  shaken  with  the 
wind  are  we  ;  or  like  to  meteors,  which  flash  across  the  brow  of  night, 
to  leave  the  darkness  denser  than  before.  How  soon  is  the  glory  of  our 
confidence  spent,  and  the  excellence  of  our  faith  withered.  Hold  thou 
mx  feet  in  life,  great  God,  or  we  shall  soon  be  silent  in  darkness. 

III.  Now,  thirdly — and  may  divine  help,  the  help  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
be  given  me — I  will  speak  upon  the  remedy  of  grace.  I  have  shown 
?ou  the  evils  of  the  wilderness  and  the  tendency  of  nature  :  it  is  de- 
lightful to  behold  the  remedy  of  grace.  First,  if  thou  wouldst  have 
Marah's  bitterness  healed,  take  the  case  in  ^ai/er  to  God,  God  begins 
by  making  us  begin.  The  people  complamed  to  Moses  ;  Moses  took 
the  complaint  to  his  Master,  in  all  trials,  the  surest  way  to  a  remedy 
is  prayer.  In  heavenly  pharmacy,  prayer  is  a  catholicon ;  it  healeth  all 
things.  Prayer,  which  overcomes  heaven,  will  certainly  never  be  over- 
matched on  earth.  Neither  men  nor  devils  can  stand  against  prayer  : 
it  smites  them  hip  and  thigh  like  another  Samson.  The  bow  of  prayer 
returns  not  empty ;  it  is  swifter  than  an  eagle,  it  is  stronger  than  a  lion. 
Take  thy  case  to  God,  0  heir  of  trouble  ;  unroll  Kabshakeh's  letter 
before  the  Most  High,  and  the  Lord  will  silence  his  revilings.  Half  the 
work  is  done  when  it  is  brought  before  God  in  supplication. 

Note,  next,  that  as  somi  as  we  liave  a  prayer  Ood  lias  a  remedy.  The 
remedy  is  near  at  hand ;  but  we  do  not  perceive  it  till  it  is  shown  us. 
"  The  Lord  showed  him  a  tree."  The  tree  had  been  growing  for  years 
on  purpose  to  be  used.  God  has  a  remedy  for  all  our  troubles  before 
they  happen  to  us.  A  delightful  employment  it  is  to  notice  how  God 
forestalls  himself;  how  long  before  we  reach  the  encampment,  if  there 
be  the  bitter  well,  there  is  dso  the  healing  tree.  All  is  ready  between 
here  and  heaven.  He  that  has  gone  to  prepare  a  place  for  us  by  his 
presence,  has  prepared  the  way  to  that  place  for  us  by  his  providence. 
But,  brethren,  though  for  every  trouble  in  this  mortal  life  there  is  a 
remedy,  you  and  I  do  not  always  discern  it.  "  The  Lord  showed  him  a 
tree."  I  am  persuaded  that  for  every  lock  in  Doubting  Castle  there  is  a 
key,  but  the  promises  are  often  in  great  confusion  to  our  minds,  so  that 
we  ai*e  perplexed.  If  a  blacksmith  should  bring  you  his  great  bundle 
of  picklocks,  you  would  have  to  turn  them  over,  and  over,  and  over ; 
andT  try  half  of  them,  perhap  two-thirds,  before  you  would  find  the 
right  one;  ay,  and  perhaps  the  right  one  would  be  left  to  the  last.  It 
is  always  a  blessing  to  remember  that  for  every  affiictiou  tUei^  \%  id^ 


23 C  METROPOLITAN  TABEBNACT.B  PULPIT. 

promise  in  the  word  of  God ;  a  promise  which  meets  the  case,  and 
was  made  on  purpose  for  it.  But  jou  may  not  be  always  able  to  find  it 
— no,  you  may  go  fumbling  over  the  Scriptures  long  before  yoa  get 
the  true  word ;  but  when  the  Lord  shows  it  to  you,  when  it  comes  with 
power  to  the  soul,  when  the  heart  can  grasp  it,  and  cry,  "Ay,  that 
is  the  word,  my  Master ;  indeed  and  of  a  truth  that  is  the  precions 
truth  which  can  sweeten  my  sad  discomforts,"  oh,  what  a  bliss  it  is ! 
All  glory  be  unto  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  to  this  day  is  ever  ready  to 
show  unto  his  praying  servants  the  sweetening  tree  when  they  come 
to  the  bitter  streams. 

Now  that  remedy  for  the  healing  of  Marah's  water  was  a  very  strange 
one.  Why  should  a  tree  sweeten  the  waters  ?  I  do  not  suppose  theie 
was  any  natural  efficacy  in  the  tree,  although  that  would  not  be 
altogether  impossible,  since  there  are  trees,  so  travellers  tell  us,  whidi 
have  been  used  in  the  sweetening  of  waters.  There  is  in  South  Africi 
a  certain  river,  which  water  cannot  be  drunk  until  branches  of  a  certain 
tree  are  placed  in  it,  and  then  the  bitterness  which  is  in  the  stream  ia 
deposited  at  the  bottom,  and  the  water  becomes  drinkable.  The  thing 
is  not  unnatural  nor  altogether  necessarily  supernatural,  though  I  think 
in  this  case  it  was  supernatural,  for  there  are  no  trees  found  now  in 
the  wilderness  of  Shur  that  would  have  the  effect  of  sweetiming  brackish 
waters.  This  was  no  doubt  a  miraculous  incident,  and  it  was  also 
meant  to  teach  us  something.  The  fruit  of  the  tree  of  knowledge  of 
good  and  evil  was  eaten  by  our  first  parents  and  embittered  all;  there 
is  a  tree  of  life,  the  leaves  of  which  are  for  the  healing  of  the  nations. 
Blessed  is  he  that  eats  of  this  tree  of  life  ;  it  shall  take  away  from 
him  the  bitterness  which  the  first  forbidden  fruit  brought  into  the 
world.  A  tree  is  a  living  thing :  may  we  not  learn  that  there  are  living 
principles  in  true  religion  which  will  sweeten  our  adversities?  Mere 
doctrines  may  not,  but  living  principles  will ;  these  cast  into  our  troubles 
will  assuage  our  grief. 

Best  of  all,  may  not  this  tree  cut  down  be  an  emblem  ofthe  Saviour? 
A  glorious  tree  indeed  was  he,  with  spreading  branches,  and  top  reaching 
to  heaven — but  he  must  suffer  the  axe  for  our  sakes  ;  and  now,  to-day, 
contemplating  his  atoning  sacrifice,  and  by  faith  resting  in  him,  the 
troubles  of  life  and  the  troubles  of  death  are  sweetened  by  his  dear 
cross,  which,  though  it  be  a  bitter  tree  in  itself,  is  the  antidote  for  all 
the  bitterness  that  comes  upon  us  here  and  hereafter. 

llutt  remedy  was  most  effedire,     AVhen  they  cut  down  the  tree,  and 
put  it  into  the  water,  it  turned  the  water  sweet — they  could  drink  of 
it ;  and  let  me  assure  you,  that  in  the  case  of  our  trouble,  the  cross  is 
a  most  effective  sweetener.     Shall  I  put  the  tree  into  the  water  for  a 
minute,  and  then  ask  you  to  drink  ?   Have  you  been  suflfering  pain,  or 
any  other  form  of  tribulation?    I  will  lay  the  cross  asoak  in  it  for  a 
minute,  and  your  first  reflection  will  be — "  In  all  this  that  I  am  called 
to  suffer  there  is  not  even  a  single  particle  of  punishment  for  my  sin ; 
God  has  punished  Christ,  consequently  he  cannot  punish  me :  to  punish 
two  for  one  offence  would  be  unjust,  therefore  there  is  nothing  penal  in 
all  that  I  am  suffering."     I  do  not  know  of  any  reflection  more  con- 
soling than  this,  that  my  sorrow  is  not  laid  on  me  by  a  jndge,  nor 
inflicted  on  me  as  the  result  of  divine  anger.    There  is  not  a  drop  of 


ICABAH;    OB,  THE  BITTEa  WATEBS  SWEETENED.  237 

wrath  in  a  riyerfal  of  a  believer's  grief.  Does  not  that  take  the  bitter- 
ness ont  of  affliction  and  make  it  sweet  ?  And  then  the  reflection  goes 
farther.  Since  Christ  has  died  for  me,  I  am  God's  dear  child ;  and 
now  if  I  snffer,  all  my  snffering  comes  from  my  Father's  hand — nay, 
more,  firom  my  Father's  heart.  He  loves  me,  and  therefore  makes  me 
suffer;  not  becanse  he  does  not  love,  but  because  he  does  love  does  he 
thus  afflict  me.  In  every  stripe  I  see  another  token  of  paternal  love.  This 
it  is  to  sweeten  Marah's  waters  indeed. 

Then  will  come  the  next  reflection — that  a  Father's  love  is  joined 
with  infinite  wisdom,  and  that,  therefore,  every  ingredient  in  the  bitter 
cap  is  measured  out  drop  by  drop,  and  grain  by  grain,  and  there  is 
not  one  pang  too  many  ever  suffered  by  an  heir  of  heaven.  The 
dOBS  is  not  only  weighed  to  the  pound  but  to  the  ounce,  ay,  to  the 
lowest  conceivable  grain.  You  shall  not  have  one  half  a  drop  of 
grief  more  than  is  aosolutely  needful  for  your  good  and  God's  glory. 
And  does  not  this  also  sweeten  the  cross,  that  it  is  laid  on  us  by 
infinite  wisdom,  and  by  a  Father's  hand  ? 

BavisMng,  indeed,  is  the  reflection  in  the  midst  of  all  our  grief  and 
suffering,  that  Jesus  Christ  suffers  with  us.  In  all  thine  affliction,  0 
member  of  the  body,  the  Head  is  still  a  sharer.  Deep  are  the  sympathies 
of  the  Bedeemer,  acute,  certain,  quick,  infallible;  he  never  forgets  his 
Bsints. 

All  the  while  the  Lord  lays  his  chastening  hand  upon  his  servants 
they  may  be  cheered  by  this  reflection,  that  in  this  he  is  making  them 
coMormable  unto  Christ.  What  should  they  know  of  Gethsemane  if 
they  had  no  sweat  of  pain  ?  What  should  they  know  of  the  passion  if 
they  never  had  to  cry,  "  I  thirst,"  or  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou 
forsaken  me  ?  "  They  were  poor  scholars  in  the  school  of  Christ's 
nfferings  if  they  endured  no  sufferings  themselves  ;  and  it  is  a  blessed 
Uung,  a  sweet  tmng  to  drink  of  his  cup,  and  to  be  baptised  >rith  his 
baptism. 

Moreover,  when  the  child  of  God  is  in  his  right  state,  it  is  always 
enongh  for  him  that  his  condition  is  the  result  of  his  Father's  will.  Is 
it  God's  will  ?  Is  it  Christ's  will  ?  Then  it  is  my  will.  How  could  I 
dare  to  wish  anything  to  be  otherwise  than  divine  love  appoints  ? 

I  do  not  know  but  what  it  will  become  sometimes  to  the  Cliristian  a 

subject  of  joy  that  Marah  is  bitter.    For  suppose  Marah  had  been  sweet, 

then,  Moses  had  not  prayed  to  God,  and  then  the  tree  had  not  been 

cut  down,  and  they  had  never  known  the  power  of  God  to  sweeten 

bitter  waters.    It  must  be  an  awful  thing  to  live  an  unafflicted  life 

en  earth.     You  say  it  must  be  a  very  delightful  thing.     I  have 

AC  donbt  it  may  be  from  some  aspects ;  but  a  person  who  has  bad  no 

sickness,  how  can  he  have  a  sympathetic  heart?    What  service  can 

he  render  in  cheering  the  people  of  God?     If  you  never  had  any 

trials,  I  should  suppose,  unless  something  very  extraordinary  happened., 

that  you  would  become  harsh,  and  untender;  I  am  afraid  some  would  grow 

brutal,  coarse,  hard  of  heart.    Who  wishes,  where  others  have  to  suffer, 

to  claim  an  immunity  from  a  blessing  which  brings  rich  consolations 

with  it,  and  works  eternal  benefits  ?    Beloved,  this  is  ever  one  thing 

tliat  sweetens  Marah  that  it  afterwards  bringeth  forth  the  comfortable 

fruits  of  righteousness.    Our  trials  are  not  sent  to  us  alone  and  by 


238  METBOPOLITAir  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

themselves;  there  is  a  quantum  suff,  of  grace  sent  with  them,  bj 
which  they  are  made  available  as  means  to  sanctify  ns,  and  make  ur 
meet  to  be  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light. 

I  will  not  keep  yon  much  longer  upon  this  point,  bnt  I  mnst  notice, 
that  while  I  have  shown  you  that  the  remedy  is  very  efficadoos,  it  is 
something  more  than  efficacious:  it  is  transcendanL  The  water  was 
bitter,  but  it  became  absolutely  sweet.  The  same  water  that  was  bitter 
became  sweet,  and  the  grace  of  God,  by  leading  ns  into  oontemplations 
that  spring  out  of  the  cross  of  Christ,  can  make  our  trials  themselres 
to  become  pleasant  to  us.  It  is  a  triumph  of  grace  in  the  heart  when  we 
not  only  acquiesce  in  trouble,  but  even  rejoice  in  it.  **  We  gloiy  in 
tribulations  also :  knowing  that  tribulation  worketh  patience."  It  is  8 
grand  thing  when  we  can  truly  say  that  as  to  the  rod  of  the  coveDanfc 
we  would  not  escape  it  if  we  might.  It  becomes  in  the  judgment  of 
wisdom  so  good  a  thing  to  be  tried,  that  though  we  would  not  seek  it, 
yet  we  accept  it  with  something  more  than  readiness,  and  the  bittor 
thing  becomes  sweet  to  us. 

Let  me  say,  and  have  done  with  this  part  of  the  subject,  that 
the  remedy  which  is  suggested  to  us  by  a  spiritualizing  of  text,  is 
efficacious  for  all  trials,  and  will  be  found  especially  so  for  the  bitto* 
waters  of  death  at  the  last.  With  all  that  can  be  said  about  death  it 
is  not  a  pleasant  subject  for  contemplation,  and  needs  to  be  viewed  in 
connection  with  covenant  consolations.  Certain  brethren  buoy  them- 
selves up  with  the  hope  of  escaping  death  by  the  second  Advent  I  am 
not  certain  that  they  are  wiser  than  David  who  did  not  hope  to  omit 
the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  but  trusted  that  he  should  fear  no 
evil  therein,  because  the  rod  and  staff  would  be  his  stay.  The  death  of 
Christ  robs  death  of  its  terrors.  The  prospect  of  the  resurrection  and 
the  certainty  of  immortality  make  us  say,  "  Surely  the  bitterness  of 
death  is  past ! " 

Be  it  remembered,  that  if  the  cross  avails  to  sweeten  all  the  bitterness 
of  our  mortal  life,  and  even  the  last  bitterness  of  death,  it  is  assuredly 
available  this  morning  to  sweeten  the  bitterness  of  our  present  sorrow. 
Did  you  drink  the  quassia-cup  this  morning  before  you  came  here? 
Do  you  feel  desponding  at  this  moment,  my  brother,  my  sister?    Go 
to  your  Saviour  at  once,  view  him  suffering  on  your  behalf,  behold 
the  completion  of  your  reconciliation  to   God,  mark  the  security  of 
your  soul  through  the  finished  work  of  your  glorious  Surety,  take  down 
your  harps  from  the  willows,  put  away  your  ashes,  ask  the  Lord  to 
anoint  you  with  the  oil  of  joy  instead  of  mourning,  and  even  at  the 
waters  of  Marah  lift  up  your  song  again,  and  let  the  timbrel  still  be 
heard.  "  Sing  unto  the  Lord,  for  he  hath  triumphed  gloriously :  Marah*B 
bitterness  hath  he  turned  to  sweetness,  he  hath  cut  down  the  mighty 
tree  which  he  gave  for  us,  and  which  yielded  itself  to  the  axe  for  us,  and 
into  the  bitter  stream  the  tree  is  cast,  and  now  henceforth,  0  Marah, 
thou  art  sweet  indeed."    Did  you  come  here  this  morning  as  Naomi 
when  she  returned  to  her  city  and  said, "  Call  me  not  Naomi,  call  me 
^lara :  for  the  Almighty  hath  dealt  very  bitterly  with  me."   Ah,  when  die 
dimdled  on  her  knee  and  held  in  her  fond  bosom  the  child  of  Rnth 
and  Boaz,  the  joy  of  her  old    age,  she  was  glad  to  think  the  neigh- 
bours had  not  changed  her  name,  and  she  was  willing  enough  to  he 


HABAH;    OB,  THE  BITTER  WATERS  SWEETENED.  239 

sailed  Naomi  still.  Call  not  yourself  Marah,  but  remember  the  new 
name  which  the  Lord  hath  named  npon  you.  The  bitter  pool  itself  call 
it  not  Marah ;  be  not  so  ready  to  affix  names  of  sad  memorials,  yoor 
^efs  are  apt  enough  to  gall  your  memory ;  do  not  aid  them  to  sbing 
^n.  Gall  the  well  by  another  name ;  forget  Marah,  and  remember 
TehoTah  Kophi^  the  Lord  that  healeth  both  thee  and  the  waters.  Record 
!iie  mercy  rather  than  the  sorrow,  and  give  thanks  unto  the  Most 
Higb. 

Now,  in  closmg,  somebody  will  say, ''  This  is  a  yery  curious  mission- 
ary sermon.**  xes,  but  you  see  I  did  not  anpolnt  the  missionary 
sermon  for  to-day :  my  brethren  did  that,  and  certainly  I  did  not 
arrange  my  own  sickness,  so  as  to  make  it  fall  on  this  day.  How  can 
I  dance  to  the  sound  of  the  timbrel  when  I  am  feeble  and  sad  ?  If  I  had 
the  choosing  of  my  own  state  of  health  and  mind,  I  would  haye  the 
choosing  of  my  own  texts,  and  make  them  always  suitable  to  the  occa- 
sions as  they  arise ;  but  I  am  obliged  to  preach  what  I  can  preach,  and 
as  I  know  pretty  well  theflayour  of  Marah,  and  a  little  about  the  sweet- 
ness which  the  healing  tree  can  giye  it,  I  can  only  tell  you  what  I 
know  by  experience. 

But  it  is  a  good  missionary  sermon  for  all  that  Let  us  show  you 
how.    Here  is  a  suggestion  of  compassion. 

Brethren,  all  the  world  oyer,  the  heathen  haye  trials,  bitternesses, 
woes.  I  said  that  Christians  haye  peculiar  woes,  but  the  dark  places  of 
the  earth  haye  direr  sorrows.  Some  nations  are  devastated  with 
war;  others  are  tormented  with  diabolical  customs  and  rites:  their 
actions  eyen  towards  themselyes  through  their  superstition  are  brutal.  I 
l&ay  well  liken  the  world  that  lieth  in  darkness  to  a  thirsty  caravan 
gathered  around  Marah's  well  where  the  water  is  too  bitter  to  drink. 
Oh,  the  woes,  the  woes  of  mankind !  High  are  the  Andes,  lofty  the  Hima- 
layas, but  the  woes  of  the  sons  of  Adam  are  higher,  hnger  still.  The 
Ganges  and  the  Indus,  and  other  mighty  streams,  pour  their  floods  into 
the  ocean ;  but  what  mighty  deep  could  contain  the  torrents  of  human 
grief?  A  very  deluge  is  the  sorrow  as  well  as  the  sin  of  man.  And,  my 
brethren,  the  heathen  know  nothing  of  the  healing  tree,  the  tree  cut 
down  of  old,  which  still  hath  power  to  sweeten  mortal  misery.  You 
know  it,  you  have  your  trials,  and  you  surmount  them  by  the  appeals 
jrou  make  to  your  Lord,  and  by  the  power  of  his  consolations ;  bub  alas! 
these  sons  of  darkness  have  your  griefs,  and  more,  but  they  have  not 
your  Comforter.  For  them  the  deluge,  but  not  the  ark ;  for  them  the 
tempest,  but  not  the  refuge.  And  you  are  so  sure  that  you  have  that 
which  would  cheer  them  :  no  doubt  passes  across  your  mind  as  to  the 
gospel.  These  are  wavering  times  in  which  some  professors,  and  even 
some  teachers,  almost  believe,  that  the  gospel  is  but  one  theory  of  many, 
and  will  have  to  stand  its  test,  and,  in  all  probability,  will  fail 
as  many  human  systems  of  thought  have  done.  You  think  not 
•0 ;  you  believe  that  God's  gospel  is  a  verity,  a  revelation  of 
Jehovah.  Heaven  and  earth  may  pass  away,  but  not  his  word, 
his  Christ,  his  decree,  his  covenant.  You  know  that  you  have  a  tree 
that  can  heal  the  bitter  fountains.  No  doubt  comes  across  your 
mind  as  to  that :  what  then  ?  By  common  humanity,  much  more  by 
tihe  tender  movements  of  the  grace  of  God  upon  your  souls,  I  conjure 


240  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

you  present  this  remedy  to  those  who  need  it,  and  who  need  it  so  macb. 
Will  anything  suffice  as  a  substitute  for  it  ?    Is  there  anywhere  on  earth 
another  healing  tree  beside  that  which  fell  beneath  the  axe  at  Calvary  ? 
Are  there  other  leaves  for  the  healing  of  the  nations  ?     On  the  seven- 
hilled  city  of  Rome,  grows  there  a  tree  that  can  heal  man's  diseases  ? 
No  ;   it  is  a  deadly  upas.     Cut  it  down,  and  bum  the  very  roote 
thereof.     Amongst  the  fancies  of  idolatiy  are   there   any  inventions 
of  man  that  can  cool  his  fevered  brow  and  sooth   his  griefs  ?    Does 
Mohammedanism  offer  hopes  for  eternity  that  can  light  up  the  grare 
to   an   awakened  sinner  ?    Are  there   thoughts  of  bliss  in  idolatry 
calculated   to    cheer   the  sepulchre?    All  religions   answer,    "Com- 
forts are  not  in  us."     It  is  only  at  the  cross,  it  is  only  |by  Jesus 
crucified  that  the  world  can   be   healed.     Hitherto   little   has  been 
accomplished    compared  with  our  desires;    and  in  contrast  to  our 
ambitions,  next  to  nothing  ;  but  faith,  darting  beyond  the  things  that 
are  seen,  flying  into  the  presence-chamber  of  God,  can  behold  him 
writing  with  the  eternal  pen,  "All  flesh  shall  seethe  salvation  of  God;" 
and  she  is  sure   that  the  tree  will  sweeten  the  waters  yet.     Come, 
brethren,  let  your  faith  prove  itself  by  your  works.     Help  to-day— to- 
day, by  your  gifts;  help  to-morrow — to-morrow,  by  your  prayers.  Help, 
some  of  you,  by  consecrating  yourselves  to  mission  labour.    There  is  a 
prayer  I  mean  to  continue  to  offer  until  it  is  answered,  that  God  wonld 
pour  out  on  this  church  a  missionary  spirit.  I  want  to  see  our  young  men 
devoting  themselves  to  the  work,  some  that  will  not  be  afraid  to  venture 
and  preach  Jesus  Christ  in  the  regions  beyond.   I  have  not  much  fidtiiin 
missionary  societies ;  it  gets  less,  I  must  protest,  each  year;  yet  we  mnst 
never  put  aside  one  instrumentality  until  we  have  a  better  ready.   If 
the  Lord  would    send  the  living  fire  through  the  churches  of  Eng- 
land, if  he  would  send  from  on  high  a  divine  impulse,  we  should  see 
starting  up  here  and  there  men  who  would  say  :  "  Here  are  we :  send 
us."     The  Spirit  of  God  will  say,  "  Separate  me  Paul  and  Barnabas 
for  the  work,"  and  when  this  is  done  I  look  to  see  far  happier  days. 

We  have  sweetened  the  waters  a  little ;  no  more  the  suttee  burns;  the 
African  is  free ;  the  slave-ship  crosses  no  more  the  deep.  In  some  regions 
exterminating  wars  have  ceased ;  the  white  dove  of  peace  flies  where 
the  raven  of  war  was  seen.  Glory  be  to  God.  A  few  leaves  cast  into  the 
waters  have  done  this.  Let  us  bear  a  whole  Christ  and  a  whole  gospel 
amongst  the  nations,  and  lay  the  tree  in  this  Marah,  until  at  last  the  whole 
world  shall  drink  of  the  sweet  waters  of  divine  love,  and  God  shall  be 
all  in  all.    God  bless  you,  beloved,  for  Jesus'  sake.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — ^Exodus  it. 


lifr^plitan  i^ab^rnarle  f  ttljtt. 


THE  PASTOE'S  PARTING  BLESSING. 


DELTYERED  BT 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT     THE     METROPOLITAN    TABERNACT.R,     NEWINGTON, 
BEFOSE   LEAVnta  HOME   FOR   A   JOUBNET. 


>  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you  all.    Amen.'* — Romans  xvi.  24. 

Christian  is  a  man  of  generous  actions,  but  his  wishes  go  far 
id  his  deeds.    Where  he  cannot  be  beneficent  he  is  beuevolent. 

cannot  actually  accomplish  good  for  all,  yet  he  anxiously  desires 
fit  be  not  in  his  power  to  confer  grace  upon  any,  yet  he  prays  that 
ivould  give  his  grace  to  all  the  brotherhood.  His  heart  entertains 
ands,  though  his  house  might  be  overfull  with  ten;  his  liberal 
38  feed  nations,  even  though  his  purse  be  so  scant  that  he  cannot 
1  more  than  a  penny  for  a  poor  child.  God,  whose  providence 
s  our  ability,  has  set  no  measure  to  our  willingness.  Our  wishes  may 
undless  though  our  powers  are  contracted,  and  this  will  be  good  for 
Ives  and  not  useless  to  others. 

ristianity  never  came  into  the  world  to  make  individual  professors 
isolated,  like  the  icebergs  which  float  away  on  the  wide  sea  in  solitary 
>lene6s ;  neither  is  it  intended  that  we  should  be  eo  anxious  for 
>wn  salvation  as  to  be  indifl*erent  to  the  welfare  of  other?.  True 
ion  is  not  a  separating  and  repelling  force,  but  rather,  like  attrac- 
it  draws  individual  atoms  into  one  body  and  holds  them  together, 
tes  not  shiver  to  fragments,  but  welds  into  one.  It  is  a  loadstone, 
I  whirlwind.  God  in  his  grace  gathers  together  in  one  body  in 
)t  Jesus  all  his  scattered  ones,  and  the  same  Spirit  who  constrains 

love  God  leads  us  to  love  our  brother  also, 
loving  spirit,  when  it  can  actually  do  no  more,  naturally  seizes 

the  ever  open  outlet  of  good  wishes,  benedictions,  and  inter- 
ons.  Thus  the  great  heart  of  the  apostle  relieved  itself;  though 
ould  have  been  willing  to  lay  down  his  life  for  the  brethren,  yet 
d  not  think  it  idle  to  give  them  his  blessing,  nor  did  they  reject 
worthless  because  it  cost  him  nothing.  It  was  meet  that  he  who 
in  so  many  ways  proved  his  sincere  love  to  the  saints  should  in 
etter  give  utterance  to  it  by  pronouncing  inspired  blessings  upon 
I.  Thus  wrbt^  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  to  those  he  longea  to 
5, "  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you  all." 
).  988. 


212  METIIOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

We  have  (lroi>pc(l,  to  a  great  extent,  the  CDstom  of  haying  the  bene 
diction  pronounced  by  the  minister  upon  the  people.  The  minister,  m 
a  rule,  ratlier  turns  it  into  a  prayer  than  pronounces  it  as  his  own  per- 
sonal blessing.  I  am  not  certain  tliat  it  is  a  great  improvement.  The  dread 
of  anything  like  priestism  has  led  us  to  this  custom.  It  may  be,  how- 
ever, that  in  avoiding  an  evil  we  have  missed  a  good.  Are  benedictions 
sinful  or  vain  ?  Are  the  blessings  of  good  men  of  no  value  ?  Can  we 
no  more  say,  *'  Peace  be  to  this  house,"  and  hope  that  our  peace  shall  rest 
upon  it  ?  May  no  Jacob  nowadays  bless  the  two  sons  of  a  beloved 
Joseph  ?  Will  it  be  a  mere  form  if  an  Isaac  should  invoke  a  blessing  on 
his  descendants,  or  a  departing  servant  of  God,  like  Moses,  pronounce 
a  benediction  on  his  people  ?  I  confess  I  would  not  treat  lightly  my 
father's  blessing  or  the  benediction  of  my  mother ;  and  though  neither 
father  nor  mother  can  by  their  mere  wish  confer  anything  upon  us, 
yet  who  would  wish  them  to  depart  this  life  without  having  bequeathed 
us  the  legacy  of  their  blessing  ?  Like  Joseph,  you  may  bring  yonr 
lads  to  receive  their  grandsire*s  blessing  if  the  old  man  be  yet  alive, 
nor  need  you  suspect  vourself  of  being  superstitious.  Many  there  are 
who  have  had  no  otlier  heritage  than  a  father's  blessing,  and  hare 
counted  themselves  rich  therein.  Now,  if  the  blessing  of  a  natural 
father  and  mother  may  be  considered  valuable  without  attributing 
too  nuicli  to  men,  so  I  think  may  the  blessing  of  those  spiritual 
parents  who  have  been  made  useful  to  our  souls.  I  was  reading 
in  the  lile  of  Ciesar  ^lalan  an  incident  which  touched  my  heart,  and 
I  feel  no  scruple  in  quoting  it  in  this  connection.  In  travelling 
through  one  of  the  valleys  of  Switzerland  he  met  with  a  woman 
who  told  him  that  her  lather  was  dying,  but  that  he  was  com- 
forted and  cheered  by  reading  a  little  book.  Being  unknown  by  any 
one  in  the  village,  !^Ialan  stepped  into  the  room  and  sat  by  the  dying 
man's  bed,  and  was  deli>ihted  to  find  that  the  book  which  had  led  to 
the  man's  conversion  was  written  by  himself.  His  son,  who  was  his 
companion,  thus  describes  the  scene: — **The  old  man  exclaimed,  *  Ah! 
had  1  not  been  aged  and  infirm,  I  should  long  ago  have  gone  there  to 
see  the  good  "Mw  Malan.  Look  here,  sir,  you  cannot  think  how  earnestly 
I  have  entreated  the  Lord  that  I  might  see  him  before  I  died.  For  a 
long  time  I  thought  he  would  grant  my  desire,  but  I'm  afraid  I  shall 
have  I o  give  it  up.*  I  stole  a  glance  at  my  father,  who  was  sitting 
silently  looking  at  his  hands.  *  What  is  the  name  of  the  book  you  refer 
to  ?'  he  suddenly  enquired  as  he  raised  his  head.  *  Stay,' was  the  reply, 
'  lure  it  is,  it's  always  by  me,'  and  he  drew  from  under  his  pillow  a  well- 
worn  eoi)y  of  one  of  the  earliest  editions  of  my  father's  hymns,  and 
handid  it  to  my  father.  *  Do  you  sing  any  of  these,  then?'  asked  my 
father  as  he  turned  over  the  leaves.  *  Oh,  Jeannette  knows  some  of 
them  ;  she  often  sings  them  to  me,  and  I  derive  pleasure  and  profit 
whenever  I  hear  them,'  adding,  as  though  speaking  to  himself,*  If  I 
could  only  see  ihe  dear  gentleman  who  wrote  those  beautiful  hymns  ; 
he  niust  be  a  good  C'hristian.'  *  Listen,  brother,'  paid  my  father,  *  this 
young  gentleman  and  I  have  just  come  from  Geneva.'  *  You  have  come 
i'rom  Geneva?  then  perhaps  you  have  seen  Mr.  Malan?'  'Certainly, 
I  have;  we  all  know  him  well ;  and  I  can  assure  you  that  if  he  were 
here  he  would  remind  you  that  he  has  only  been  a  feeble  and  imperfect 


THE  PA8T0B*S  PABTINO  BLE88INO.  243 

instmment  of  good  to  jon;  and  he  would  speak  to  you,  above  all,  not 
of  himself,  a  poor  sinner  as  yon  are,  but  of  the  eternal  grace  and  per- 
fection of  our  blessed  Lord.'  The  conversation  lasted  a  few  moments 
longer ;  my  fiither  prayed ;  then,  when  we  had  snng  together  one  of  the 
hymns  which  Jeannette  knew,  he  prepared  to  leave,  telling  her  that  he 
was  to  preach  the  next  day,  Sunday,  at  MoAtiers.  When  he  had  got  to 
the  door,  however,  he  stopped  ;  and  returning  once  more  to  the  bed 
where  the  old  man  was  lying  with  folded  handn,  said  to  him  with 
emotion,  *  My  Father,  God  himself,  to  whom  you  will  so  soon  depart, 
has  granted  your  prayer.  I  am  Malan  of  Geneva;  your  brother  in  the 
faith  of  the  blessed  Savionr.'  The  poor  old  man,  fixing  his  streaming 
eyes  upon*  him  in  a  long  and  ardent  paze,  and  slowly  raising  his 
trembling  hands,  exclaimed,  *  Bless  me,  bless  me  before  I  die!  You, 
whom  I  have  so  long  prayed  God  to  send  to  me,  bless  me  now  that  I 
have  had  the  joy  of  seeing  yon.'  Falling  on  his  knees  at  the  bedside, 
my  father  replied,  in  tones  which  betrayed  his  deep  feeling,  *  You  ought 
rather  to  bless  me,  for  yon  are  old  enough  to  be  my  father;  but  all 
blessing  comes  from  God  alone ;  let  us  once  more  ask  it  of  him  together.' 
And  folding  in  his  arms  the  lowly  brother,  whom  he  felt  he  should  never 
see  again  till  they  met  in  the  better  conntry,  he  invoked  upon  him  '  the 
peace  which  Jesus  gives,'  and  we  left  the  hamlet." 

I  am  ready  to  confess  that  there  are  those  to  whom  I  look  with  the 
same  respect ;  without  the  slightest  worship  of  men  or  care  about  mental 
attainments,  or  mere  office,  I  recognise  those  from  whom  I  would  fain 
receive  a  blessing.  Priestcraft  assumes  to  be  the  divinely  appointed 
channel  of  communicating  with  heaven,  and  this  monstrous  pretence  is 
80  abominable  that  we  would  sooner  have  the  curse  than  the  blessing  of 
a  msn  hardened  to  such  imposture  ;  but  men  who  live  near  to  God, 
and  have  power  with  him  in  prayer,  do,  without  assuming  it,  become  by 
their  prayers  and  fervent  wishes  the  means  of  pre  curing  many  blessings 
for  those  whom  they  bear  upon  their  hearts.  I  have  even  now  ring- 
ing in  my  ears  the  fervent  benediction  of  a  venerable  minister  whose 
daily  prayers  for  me,  and  reading  of  my  sermons,  constrained  him 
to  make  a  considerable  journey  that  he  might  in  person  pron(unce 
a  blessing  upon  my  head.  Job  thought  it  no  little  thing  that  the 
blessing  of  him  that  was  ready  to  perish  came  upcn  liim,  and  that 
when  the  eye  saw  him  then  it  blcFsed  him.  Good  men  in  their  bene- 
dictions are  moved  to  give  us  something  more  than  words,  for  they 
mean  what  they  say;  and  they  appeal  to  heaven  to  make  true  their 
wishes,  and  their  wishes  being  prayers  minted  in  another  form 
become  current  coin  of  the  realm,  and  greatly  enrich  us,  for  they  tear 
the  approving  stamp  of  heaven  upon  them. 

I  look  upon  the  apostle's  words,  though  thoy  are  venerable  with  years, 
as  dropping  heaven's  own  dew  upon  us  to-night.  I  hear  their  mellow 
tones  ringing  all  along  the  centuries  and  scattering  blcFsings  right 
through  the  ages.  Tlieir  music  is  not  silent,  nor  is  it  impotent  at  tliis 
honr  :  **  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you  nil "  is  Paul's 

E resent  and  ever  new  blcBsing ;.  he  being  dead  yet  spcnketh.  and  his 
lOrd  yet  hears  his  holy  prayer.  Long  has  the  benediction  lain  in  the 
epistle  like  the  wheat  in  the  Egyptian  catacomb,  but  there  is  a  vitality 
in  it  yet;   lo,  it  buds  and  brings  forth  good  to  us  after  the  lapse  of 


211  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  FULPIT. 

ciglitecu  centuries.  May  every  one  of  us  feel  an  unction  from  the  Lord 
attendinp:  tlieso  words.  !May  tlie  apostle  bless  us  now,  yea,  better  may 
the  apostle  and  High  Priest  of  our  profession  pronounce  anew  this 
Benedict  ion  over  us. 

Let  us  now  analyse  the  text  itself.  The  first  thing  we  will  speak  upon 
is  this, — what  in  mmnHni  the  grace  of  our  LcndJesua  Christ?  secondly, 
v'iih  irhom  is  it  to  Iv  7 — the  ai)06tle  says,  "  Be  with  you  all ;"  and 
thirdly,  and  what  witl  be  the  effect  if  it  he  with  us  all? 

I.  Let  us  first  en(iairc  what  is  the  grace  of  ouii  Loiu)  Jesus 
Chkist  which  the  aiustle  w-ould  have  to  be  with  us  all? 
lie  repeats  the  expression  verbatim  in  his  epistles  to  the  Corinthians, 
and  to  the  Philip)>ians,  and  also  iu  his  second  letter  to  the  Thessalonians. 
He  closes  each  of  these  epistles  with  precisely  the  same  benediction, 
therefore  he  felt  it  to  be  fitting  and  weighty.  Does  he  mean  by  this 
"  grace  of  our  Tiord  Jesus  Christ,"  the  grace  which  was  revealed  m 
Christ  the  Suvioar ;  that  grace  of  God  which  shone  in  the  gift  of  t 
Saviour  to  the  sons  of  men,  that  grace  which  was  displayed  in  the  com- 
inj;^  of  Christ  to  be  bone  of  our  boue,  and  flesh  of  our  flesh,  which  was 
manifested  in  the  whole  life  of  Clirist  on  earth,  was  revealed  especially 
in  the  death  of  Christ,  and  which  is  still  to  be  seen  since  his  resurrection 
and  ascension  in  his  intercession,  and  iu  his  standing  as  our  repre- 
sentative before  the  Father's  throne?  Grace  was  gloriously  revealed  in 
the  i)erson  of  Christ  when  lie  became  the  incarnate  God,  and  none  can 
consider  him  as  uniting  in  one  iK'rson  God  and  man  without  discerning 
mueli  love,  and  ^xircciving  that  it  was  meant  to  make  way  for  still  more 
clear  displays  of  mercy.  Does  not  the  benediction  desire  for  as  a 
part  in  the  blessing  which  lies  couched  in  the  Messiah's  person,  in 
whom  all  nations  are  blessed? 

Does  tlie  apostle,  mean  the  grace  which  comes  to  us  through  Christ 
as  well  as  that  which  is  shown  to  us  in  Christ?  Our  Lord,  as  it  were, 
took  out  of  the  i*iver-bed  of  grace  the  great  rock  which  blocked  up  the 
water  courses,  and  now  along  the  wide  and  open  channel — 

*' Jmmortal  joys  come  streaming  down, 
Joys  like  his  griefs,  immense,  unknown.** 

Christ  did  not  create  the  Father's  love  to  us,  the  elect  were  loved  of 
God  before  all  worlds,  and  Christ  is  the  gift  of  that  love,  not  the  cause 
of  it.  Calvary  did  not  procure  the  Father's  love  to  us,  but  the  love  of 
God  towards  us  could  not,  by  reason  of  our  sins,  and  the  penalty  due 
thereto,  come  to  us  so  as  to  be  enjoyed  by  us.  It  could  not  bring  to 
us  tlie  blessings  which  we  now  possess  until  Jesus  had  finished  trans- 
gression, and  made  an  end  of  sin.  Both  the  grace  implied  in  the 
sending  of  the  ^Messiah,  and  the  grace  which  flows  to  us  through  him, 
are  here  intended. 

Does  the  apostle  also  mean  the  grace  which  comestouswrru  Christ? — 
by  which  I  mean  those  peculiar  blessings  which  come  to  souls  who 
abide  in  Christ,  who  commune  with  him,  walk  with  him,  work  for  him, 
and  arc  raised  uj)  together,  and  made  to  sit  together  in  heavenly  places 
in  him;  who  are  not  only  saved,  but  something  more;  who  are  not 
drowning  men  barely  landed  on  the  shore,  and  hardly  possessed  of  life, 
but  who  have  life  abundantly,  walk  in  the  light  of  God's  countenance, 
and  go  from  strength  to  sfrcngth.    If  so,  there  is  an  exquisite  sweetness 


THE  PASTOB'S  PABTIKG  BL£8S£KG.  245 

of  meaning  in  his  benediction.  May  it  be  richly  fulfilled  in  each  of 
UB.  May  our  nnion  to  Jesus  be  so  clearly  apprehended  that  we  may 
experience  no  stinted  measure  of  vital  energy,  but  the  rather  may  be 
filkd  with  all  the  fulness  of  God.  Surely  Paul  means  nothing  loss  than 
this. 

But  he  intended  more  yet,  for  his  is  no  niggardly  invocation.  Grace  in 
Christ,  grace  through  Christ,  and  grace  with  Christ — put  these  together, 
and  even  then  you  nave  not  grasped  the  whole.  He  desires  for  us  all 
the  grace  that  is  in  any  way  connected  with  Ohrist;  for  you  will  have 
remarked  that  in  the  close  of  the  second  of  Corinthians,  w4\cre  he  gives. 
the  Bame  benediction,  he  extends  it,  **Thc  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
ChriBt,  and  the  Jove  of  Ood^  and  the  communion  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  be 
with  you  all."  Here  he  gives  it  the  shorter  form,  but  he  doubtless 
intended  it  to  comprehend  all  the  rest.  He  really  wishes  that  the  one 
comprehensive  blessing  of  the  divine  unity,  even  all  the  triple  blessing 
of  the  sacred  Trinity,  may  abide  with  all  those  who  by  faith  were  one 
with  Christ,  and  therefore  were  beloved  of  the  apostolic  soul.  ''The 
grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  then  includes  all  the  grace  secured  to  us 
in  the  eternal  covenant.  In  many  of  his  epistles,  the  apostle  sums  up 
with  a  shorter  word  than  our  text,  and  yet  in  some  respects'  a  fuller 
one,  *^yrace  be  with  you  all'*  You  have  this  in  the  Colossians,  in  the 
first  epistle  to  Timothy,  in  Titus,  and  in  the  Hebrews.  He  says, 
** Grace  be  with  you  all,"  without  mentioning  any  person  of  the  God- 
head. So  that  "  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  is  synonymous 
with  grace  as  such ;  and  comprehends  all  the  various  displays  of  grace 
which  are  in  other  passages  of  Scripture  referred  to  the  various  persons 
of  the  Godhead.  He  wushes  the  saints  all  the  grace  they  need,  nil  the 
grace  they  can  desire,  all  the  grace  the  Infinite  God  can  give,  llow 
truly  do  1  echo  his  great  prayer  that  all  grace  may  be  with  you  all. 

Coming  to  particulars  more  closely.  When  it  is  the  desire  of  our 
heart  that  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  may  be  with  you  all,  we 
mean,  firsts  may  the  love  of  Jesus  Christ  Ic  with  you^  and  may  you  know 
thai  you  Mve  it.  May  it  be  so  with  you  that  you  may  distinctly  and 
beyond  all  doubt  know  that  Jesus  loves  you,  and  the  fact  being 
ascertained,  mav  you  drink  deep  into  the  fulness  of  its  meaning.  May 
you  be  ravishecJ  with  the  assurance  that  the  ever-blessed  Son  of  God  has 
set  his  affection  upon  you,  has  loved  you  from  before  the  foundation 
of  the  world,  loves  you  now  even  as  the  Father  loves  him,  and  will  love 
you  when  heaven  and  earth  shall,  like  a  scroll,  be  rolled  uj),  and  like  an 
outworn  vesture  be  put  away.  0  that  you  all  nii«:ht  be  in  such  a 
condition,  that  the  love  of  Christ  might  shine  full  into  your  souls,  a 
noon-tide  without  a  solitary  cloud,  a  summer  without  a  single  blight. 
May  you  know  of  a  surety,  by  the  witness  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  you 
have  passed  from  death  unto  life,  and  that  the  love  of  God  is  shed 
abroad  within  your  souls.  What  a  happy  church  would  it  be  were  all 
the  members  in  such  a  condition!  But,  alas,  we  see  one  fearful, 
another  doubting,  and  a  third  declining ;  here  is  one  living  at  a  distance 
from  Christ,  and  another  saying,  **  0  that  1  knew  where  I  might  find 
himl "  May  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  sense  of  a  con- 
scious enjoyment  of  his  love  be  the  habitual  possession  of  your  hearts 
and  mincU. 


210  MKTKOPOLITAN  TABEIINACLE  PULPIT. 

Paul  intends  also  as  nuicb  as  tliis, — moji  the  mernj  as  well  as  the  Iov$ 
of.-ur  Lonf  Jesus  Christ  he  vHk  you  !     May  that  mercy  be  shown  to  you 
by  the  full  pardon  of  all  your  sins,  and  your  knowledge  that  they  are 
pardoned.     May  your  conscience  be  purged  from  dead  works,  and  not 
merely  cleansed,  but  cleansed  so  that  you  may  know  it  to  be  clean. 
Tiie  great  mercy  is  to  have  no  suspicion  that  sin  is  left  upon  yon,  but 
to  be  certain  that  every  transgression  of  every  sort  has  l)een  for  ever 
put  away  through  the  precious  blood  which  cleanses  from  all  sin. 
Alas!  there  are  many  Ciiristians  who  even  in  their  prayers  do  not 
appear  to  understand  or  distinguish  between  themselves  and  the  uncon- 
verted.    I  believe  it  to  be  our  duty  to  ask  for  pardon  every  day.    Our 
Lord  in  the  model  prayer  teaches  us  to  say,  "  iorgive  us  our  trespasses 
as  we  forgive  them  that  trespass  against  us;  "  but  we  should  not  con- 
found that  i)etition  of  a  child  to  its  father  with  the  first  sapplication 
for  pardon  which  befitted  us  as  aliens  before  we  were  brongnt  nigh. 
As  guilty  sinners  we  stood  before  the  judge,   but  now  we  are  no 
longer  criminals,  for  there  is  now  no  condemnation  to  them  that  are 
in  Christ  Jesus.      We   need   not  say  with  Peter  in  his  enthusiastic 
folly,  *•  Wash  not  my  feet  only,  but  also  my  hands  and  my  head,"  for  the 
Master  tells  us  that  we  have  been  washed  and  are  clean,  and  therefore 
we  need  only  to  wash  our  feet,  for  we  are,  in  him,  clean  every  whit 
May  you  not,  therefore,  come  before  him  with  what  is  too  often  used  as 
a  mere  parrot  cry,  "  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us  miserable  sinners.*'    If 
you    believers  are  miserable  sinners  you  ought  not  to  be.     You  are 
sinners,  but  you  ought  not  to  be  miserable.    You  have  been  forgiven; 
you  are  justified  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus.    Is  all  this  nothing  ?    How 
can  you  ignore  it,  and  speak  of  yourself  still  as  you  would  have  spoken 
before  you  were  saved?    Is  the  Lord's  pardon  nothing  that  you  com- 
plain still  of  being  condemned  ?    Do  you  despise  the  diviiie  forgiveness? 
You  are  a  child  of  God,  and  do  you  still  use  the  language  of  a  slave, 
and  feel  no  liberty  in  your  soul  ?     I  feor  that  what  is  imagined  to  be 
humility  is  a  mingle-mangle  of  hypocrisy  and  unbelief.    If  yon  are 
taved  it  is  sheer  cant  to  call  yourself  a  miserable  sinner;  you  ought 
to  be  one  of  the  happiest  of  beings,  and  rejoice  that  the  mercy  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Clirist  abides  with  you. 

Furthermore,  beloved,  maxj  you  he  the  subjects  of  Chrisfs  tcorh 
coistantly.  That  will  give  yet  another  meaning  to  this  benediction. 
The  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  his  Spirit,  is  carrying  on  in  believers  daily 
a  purifying  work;  for  he  sits  as  a  refiner  and  he  purifies  the  sons  of 
Jicvi.  He  is  like  a  refiner's  fire,  and  like  fullers'  soap.  Let  us  pray 
that,  however  trying  it  may  be  to  us,  and  whatever  rough  providences 
it  may  involve,  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  may  be  with  qb 
all  in  this  respect.  May  our  prayer  be,  **  Refining  fire,  go  through 
my  heart !"  Let  the  winnowing  fan  be  used ;  let  our  chaff  be  driven 
away,  there  is  not  a  particle  of  it  we  would  wish  to  retain.  We  desire 
to  be  sanctified — spiiit,  soul,  and  body — through  him  who  leads  his 
people  without  the  camp  that  they  may  be  separated  unto  himself. 
May  we  walk  in  the  light  as  he  is  in  the  light,  and  so  have  felloii\*8hip 
one  with  another,  and  may  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  God's  dear  Son, 
cleanse  us  from  all  sin. 

May  the  benediction  rest  upon  you  also  in  anotlier  manner.    May 


THE  pastor's  parting  BLESSING.  247 

you,  brethren,  he  possessors  of  Christ s  y^eacc.  One  of  the  benedictions 
freqaently  nsed  by  the  apostle  expressly  mentions  peace.  *'  Grace,  mercy, 
and  peace  be  with  you."  Where  Christ  is,  peace  reigns  within ;  he  is  the 
peacemaker,  yea,  peace  itself.  Conscience  is  quieted,  the  heart  rests  in 
God,  the  whole  man  casts  anchor,  the  barque  has  reached  its  haven 
when  it  has  come  to  the  Well-beloved.  0  that  you  may  enjoy  this 
grace  of  Christ,  for  it  was  his  prerogative  to  say,  **  Peace  I  leave  with 
you,  my  peace  I  give  unto  you."  It  was  his  delight  to  pronounce 
upon  his  disciples  the  word,  *'  Peace  be  unto  you."  May  the  peace 
of  God,  which  passeth  all  understanding,  keep  your  hearts  and  minds 
by  Christ  Jesns.  If  you  are  troubled  with  family  concerns,  may 
you  roll  your  burden  upon  the  Lord  and  find  rest ;  or  if  you  are  vexed 
about  your  past  transgressions,  may  you  confess  the  sin  unto  the  Lord 
and  hear  his  blood  speak  peace  to  your  soul.  Whatever  it  is  that 
troubles  you,  may  he  comfort  you  and  give  you  his  peace,  the  deep,  un- 
rufl9ed  calm  which  reigns  in  his  own  bosom.  If  there  be  one  gem  of 
grace  which  beyond  all  others  especially  belongs  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  it  is 
the  lovely  pearl  of  peace.  He  is  the  Lord  and  giver  of  peace,  the  Prince 
of  Peace,  and  the  messenger  of  the  covenant  of  peace.  Brethren,  may 
we  live  in  peace  with  God,  with  men,  and  with  ourselves.  We  all  say 
**  Amen  **  to  that  prayer. 

Would  not  Paul  also  desire  for  us  that  we  may  exhibit  in  ourselves  the 
grace  tvht'ch  shone  so  brightly  in  Christy  and  was  seen  by  men  and  angels 
to  th$  glory  of  Ood  the  Father?  You  will  never  have  grace,  dear  friends, 
in  the  same  measure  as  the  Lord  Jesus  had  it  (rather  let  me  correct 
myself,  for  he  had  grace  without  measure),  but  you  may  receive  and 
exhibit  the  same  grace  in  your  measure.  0  that  you  and  I  may  liave 
a  high  degree  of  it !  Grace  displayed  itself  in  the  Lord  Jesus  in  a 
character  absolutely  perfect,  in  which  not  one  of  the  virtues  was  absent 
or  exaggerated,  and  m  which  not  a  single  fault  could  be  found.  You 
can  depict  the  character  of  John,  for  a  prominent  excellence  is  visible ; 
you  can  describe  the  characteristics  of  Peter;  you  can  give  an  idea 
of  Paul ;  for  each  of  these  is  like  a  separate  gem,  and  each  one  has 
its  own  especial  brightness  and  colour,  and  I  may  add  each  one  has  its 
own  peculiar  flaw ;  but  when  you  come  to  the  altogether  lovely  One  your 
descriptive  powers  fail  you,  for  he  is  like  the  high  priest's  breastplate 
in  which  all  the  jewels  met  in  harmony.  The  excellences  of  all  the 
excellent  are  in  him,  and  none  of  the  naws.  In  him  all  perfections 
meet  to  make  up  one  perfection.  All  the  spices,  the  myrrh,  the  aloes, 
the  cassia,  the  sweet  cinnamon,  and  whatever  else  may  be  grateful  to 
God  and  to  holy  men — all  these  divinely  compounded  with  the  art  of 
the  apothecary,  and  well-balanced  as  to  the  proportions  arc  to  be 
found  in  one  rare  anointing  oil  upon  the  person  of  our  Well-beloved. 
O  may  that  grace  be  with  you  which  was  poured  upon  our  glorious 
Head  and  continues  to  distil  to  the  skirts  of  nis  priestly  garments.  May 
his  aacred  unction  anoint  and  perfume  us  all !  It  was  poured  on  Jesus 
that  it  might  drop  on  us.  He  received  this  fulness  that  we  might  receive 
out  of  him  grace  for  grace.  He  does  not  possess  grace  that  he  may 
store  it  up  for  himself,  for  he  needs  it  not ;  but  he  has  all  fulness  in  him- 
«elf  on  purpose  for  us,  that  we  may  partake  thereof  both  now  and  for  ever. 
0  that  we  may  manifest  it  in  our  lives  both  public  and  private,  in 


248  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

the  emotions  of  our  hearts,  and  the  words  of  onr  months.  May  men  m 
all  the  actions  of  our  lives  observe  that  we  are  heirs  of  grace  by  our 
gracious  conversation,  knowing  us  as  a  tree  is  known  by  its  fruit.  May 
this  grace  be  iu  you,  and  abound  that  you  may  not  be  barren  nor 
un])rc'fi  table. 

I  am  far  from  having  brought  out  all  the  various  shades  of  meaning 
which  lie  within  this  ancient  benediction;  for  as  the  Holy  Spirit,  like  the 
sun,  shines  on  this  crystal  text,  it  flashes  with  all  the  colours  of  the 
rainbow.  It  is  a  very  full,  rich,  and  large  benediction.  Even  Aaron 
hhnsclf  could  not  pronounce  a  fuller  blessing.  The  Lord  fulfil  it  to 
every  one  of  you,  according  to  the  riches  of  his  glory  by  Christ  Jesus! 

II.  Socondiy,  with  wuom  I8  this  grace  to  bb  ?     **  With  youalL" 
The  apostle  meant  with  all  the  saints.     lie  did  not  actually  limit  it  in 
words  to  the  saints,  but  he  evidently  intended  to  be  so  understood,  for  he 
was  writing  "  to  all  that  be  in  Rome,  beloved  of  God,  called  to  be  saints," 
and  to  them  he  said,  "  grace  be  with  you  all."    We  will  not  go  beyond 
the  apostolic  wish,  neither  will  we  stop  short  of  it.    This  moment  I  say  to 
you,  *'  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Cnrist  be  with  you  all'* — with  all  the 
members  of  this  church,  and  all  my  fellow-servants  in  Christ  Jesus.    The 
like  grace  be  with  all  the  churL-hes,  with  all  the  chosen  of  God  in  cveiy 
land  ;  but  at  this  present  I  may  be  permitted  to  utter  this  as  my  pcrsontd 
and  especial  wish  for  you  my  beloved  flock  at  this  time,  when  for  a 
season  I  shall  be  absent  from  you.     Tlie  demands  of  health  call  me 
away,  and  what  shall  I  leave  with  you,  my  dear  companions,  my  own 
children,   my  reverend  elder  brethren,   my  beloved  fellow  soldiers? 
What  better  word  shall  be  the  last  to  salute  your  ear  from  my  lips  till 
I  return  to  you  ?  IIow  can  my  aflcction  frame  a  fitter  utterance  than  that 
which  fell  from  Paul's  ixin,  when  he  added  to  the  apostolic  benediction 
liis  own  personal  love,  and  wrote  to  the  Corinthians,  **  The  grace  ofow 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  he  with  you ;  my  Iovb  le  icilh  you  all  in  Christ  Jesus  f^ 

Now,  why  with  you  all  ?  Is  it  not  because  you  all  need  il?  There  is 
not  one  among  you  who  can  do  without  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  You  ex})erienced  Christians  are  greatly  in  danger  when  yon  think 
your  mountain  stimds  firm  and  will  never  be  moved.  You  wise  and  in- 
telligent believers  are  in  sore  peril  when  you  dream  that  you  can  battle 
with  error  apart  from  your  Master.  Conscious  weakness  is  our  true 
strength.  "  When  I  am  weak  then  am  I  strong."  The  boldest, 
bravest,  wi.^^est,  most  judicious,  and  most  experienced  among  you,  need 
the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  certainly  the  babes  in  grace 
and  the  weaklings  of  the  flock  require  it  no  less. 

More  delighcfiil  still,  is  it  to  remember  that  you  all  mayluive  it.  Yon 
all,  having  believed  in  Jesus,  have  him  to  be  your  own,  and  you  may 
surely  have  his  grace.  He  who  gave  you  Christ  has  virtually  given 
you  all  the  grace  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  Indeed  we  know  from  the 
best  autliority  that  grace  was  given  us  in  Christ  Jesus  ere  the  world 
began. 

And,  beloved,  there  is  no  grace  which  you  may  not  JmvCj  no  grace  ivhicA 
you  ought  to  he  content  to  go  without.  If  a  line  should  be  drawn  in 
Christijin  experience,  and  a  decree  should  be  passed  that  such  and  such 
a  Chriiitian  should  never  advance  beyond  tiiat  mark,  j'ou  might  feel  very 
unhappy,  and  yet  some  of  you  have  drawn  such  a  hne  for  yourselves, 


THB  PASTOR'S  PABTING  BLESSnfG.  249 

and  yoa  are  not  nnhappj.  It  is  grieyous  to  see  how  we  btant  and 
dwarf  ourselves,  and  appear  to  be  content  with  a  very  poor  and 
feeble  form  of  spiritual  life.  May  the  Holy  Spirit  breathe  into  your 
hearts  a  higher  ambition,  for  rest  assured  if  you  do  not  possess  the 
whole  laud  of  Canaan,  it  is  because  you  are  too  idle  to  drive  out  the 
Hivites  and  Jebusites,  for  there  is  not  one  of  all  the  clan  but  what  yon  may 
conquer,  though  they  have  chariots  of  iron.  There  is  not  a  brook  that 
flows  with  milk  and  honey  but  you  may  drink  of  it,  if  you  have  but 
faith  and  prayer  enough  to  win  it  for  yourselves.  He  givcth  more 
grace ;  seek  to  enjoy  it. 

I^Ty  dear  brethren  in  office,  my  esteemed  deacons  and  elders^  I  pray 
that  you  may  have  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  abundantly,  so 
tliat  you  may  walk  before  us  as  becometh  fathers  in  Israel,  that  yon 
may  be  ensamples  to  the  flock,  that  none  of  the  weaker  sort  may  see  in 
jon  any  occasion  of  stumbling,  but  much  that  may  lead  them  forward 
m  the  divine  life.  You  who  are  especially  the  workers  among  us,  yon 
Sabbath -school  teachers,  you  who  have  the  conduct  of  our  adult  classes, 
you  who  preach  for  the  Master  in  the  streets,  or  go  from  house  to  liousc 
with  your  tracts,  I  pray  that  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  be  with  you 
all.  Whatever  your  form  of  work  may  be,  it  will  come  to  nought 
without  his  grace;  but  you  may  have  it,  and  I  pray  you  be  not  content 
unless  you  possess  it  abundantly. 

Among  you  there  are  members  of  the  church  who  are  very  poor ; 
there  are  in  proportion  probably  more  poor  among  us  than  in  any  other 
church  of  our  order  and  standing,  and  for  this  I  devoutly  thank  God, 
for  I  can  hardly  conceive  a  church  to  be  rich  in  grace  which  has  not  in 
it  many  of  the  Lord's  poor.  But  this  I  pray,  that  the  grace  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  may  be  with  you,  who  are  the  sons  and  daughters  of  poverty, 
to  enable  you  to  be  patient,  to  sanctify  your  trials,  to  make  your  homes 
bright  with  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and  to  keep  you  from  envy  and 
murmuring.  May  your  rooms  be  palaces  to  you,  because  the  King  visits 
you  and  feast  you  with  his  love. 

May  that  same  grace,  however,  be  with  the  few  among  us  who  may 
be  said  to  be  rich,  for  how  much  grace  do  the  wealthy  require,  that  tliey 
may  be  kept  from  the  temptations  which  beset  their  position,  and  may 
be  delivered  from  the  cankering  influence  of  riches !  May  the  grace  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  that,  con- 
secrating your  substance  habitually  to  Christ,  it  may  bring  with  it  many 
comforts  to  your  souls  as  well  as  to  your  bodies. 

May  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you,  dc«nr  brethren 
and  sisters,  who  are  ripening  for  heaven;  may  it  be  light  with  you  at 
eventide,  and  may  your  rest  be  glorious.  Though  near  to  glory,  you 
know  right  well  that  you  are  still  dependent  upon  grace,  and  I  trust  you 
will  abundantly  enjoy  it.  May  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be 
with  you,  young  beginners,  who  have  just  put  on  the  harnesB.  May  you 
live  long  in  the  Christian  Church,  and  serve  your  Master  well.  Amidst 
the  temptations  of  youth,  and  the  trials  of  manhood,  may  you  stand 
fast  and  glorify  your  Lord. 

Some  of  you  are  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  his  mi<:;ht. 
May  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you  to  keep  you  strong. 
If  you  have  trodden  down  strength,  and  have  had  the  hiud*s  feet  with 


250  HETBOFOLITAN  TABERNAGLS  PULPIT. 

which  you  have  stood  upon  your  high  places,  may  you  never  lose  your 
position,  bub  maintain  your  joy.  And  as  for  you  who  are  doubting 
and  fearing,  the  timid  ones  of  the  flock,  may  the  grace  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  be  with  you  too,  for  he  carrieth  the  lambs  in  his  bosom, 
and  doth  gently  lead  those  that  are  with  young.  A  bruised  reed  he 
will  not  break,  and  the  smoking  flax  he  will  not  quench. 

While  I  make  the  benediction  thus  as  large  as  the  apostle  did,  let  me 
remind  you  very  affectionately  that  there  is  a  limit  to  it.  He  is 
speaking  to  the  saints,  and  to  none  else.  Have  you  noticed  the  form 
tliis  benediction  takes  in  the  epistle  to  Philemon,  and  in  the  epistle 
to  the  (Jalatians?  There  the  apostle  puts  it  thus,  **The  grace  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  your  spirit."  It  is  only  meant,  then,  for 
spiritual-minded  men,  for  such  as  have  been  bom  again  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Jesus  Christ  cannot  be  with  the  carnal.  He  will  not  give  the  blessing 
of  his  presence  to  those  who  mind  earthly  things.  When  ye  have  been 
born  again  ye  can  understand  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  but 
not  till  then.  May  that  gracious  work  of  regeneration  be  wrought  in 
every  soul  here.  The  apostle  limits  it  again  in  his  Epistle  to  the 
Ephesians.  He  there  utters  a  desire  that  the  grace  of  our  Lord  JesuB 
Christ  may  be  with  "all  them  that  love  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in 
sincerity."  You  cannot  expect  the  blessing  of  Christ  to  abide  with 
you  if  you  are  hypocritical,  or  formal,  or  self-deceived.  Sincerity  is  a 
needful  index  of  the  grace  of  Christ  being  with  you.  Do  you,  dear 
l.earer,  in  sincerity  love  Jesus  Christ  ?  If  you  do,  may  his  grace  be 
with  you. 

One  other  limit  the  apostle  gives.  Let  me  read  it  to  you.  I  can 
never  read  these  words  either  in  public  or  in  private  without  a  conscious 
shudder,  but  they  demand  an  attentive  consideration  by  us  all.  You 
will  find  them  at  the  close  of  the  first  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians. 
"  The  salutation  of  mc  Paul  with  mine  own  hand.  If  any  man  love 
not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  let  him  be  Anathema  Maran-atha.  The 
grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you.*'  What  a  limitation  is 
this !  He  pronounces  a  solemn  curse  upon  those  whom  he  feels  he  can- 
not bless,  because  they  arc  so  base  as  not  to  love  the  infinitely  loving 
Jesus.  "  If  any  man  love  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  let  him  be 
accursed  when  the  Lord  cometh,"  for  that  is  the  meaning  of  the 
words,  "Anathema  Maran-atha,"  "cursed  when  the  Lord  cometh," 
or  "  As  surely  cursed  as  the  Lord  cometh."  Whoever,  then,  loves 
not  Christ  is  cursed.  Oh!  God,  save  us  all  from  a  curse  so  well 
deserved;  for  not  to  love  such  a  generous  Saviour,  not  to  love  one 
so  lovely  and  so  gracious,  not  to  love  one  who  loved  his  enemies,  and 
laid  down  his  life  for  sinners,  is  in  itself  to  be  accursed.  That  spirit 
is  withered  already.  Saviour,  that  loves  not  thee!  To  be  able  to  withhold 
its  aflections  from  so  lovely  an  object  is  in  itself  a  doom.  God  save 
you  from  it !  May  there  not  be  one  among  you  here  upon  whom  that 
curse  may  come,  but  "  may  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with 
you  all." 

III.  And  now  as  this  must  serve  for  my  parting  word  for  some 
little  time,  let  me  explain,  in   the  third  place,  what   will   be  the 

RK.SULT  TO  YOU  IF  THE    GRACE  OF   OVR  LORD  JE8U8  CuRIST  BE  WITH 
YOU   ALL. 


THE  PABTOB'B  PARTIKO  BLE6SIXG.  251 

First,  there  will  be  a  blessed  consequence  to  you  Godward.  As  you 
have  this  grace  of  Christ  in  you  you  will  love  God  better  ;  you  will  seek 
his  face  oftener;  you  will  pray  with  more  confidence,  and  more  vehemence. 
You  could  not  have  the  grace  of  Christ  without  being  much  in  prayer, 
for  this  eminently  distinguished  his  character.  If  you  have  the  grace 
of  Christ  you  will  walk  with  God,  even  as  he  did.  Your  communion 
with  the  Father  will  be  closer  then  heretofore;  it  will  be  less  interrupted ; 
it  will  become  thorough.  0  that  I  might  see  a  church  made  up 
wholly  of  saints  who  live  in  habitual  intercourse  with  God !  I  know  it 
is  not  60  with  all  in  this  church.  I  know  there  are  many  out  of  our 
four  thousand  members  who  walk  with  God,  but  I  mourn  that  there  are 
others  who  follow  afar  off.  May  this  affectionately-intended  remark 
nose  in  each  heart  the  personal  enquiry,  **  Lord,  is  it  I  ?  *'  And  if 
your  hearts  condemn  any  of  you,  may  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
be  with  you  most  effectually,  that  you  may  amend  your  ways. 

The  next  beneficial  effect  tcill  extend  to  your  fellow  church-members. 
If  you  have  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  with  you,  you  will  love 
each  other  with  a  pure  heart  fervently.  You  will  have  compassion  one 
towards  another.  No  one  will  seek  his  own,  but  every  man  his  brother's 
benefit.  Suspicion,  harsh  judgment,  envy,  and  jcalonsy  will  cease. 
GoBsipping  and  foolish  talking  will  come  to  an  end.  Alas  !  how  much 
these  things  abound,  and  what  sorrow^  they  cause.  When  the  grace  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  with  us  our  speech  will  be  to  edificaticfn.  We 
shall  esteem  others  better  than  ourselves.  We  shall  rather  sec  their  ex- 
cellences than  their  faults,  while  we  shall  each  strive  which  can  be  of 
most  service  to  the  rest.  "  Behold,  how  good  and  how  pleasant  it  is  for 
brethren  to  dwell  together  in  unity!"  By  this  shall  all  men  know  that 
ye  are  Christ's  disciples,  if  ye  have  love  one  towards  another.  May 
we  be  mutually  enriched  in  all  spiritual  gifts  and  graces  by  loving 
communion  in  the  grace  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  Eighteen  years 
and  more  have  we  now  dwelt  together  in  union  and  prosperity,  and 
that  this  same  grace  may  continue  with  us  tlirongli  twice  another 
eighteen  years,  if  the  Lord  spare  us  so  long,  is  my  souPs  most  fervent 
prayer. 

Another  admirable  result  will  follow  towards  your  families  and  your' 
selves.  If  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you,  you  will 
personally  be  much  the  happier.  Your  troubles  will  sit  lighUy  upon 
you  when  grace  is  fully  within  yon.  Your  joys  will  have  a  mellower 
taste  in  them  than  now  when  they  are  seasoned  with  grace.  The 
family  altar  will  become  a  reality.  The  servants  will  find  the  house  a 
home,  and  the  children  will  become  children  of  God,  when  the  master  and 
mistress  are  filled  with  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus.  Gracious  men 
arc  a  sure  blessing  to  the  neighbourhoods  in  which  they  live ;  the  sweet 
perfume  of  their  family  piety  will  blow  out  at  the  doors  and  windows, 
and  spread  a  balmy  influence  around.  As  trades  of  an  ill  savour  make 
a  whole  district  nauseous,  so  saints,  who  have  the  sweet  sa^'our  of 
Christ  in  them,  render  a  region  fragrant. 

Thus  a  blessing  will  flow  out  to  the  tvorld  which  lieth  in  darkness. 
If  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  us,  we  shall  have  all  our 
thoughte  and  feelings  towards  sinners  materially  changed.  We  shall 
mourn  over  them  with  intense  compassion.    Parents,  you  will  not  be 


252  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

able  to  look  upon  your  nnconverted  children  as  yon  now  do,  holy 
sorrow  will  mingle  with  natural  pleasure.    Ah  !  he  is  a  fine  yonng 
man ;  he  is  growing  up,  and  is  quite  his  mother's  joy.    Mother,  if  his 
soul   is   unsaved,  do  not  so  much  as   look    at  him  without  a  tear. 
"Ah!"  says  the  father,  "there  is  my  girl — what  a  lovely  creature 
she  is!  **     Is  she  converted  ?     If  not,  think  what  a  fallen   creature 
she  is.     Employers,  if  you  have  grace  yon   will  not  go    into   yoor 
iiictories  as  you  have  done,  and  think  of  the  **  hands,"  bnt  yon  will 
have  pity  on  the    "  souls "   therein.     Many  sensations  pass  through 
a  niun^s  mind  if  he  stands  at  a  window  in  Cheapside  and  sees  the 
rush  of  the  living  river.     It  strikes  me  that  the  flow  of  our  crowded 
streets  is  one  of  the  most  wonderful  sights  in  the  whole  world.    There 
go  the  thousands,  tramp,  tramp,  tramp,  on,  on,  on,  without  a  pause. 
Thoughtful  men  watch  the  stream  and  calculate  this  and   that>  ac- 
cording to  the  manner  of  statistics ;   but  the  right-minded  Christian, 
contemplating  the  scene,  has  this  consideration  uppermost,  "  All  these 
are  immortal.     How  many,  or  how  few  of  them,  are  on  the  road  to 
bliss,  and  how  many  are  leaping  up  wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath." 
Then  will  he  breathe  the  prayer  involuntarily,  **  Lord,  have  mercy  upon 
.this  guilty  city  ;  save  the  myriads  of  this  modern  Nineveh,  and  let 
transgressoi-s  learn  thy  ways."    Oh  I  if  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesos 
Christ  were  with  us,  we  should,  like  the  ^viour,  often  burst  iuto 
tears  over  London,  as  he  did  over  Jerusalem.     We  should  not  trifle,  as 
we  now  do,  with  opportunities  of  doing  good.     We  should  speak  to 
ones  and  twos  if  we  could  reach  no  more,  and  Jesus*  love  would  be 
our  theme. 

Time  compels  me  to  cease,  but  ere  I  leave  you,  my  beloved  flock, 
I  st»leinnly  pronounce  this  benediction  upon  you  : — "The  peace  of  oar 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you  all."  And  my  heart  says,  Amen, 
Amen,  Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Romans  xvi. 


r.S. — During  our  absence,  \re  trust  our  evor-affoctionate  friends,  both  hearers  and 
readi'is,  will  care  for  our  various  works  and  sec  that  thoy  do  not  lack  pecuniary 
nii;anH,  The  College,  the  Ori)hanage,  and  the  Colportago  are  always  at  work,  and 
expouding  considerablo  sums.  ^Ir.  Blackshaw,  Secretary-,  Tabernacle,  Newington, 
will  receive  and  acknowledge  any  aid  rendered.  To  the  God  of  Providence,  who 
supplies  our  needs  through  -the  willing  offerings  of  his  people,  we  look  confidently. 
There  will  be  no  alteration  in  the  publication  of  the  Sermons  during  our  abtenoe* 
W©  have  arranged  that  a  Sermon  shall  appear  each  wock,  as  usual. 


^ti[0plton;  ©Hkmack  ftilpit. 


A  LAST  LOOK-OUT. 


%  pennon 


DELI7EBED  BT 

C.  H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABBRNACLB,  NBWINGTON. 


'*  The  time  of  my  departure  is  at  hand." — 2  Timothy  iv.  6. 

ir,  SO  very  near  the  chanp;e — his  removal  from  this  to  another 
and  so  Very  conscious  of  it ;  yet  Paul  looked  back  with  calm 
3tion :  he  looked  forward  with  sweet  assurance ;  and  he  looked 
with  deepest  interest  on  the  mission  that  had  engaged  his  life, 
a  must  have  noticed  while  we  were  reading  the  chapter,  in  his 
the  ruling  passion  was  strong  in  death."  Writing  what  he  well 
is  the  last  letter  he  shall  ever  write,  its  main  topic  is  care  for 
arch  of  God — anxiety  for  the  promotion  of  the  truth — zeal  for  the 
•ance  of  the  gospel.  When  he  is  dead,  and  gone  from  the  post  of 
},  the  scene  of  suffering,  the  field  of  enterprise,  on  whom  shall  his 
J  fall  ?  He  desires  that  in  Timothy  he  may  find  a  worthy  sue- 
strong  in  the  faith,  sincere  of  heart,  and  having  dauntless 
;e  withal,  one  who  will  wield  the  sword  and  hold  the  banner  when 
nd  is  palsied  in  death.  Men  have  usaally  shown  us  what  lies  at 
ttom  of  their  heart  when  they  have  come  to  die.  Often  their  last 
ig  expressions  have  been  indicative  of  their  entire  character, 
aly  you  have  before  you  in  the  last  sentences  of  Paul's  pen  a  fair 
le  of  his  entire  life.  He  is  trusting  in  the  Saviour  ;  he  is  anxious 
w  his  love  for  that  Saviour.  The  welfare  of  the  Christian  church 
e  advancement  of  the  holy  cause  of  the  gospel  are  uppermost  in 
nd.  May  it  be  yours  and  mine  to  live  wholly  for  Christ,  and 
also  for  him.  May  this  ever  be  foremost  in  our  thoughts,  **  How 
advance  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  ?  By  what  means 
)less  his  church  and  people  ?  "  It  is  very  beautiful  to  observe  the 
I  which  Paul  describes  his  death  in  this  verse.  According  to  our 
ition  he  speaks  of  it  as  an  offering.    **  I  am  now  ready,"  saibU 

0  be  offered."    If  we  accept  this  version  he  may  be  supposed  to 
that  he  felt  as  one  standing  like  a  bullock  or  a  lamb,  ready  to  be 

1  an  altar.     He  foresaw  he  would  die  a  martyr's  death.    He  knew 
lid  not  be  crucified  as  his  brother  Peter  had  been,  for  a  Roman 

was,  as  a  rule,  exempt  from  that  ignominious  death.    He  expected 
989. 


I 


254  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

to  die  in  some  other  manner.     Probably  he  guessed  it  would  be  by  tiie 
sword,  and  so  he  describes  himself  as  waiting  for  the  sacrificial  knife  to 
be  used,  that  he  might  be  presented  as  a  sacrifice.     So  I  say  the  words 
of  our  translation  would  lead  us  to  think.    But  the  original  is  far  more 
instructive.     He  here  likens  himself,  in  the  Greek,  not  to  an  offering, 
but  to  the  drink-offering.     Every  Jew  would  know  what  that  meant 
When  there  was  a  burnt-sacrifice  offered,  the  bullock  or  the  victim 
then  slain  was  the  main  part  of  the  sacrifice.    But  sometimes  there 
was  a  little,  what  if  I  say  an  unimportant,  supplement  added  to  that 
sacrifice— a  little  oil  and  a  little  wine  were  poured  on  tq  the  altar  or 
the  bullock,  and  thus  a  drink-offering  was  said  to  be  added  to  the  burnt- 
offering.    Now,  Paul  does  not  yenture  to  call  himself  an  offering- 
Christ  is  his  offering.     Christ  is,  so  to  speak,  the  sacrifice  on  the 
altar.     He  likens  himself  only  to  that  little  wine  and  oil  poured  out  as 
a  supplement  thereto,  not  necessary  to  its  perfection,  but  tolerated  in 
performing  a  vow,  or  allowed  in  connection  with  a  free-will  offering,  as 
you  will  find  if  you  refer  at  leisure  to  the  fifteenth  chapter  of  Numbers, 
from  the  fourth  to  the  eighth  verses.     The  drink-offering  was  thus  a 
kind  of  addendum,  by  which  the  person  who  gave  it  showwl  his  thank- 
iulness.     So  Paul  is  resolved  to  show  his  thankfulness  to  Christ,  the 
great  sacrifice,  and  he  is  willing  that  his  blood  should  be  poured  as 
a  drink-offering  on  the  altar  where  his  Lord  and  Master  was  the  great 
burnt-offering.      He  rejoices  when  he  can  say,   "lam  ready  to  be 
presented  as  a  drink-offering  unto  God." 

We  have  mainly  to  do  with  the  second  description  which  he  gives  of 
his  death.  AVliat  does  he  say  when  the  hour  that  this  grim  monster 
must  be  grappled  with  is  at  hand  ?  I  do  not  find  him  sad.  Those  who 
delight  in  gloomy  poetry  liave  often  represented  death  in  terrible 
language.     "  It  is  hard,"  says  one — 

"  To  feci  the  hand  of  death  arrest  one's  steps, 
Throw  a  chill  blight  on  all  one's  budding  hopes. 
And  hurl  one's  soul  untimely  to  the  shades. 

And  another  exclaims — 

"  O  God,  it  is  a  fearful  thing 
To  see  the  human  soul  take  wing. 
In  any  shape,  in  any  mood ! 
I've  seen  it  rushing  forth  in  blood, 
Fvc  seen  it  on  the  breaking  ocean. 
Strive  with  a  swollen  convulsive  motion." 

Not  SO  the  apostle  Paul.  I  do  not  even  hear  him  speak  of  flying 
through  the  gate  as  our  grand  old  poet  has  described  death.  He  does 
not  say,  **  The  hour  of  my  dissolution  is  at  hand" — a  very  proper  word 
if  he  had  used  it;  but  he  is  not  looking  so  much  at  the  process  as  at 
the  result  of  his  dying.  He  docs  not  even  say,  "  The  hour  of  my  death 
is  at  hand,"  but  he  adopts  a  beautiful  expression,  "  The  time  of  my 
departure  " — words  which  are  used  sometimes  to  signify  the  departure  of 
a  vessel  from  the  port ;  the  pulling  up  of  the  anchor  so  that  it  looses  its 
moorings,  when  about  to  put  out  to  sea — so  he  feels  himself  like  a  ship 
lying  at  the  harbour  for  awhile — but  he  says,  **  The  time  for  pulling 
up  the  anchor,  the  time  for  letting  loose  the  cable,  and  cutting  from 


A  LAST  LOOK-OUT.  255 

be  mooring  is  at  hand ;  I  shall  soon  be  launched  upon  mj  voyage."  And 
e  knew  right  well  where  that  Tojage  would  end,  in  the  fair  havens  of 
he  port  of  Peace  in  the  better  country,  whither  his  Lord  had  gone 
efore  him. 

Now  we  will  proceed  very  briefly  to  say  a  word  about  departure; 
nd  then  a  shorter  word  still  about  the  time  of  our  departure;  and  then  a 
ittle  more  about  the  time  of  our  departure  being  at  hand — trying  here, 
specially,  to  bring  forward  some  lessons  which  may  be  of  practical 
sefulness  to  each  one  of  us. 

I.    First,  then,  dear    brethren,  let  us  think  a  little  about    ouii 

•£PABTUBE. 

It  is  quite  certain  we  shall  not  dwell  here  for  ever :  we  shall  not  live 
ere  below  as  long  as  the  first  man  did,  or  as  those  antediluvian  fathers, 
'ho  tarried  some  eight  or  nine  hundred  years.  The  length  of  hunvan  life 
hen  led  to  greatness  of  sin.  Monstrosities  of  evil  were  ripened  through 
tie  long  continuance  of  physical  strength,  and  the  accumulating  force  of 
ager  passions.  All  things  considered,  it  is  a  mercy  that  life  is  abridged 
ud  not  prolonged  to  a  thousand  years.  Amidst  the  sharp  competition 
f  man  with  man,  and  class  with  class,  there  is  a  bound  to  every  scheme 
f  personal  aggrandisement,  a  limit  to  all  the  spoils  of  individual 
espotism,  a  restraint  upon  the  hoardings  of  any  one*s  avarice.  It  is 
reil,  I  Fay,  that  it  should  be  so.  The  narrow  span  of  life  clips  the 
rings  of  ambition,  and  baulks  it  of  its  prey.  Death  comes  in  to  deprive 
he  mighty  of  his  power,  to  stay  the  rapacity  of  the  invader,  to  scatter 
broad  the  possessions  of  the  rich.  The  most  reprobate  men  must 
nd  their  career  after  they  have  had  their  three  score  years  and  ten,  or 
heir  four  score  years  of  wickedness.  And  as  for  the  good  and  godly, 
hough  we  mourn  their  exit,  especially  when  we  think  that  they  have 
een  preraatmrely  taken  from  us,  we  remember  how  the  triumphs  of 
^nius  have  been  for  the  most  part  achieved  in  youth,  and  how  much 
he  world  has  been  enriched  by  the  heads  and  hearts  of  those  who  have 
•ut  gown  the  seeds  of  faith  and  left  others  to  reap  the  fruits.  If  into 
28S  than  the  allotted  term  they  have  crowded  the  service  of  their 
eneration,  we  may  save  our  tears,  for  our  rejrrets  are  needless.  The 
ummons  will  reach  each  one  of  us  ere  long.  We  cannot  stop  here  as 
)ng  as  the  grey  fathers  of  our  race :  we  expect,  and  it  is  meet  that  we 
hould  prepare,  to  go.     The  world  itself  is  to  be  consumed  one  day. 

The  elements  shall  melt  with  fervent  heat."  The  land  on  which  we 
band  we  are  wont  to  call  terra  firma^  but  beneath  it  is  probably  an  ocean 
ffire,  audit  shall  itself  feel  the  force  of  the  ocean.  We  must  not 
larvel,  the  house  being  so  fraii,  that  the  tenants  are  unsettled  and 
ligratory.  Certainly,  whether  we  doubt  it  or  not,  we  shall  have  to  go. 
*here  will  be  a  departure  for  us.  Beloved  believer  in  Christ  Jesus,  to  you 
le  soft  term,  "  Departure  "  is  not  more  soft  than  the  truth  it  represents. 
'o  die  is  to  depart  out  of  this  world  unto  the  Father.  What  say  you 
hout  your  departure  ?  What  say  you  of  that  from  which  you  go,  and 
hat  think  you  of  that  land  to  which  you  go  ?  Well,  of  the  land  from 
hich  we  go,  my  brethren,  we  might  soy  many  hard  things  if  we  would, 
at  I  think  we  had  better  not.  We  shall  speak  more  correctly,  if  we  say 
le  hard  things  of  ourselves.  This  land,  my  brethren,  has  been  a  land  of 
lercy  to  us:  theie  have  been  sorrows  in  it;  but  in  bidding  it  farewell 


256  »  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

we  will  do  it  justice  and  speak  the  truth  concerning  it.  Our  sorrows 
IiaAC  usually  pprung  up  in  our  own  bosoms,  and  those  that  have  come  from 
the  soil  itself  would  have  been  very  light  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  plague 
of  our  hearts,  which  made  us  vex,  and  fret  over  them.  Oh,  the  mercy 
you  and  I  have  enjoyed  even  in  this  life  !  It  has  been  worth  while  to 
live  for  us  who  arc  believers.  Even  had  we  to  die  like  a  dog  dietb,  it 
has  been  worth  while  to  live  for  the  joy  and  blessedness  which  God  has 
made  to  pass  before  us.  I  dare  not  call  that  an  evil  country  in  which 
I  have  met  my  Saviour,  and  received  the  pardon  cf  my  sin.  I  dare  not 
call  that  an  ill  life  in  which  I  have  seen  my  Saviour,  though  it  be 
through  a  glass  darkly.  How  shall  I  speak  ill  of  that  land  where 
Zion  is  built,  beautiful  for  situation,  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth, 
the  place  of  our  solemn  assemblies,  where  we  have  worshipped  God? 
No ;  cursed  of  old  as  the  earth  was  to  bring  forth  the  thorn  and  the 
thistle,  the  existence  of  the  church  of  God  in  that  land  seems  to  a  great 
degree  to  have  made  reparation  for  the  blight  to  such  as  know  and  love 
the  Saviour.  Oh,  have  we  not  gone  up  to  the  house  of  God  in  company 
with  songs  of  ecstatic  joy,  and  have  we  not  when  we  have  gathered  round 
the  table  of  the  Lord — though  nothing  was  upon  it  but  the  type  and 
emblem — have  we  not  felt  it  a  joyous  thing  to  be  found  in  the  assembly 
of  the  saints,  and  in  the  courts  of  the  Lord's  house  even  here  ?  Whea 
we  loose  our  cable,  and  bid  farewell  to  earth,  it  shall  not  be  with 
bitterness  in  the  retrospect.  There  is  sin  in  it,  and  we  are  called  to 
leave  it ;  there  has  been  trial  in  it,  and  we  are  called  to  be  delivered 
from  it;  there  has  been  sorrow  in  it,  and  we  are  glad  that  we  shall  go 
where  we  shall  sorrow  no  more.  There  have  been  weakness,  and  pain, 
and  suifering  in  it,  and  we  are  glad  that  we  shall  be  raised  in  power ; 
there  has  been  death  in  it,  and  we  are  glad  to  bid  farewell  to  shrouds  and 
to  knells;  but  for  all  that  there  has  been  such  mercy  in  it,  such  loving- 
kindness  of  God  in  it,  that  the  wilderness  and  the  solitary  place  have 
been  made  glad,  and  the  desert  has  rejoiced  and  blossomed  as  a  rose. 
We  will  not  bjd  farewell  to  the  world,  execrating  it,  or  leaving  behind 
us  a  cold  shudder  and  a  sad  remembranco,  but  we  will  depart,  bidding 
adieu  to  the  scenes  that  remain,  and  to  the  people  of  Gcd  that  tarry 
therein  yet  a  little  longer,  blessing  him  whose  goodness  and  mercy  have 
followed  us  all  the  days  of  our  life,  and  who  is  now  bringing  us  to 
dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  for  ever. 

But,  dear  brethren,  if  I  have  had  to  speak  in  a  somewhat  apologetic 
manner  of  the  land  from  Avhich  we  de})art,  I  shall  need  to  use  many 
ai)ol(>gies  for  my  own  poor  talk  about  the  land  to  which  we  are  bound.  Ah, 
whither  goest  thou,  spirit  loosened  from  thy  clay— ^iost  know  ?  Whither 
goest  thou  ?  The  answer  must  be,  partly,  that  we  know  not.  None  of  us 
have  seen  the  streets  of  gold  of  which  we  sang  just  now  ;  those  harpings 
of  the  harpers,  harping  with  their  haq)s,  have  never  fallen  on  these  ears; 
eye  liatii  not  sc(!n  it,  ear  hath  not  heard  it:  it  is  all  unrevealed  to  the 
senses;  ilesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  it,  and,  tiierefore,  flesh  and  blood 
cannot  imagine  it.  Yet  it  is  not  unknown,  for  God  hath  revealed  it  unto 
us  by  his  Spirit.  Spiritual  men  know  what  it  is  to  feel  the  spirit,  their 
own  new-bom  spirit,  living,  glowing,  burning,  triumphing  within  them. 
They  know,  therelbre,  that  if  the  body  should  drop  oflf  they  would  not 
die.  .  They  feel  there  is  a  life  within  them  superior  to  blood  and  bone. 


A  LAST  LOOK-OUT.  257 

and  nerve  and  sinew.  They  feel  the  life  of  God  within  them,  and  none 
can  gainsay  it.  Tiieir  own  experience  has  proven  to  tliem  that  there  is 
an  inner  life.  Well,  then,  when  that  inner  life  is  strong  and  vigorous, 
the  spirit  often  reveals  to  it  what  the  world  of  spirits  will  be.  We  know 
what  holiness  is,  do  we  not,  brethren  ?  Are  we  not  seeking  it  ?  That 
is  heaven — perfect  holiness  is  heaven.  We  know  what  peace  means  ; 
Christ  is  onr  peace.  Rest — he  gives  us  rest :  we  find  lliat  when  we  take 
his  yoke.  Best  is  heaven.  And  rest  in  Jesus  tells  us  what  heaven  is. 
We  know,  even  to-day,  what  communion  with  God  is.  If  any  one 
should  say,  '*  I  do  not  know  it,'*  I  should  reply  to  him  thus  :  Suppose  I 
said  to  you,  **  You  know  not  what  it  is  to  eat  and  drink :"  the  man  would 
tell  me  that  I  belied  him,  for  he  knew,  as  he  knew  his  own  existence, 
what  it  was  to  eat  and  drink ;  and,  as  surely  as  I  live,  I  have  communion 
with  God.  I  know  it  as  certainly  as  you  know  that  I  have  declared  it  to 
you.  Well,  friends,  that  is  heaven.  It  has  but  to  be  developed  from 
the  germ  to  the  produce,  and  there  is  heaven  in  its  full  development. 

Communion  with  saints  in  like  manner — know  we  not  what  that  is  ? 
Have  we  not  rejoiced  in  each  other's  joys,  been  made  glad  with  the  ex- 
perience of  our  brethren  ?  That,  too,  carried  to  perfection,  will  be  heaven. 
Oh,  to  throw  yourself  into  the  bosom  of  the  Saviour  and  lie  there  taken 
up  with  his  mind  and  his  love,  yielding  all  things  to  his  supremacy, 
beholding  your  king  in  him  !  W  hen  you  have  been  in  that  state  you 
have  had  an  antepast  of  heaven.  Your  view  may  have  been  but  as  one 
seeing  a  man's  face  in  shadow,  yet  you  would  know  that  man  again 
even  by  the  shadow ;  so  krow  we  what  heaven  is.  We  shall  not  be 
Btrangers  in  a  strange  land  ^hen  we  get  there.  Though,  like  the  Queen 
of  Sheba,  we  shall  say,  "  The  half  has  not  been  told  me,"  yet  we  shall 
reflect  on  it  thus:  "  I  did  surmise  there  would  be  something  of  this  sort. 
I  did  know  from  what  I  felt  of  its  buddings  in  my  soul  below  that  the 
full-blown  flower  would  be 'somewhat  of  this  kind."  Whither  away, 
then,  spirit  that  art  departing  to  soar  through  tracks  to  thyself  unknown? 
Thine  answer  is,  "I  am  away:  away  to  the  throne  of  him  whose  cross 
first  gave  me  life,  and  light,  and  hope.  I  am  away  to  the  very  bosom  of 
my  Saviour,  where  I  hope  to  rest  and  to  have  fellowship  with  the 
church  of  the  firstborn,  whose  names  are  written  in  heaven."  This  is 
your  departure  that  you  have  in  near  prospect. 

Suppose,  dear  friend,  the  thought  of  departing  from  this  world  to  the 
glory- world  should  ever  startle  you,  let  me  remind  you  that  you  are  not 
the  first  that  ever  went  that  way.  Your  vessel  is  in  the  pool,  as  it  were, 
or  in  the  dock ;  she  is  going  out  on  her  voyage ;  oh,  but  you  will  not  go 
alone,  nor  have  to  track  your  course  through  paths  unnavigated  or  un- 
known before  !  When  the  Portuguese  captain  first  went  by  the  Cape  of 
Storms  it  was  a  venturous  voyage,  and  he  called  it  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope  when  he  had  rounded  it.  When  Columbus  first  went  in  search 
of  the  New  World,  his  was  a  brave  spirit  that  dared  cross  the  unnavi- 
gated Atlantic.  But  oh,  there  are  tens  of  thousands  that  have  gone 
whither  you  go.  The  Atlantic  that  severs  us  from  Canaan  is  white 
with  the  sails  of  the  vessels  that  are  on  voyage  thither.  Fear  not,  they 
have  not  been  wrecked  ;  we  hear  good  news  of  their  arrival ;  there  is 
good  hope  for  you.  There  are  no  icebergs  on  the  road,  no  mists,  no 
counter  currents,  and  no  sunken  vessels  or  quicksands ;  you  have  biif^ 


258  METROPOLTTAK  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

to  cut  your  moorings,  and  with  Christ  on  board  you  shall  be  at  yonr 
desired  haven  at  once. 

Remember,  too,  your  Saviour  went  that  way.  Have  you  to  depart?  So 
Christ  departed  too.  Some  of  my  brethren  arc  always  so  pleased — pleased 
as  some  children  are  with  a  new  toy — at  the  idea  that  they  shall  never 
die ;  that  Christ  will  come,  it  may  be  before  the  time  of  their  decease; 
for,  "  we  shall  not  all  sleep,  but  we  shall  all  be  chanced."  Well,  let  him 
corae,  ay,  let  him  come ;  come  quickly.  But  if  I  had  my  choice,  were  it 
IKjrmitted  me  to  choose,  I  would  prefer  to  pass  through  the  portals  of  the 
grave.  Those  that  are  alive  and  remain  unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord 
will  not  prevent,  go  before,  or  steal  a  march  on  them  which  are  asleep. 
But  surely  they  will  lack  one  point  of  conformity  to  their  Lord,  for  he 
disdained  not  to  sojourn  awhile  in  the  tomb,  though  it  was  impossible  that 
he  should  be  holden  of  death.  Let  the  seal  of  death,  then,  be  set  upon 
this  face  of  mine,  that  my  fate  in  the  matter  may  be  like  his.  Enoch  and 
Ellas  were  exempt  from  this  privilege — privilege,  I  call  it — of  conformity 
to  his  death.  But  it  is  safe  to  go  by  the  beaten  track,  and  desirable 
to  travel  by  the  ordinary  route  to  the  heavenly  city.  Jesus  died 
Through  the  valley  of  shadows,  the  vale  of  death-shades,  there  are  the 
foot-prints  of  Immannel  all  the  way  along :  go  down  into  it  and  fear 
not.  Bethink  you,  too,  dear  brethren  and  sisters,  that  we  may  well 
look  forward  to  our  departure,  and  look  forward  to  it  comfortably  too? 
Is  it  not  expedient  by  reason  of  nature?  Is  it  not  desirable  hy 
reason  of  grace?  Is  it  not  necessary  by  reason  of  glory?  I  say, 
is  not  our  departure  needful  by  reason  of  nature?  Men  are  not, 
Avhen  they  come  to  hoary  age,  what  they  were  in  the  prime  of  their 
days.  The  staff  is  needed  for  the  foot,  and  the  glass  is  wanted  for  the 
eye ;  and  after  a  certain  number  of  years,  even  those  on  whom  Time  hath 
gently  laid  his  hand,  find  the  taste  is  gone.  They  might  proclaim,  like 
old  Barzillai,  that  they  know  not  what  they  eat  or  drink.  The  hearing 
fails,  the  daughters  of  music  are  silent,  the  whole  tenement  gets  veiy 
crazy.  Oh,  it  were  a  melancholy  thing  if  we  had  to  continue  to  live! 
Perhaps  there  is  no  more  hideous  picture  than  that  which  the  satirist 
drew  of  men  who  livid  on  to  six  or  seven  hundred  years  of  age — that 
strange  satirical  man,  Swift.  Be  thankful  that  we  do  not  linger  on  in 
imbecility.  Kind  Nature  says  we  may  depart ;  she  gives  us  notice,  and 
makes  it  welcome  by  the  decays  that  come  upon  us.  Besides,  grace 
desires  it;  for  it  were  a  poor  experience  of  his  kindness  as  our  best 
and  truest  friend  that  did  not  make  us  long  to  see  our  Saviour's  face. 
It  is  no  mere  drivelling  sentiment,  I  hope,  when  we  join  to  sing — 

*'  Father,  I  long,  I  faint  to  sec 
The  place  of  thine  abode  ; 
I'd  leave  thy  earthly  <:oiirta,  and  flee 
Up  to  thy  seat,  my  God !" 

I  must  confcRS  there  was  one  verse  in  the  hymn  we  sung  just  now 
which  I  could  not  quite  chime  in  with.  I  am  not  eagerly  wishing 
to  go  to  licaven  ihis  night.  I  have  a  great  deal  more  to  do  here; 
therdbre  1  do  not  want  to  take  a  hasty  leave  of  all  below.  To 
full  many  of  us,  I  suppose,  there  are  times  of  quiet  contemplation 
and   times  of   rapt  devotion,   when    our   thoughts    surmount   these 


A  LAST   LOOK-OUT.  259 

lower   skies,  and  look   within  the  veil ;  and  thon,  Oh,  how  we  wish 
to  be  there !     Yet  there  are  other  times  ;  times  of  strenuous  activity 
when  we  buckle  on  the  ai'mour  and  press  to  the  front ;  and  then  we 
see   such  a  battle  to  be  waced,  such  a  victory  to  be  won,   such  a 
work  to  be  wrought,  that  we  Bay :  "Well;  to  abide  in  the  flesh,  to  con- 
tinue with  you  all  for  the  joy  and  furtherance  of  your  faith,  seems  more 
loyal  to  Christ,  more  needful  for  you,  and  more  in  accord  with  our 
present  feelings."    I  think  it  is  idle  for  us  to  be  crying  to  go  home  ;   it 
IB  too  much  like  the  lazy  workman,  that  wants  Saturday  night  to  come 
when  it  is  only  Tuesday  morning.    Oh,  no  ;  if  God  spare  us  to  do  a 
long  life's  work,  so  much  the  better.    At  the  same  time,  as  a  spark  flies 
upward  to  the  sun,  the  central  source  of  flame,  so  does  the  new-born 
spirit  aspire  towards  heaven,  towards  Jesus,  by  whom  it  was  kindled. 
And,  I  add,  that  glory  den^ands  it,  and  makes  our  departure  needful. 
Is  not  Christ  in  heaven  praying  that  we  may  be  with  him  where  he  is  ? 
Are  there  not  the  saints  in  heaven,  of  whom  it  is  said,  they  without  us 
cannot  be  perfect?    The  circle  of  the  skies  cannot  be  completed  until 
all  the  redeemed  be  there.    The  grand  orchestra  of  glorj'  misses  some 
notes  as  yet.    What  if  the  bass  be  full,  there  are  wanting  still  some 
trebles  and  tenors !     There  are  some  sopranos  that  will  be  requisite  to 
swell  the  enchanting  melodies,  and.  consummate  the  worship  of  the 
Eternal !    What,  therefore,  nature  prepares  for,  gi-ace  desires,  and  glory 
itself  demands,  we  have  no  just  cause  to  shudder  at.    Our  departure 
need  not  make  us  afraid. 

11.  Having  thus  occupied  so  much  time  on  tlus  first  point,  I  have 
little  or  no  room  to  enlarge  on  the  second. 

The  time  of  our  departure,  though  unknown  to  us,  is  fixed  by 
God,  unalterably  fixed;  so  rightly,  wisely,  lovingly  settled,  and  prepared 
for,  that  no  chance  or  haphazard  can  break  the  spell  of  destiny. 
The  wisdom  of  divine  love  shall  be  proven  by  the  carefulness  of  its 
proTlsion.  Perhaps  yon  will  say :  "  It  is  not  easy  to  discern  this;  the 
natural  order  of  things  is  so  often  disturbed  by  casualties  of  one  kind 
or  another."  Let  me  remind  you,  then,  that  it  is  through  faith,  cnly 
through  faith,  we  can  understand  these  things;  for  it  is  as  true  now  of 
the  providence  of  God  as  it  was  of  old  of  the  creation  of  God  that 
•*  things  which  are  seen  were  not  made  of  things  which  do  appear." 
Because  the  mode  of  your  departure  is  beyond  your  own  ken,  it  does  not 
follow  that  the  time  of  your  departure  is  not  foreseen  by  God.  *'  Ah  ! 
but,"  say  you,  "  it  seems  so  shocking  for  any  one  to  die  suddenly,  un- 
expectedly, without  warning,  and  so  come  to  an  untimely  end!"  1  answer 
vou  thus.  If  you  take  counsel  with  death  your  flesh  will  find  no  comfort ; 
but  if  you  trust  in  God  your  faith  will  cease  to  parley  with  these  feverish 
anxieties,  and  your  spirit  will  enjoy  a  sweet  calm.  Dire  calamit  ie>i  befel 
Job  when  he  was  bereaved  of  his  children  and  his  servants,  his  hcr«.R 
and  his  flocks.  Yet  he  took  little  heed  of  the  different  ways  in  wliidi 
his  troubles  were  brought  about;  whether  by  an  onslaught  of  the 
Sabeans  or  by  a  raid  of  the  Chaldeans :  whether  the  fire  fell  from  heaven, 
or  the  wind  came  from  the  wilderness;  it  mattered  little.  Whatever 
strange  facts  broke  on  his  ear,  ene  thought  penetrated  his  heart,  an^R 
one  expression  broke  from  his  lips.  "  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath 
taken  away;  blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord."    So,  too,  beloved,  when 


260  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

the  time  of  yoar  departure  arrives — be  it  by  disease  or  decay,  be  it  by 
accident  or  assault,  that  your  soul  quits  its  present  tenement — ^rest 
assured  that  "  thy  times  are  in  his  hand  ; "  and  know  of  a  surety  that 
"  all  his  saints  are  in  his  hand "  likewise.  Besides  this,  dear  friends, 
since  the  time  of  our  departure  must  come,  were  the  manner  of  it  at 
our  own  disposal,  I  think  we  should  most  of  us  say,  "  What  I  shall 
choose,  I  wot  not."  Fevers  and  agues,  the  pangs  and  tortures  of  one 
malady  and  another,  or  the  delirium  incident  to  sickness,  are  not  so 
much  to  be  preferred  to  the  shock  of  a  disaster,  or  the  terror  of  a 
wreck  at  sea,  because  one  is  the  prolonging  of  pain,  and  the  other  the 
despatch  of  fate,  that  we  need  to  covet,  and  desire  weeks  or  months  spent 
in  the  vestibule  of  the  grave.  Rather  should  we  say.  Let  the  Lord  do 
with  me  as  seemeth  him  good.  To  live  in  constant  communion  with 
God  is  a  sure  relief  from  all  these  bitter  frettings.  Those  who  have 
walked  with  him  have  often  been  favoured  with  such  presentiments  of 
their  departure  as  no  physician  could  give  them.  Survivors  will  tdl 
you  that  though  death  seemed  to  come  suddenly  to  the  godly  merchant, 
he  had  in  the  last  acts  of  his  life  appeared  to  expect  and  prepare  for 
it,  and  even  to  have  taken  an  affecting  farewell  of  his  family  while  in 
the  vigour  of  health,  as  though  he  were  aware  that  he  was  setting  ont 
on  his  last  journey,  which  a  few  hours  afterwards  it  proved  to  be.  So, 
too,  the  minister  of  Christ  has  sometimes  fallen,  expiring  in  his  pulpit 
with  a  nunc  dimitlis,  "Now  lettest  thou  thy  servant  depart  in  peace" 
on  his  lips ;  secretly,  but  surely,  made  ready  to  depart  and  to  be  with 
his  Lord.  There  is  a  time  to  depart ;  and  God's  time  to  call  me  is  my 
time  to  go. 

in.  Now,  to  our  third  point — the  time  is  at  hand.     "The time 
of  my  departure  is  at  hand." 

In  a  certain  sense,  every  Christian  here  may  say  this ;   for  whatever 
interval  may  interpose  between  us  and  death,  how  very  short  it  is! 
Have  vou  not  all  a  sense  that  time  flows  faster  than  it  did?     In  our 
childish  days,  we  thought  a  year  was  quite  a  period  of  time,  a  very 
epoch  in  our  career ;  now  as  for  weeks— one  can  hardly  reckon  them ! 
We  seem  to  be  travelling  by  an  express  train,  flying  along  at  such  a  rate 
that  we  can  hardly  count  the  months.    Why,  the  past  year  only  seemed 
to  come  in  at  one  door  and  go  out  at  the  other ;  it  was  over  so  soon. 
We  shall  soon  be  at  the  terminus  of  life,  even  if  we  live  for  several  years; 
but  in  the  case  of  some  of  us,  God  knows  of  whom,  this  year,  perhaps 
this  month,  will  be  our  last.     I  think  to-morrow  night  we  shall  have  to 
report  at  the  church  meeting  the  deaths  of  nine  members  of  this  church 
within  the  last  eight  or  nine  days.     Since  these  have  gone,  some  of  us 
may  expect  to  follow  them.     There  are  those  who  will  evidently  go ; 
disease  has  set  in  upon  them.    Some  of  those  disorders  that  in  this  land 
seem  to  be  always  fatal,  tell  these  dear  friends  that  the  time  of  their 
departure  is  undoubtedly  at  hand.    And  then  old  age,  which  comes  so 
gracefully  and  graciously  to  many  of  our  matrons  and  our  veterans, 
shows,  past  all  dispute,  **  the  time  of  your  departure  is  at  hand."     The 
lease  of  your  life  is  almost  up.     Not  indeed  that  I  would  address  my- 
self to  such  special  cases  only.     I  speak  to  every  brother  and  sister  in 
Christ  here.     **  The  time  of  our  departure  is  at  hand."    What  then, 
dear  friends  ? 


A  LAST  LOOK-OUT.  261 

Is  not  this  a  reason  for  surveying  our  condition  again  ?  If  our  vessel 
is  jnst  launching,  let  us  see  that  she  is  seaworthy.  It  would  be  a 
sad  thing  for  us  tx)  be  near  departing,  and  yet  to  be  just  as  near  dis- 
covering that  we  are  lost.  Remember,  dear  friends,  it  is  possible  for 
any  one  to  maintain  a  decent  Christian  profession  for  fifty  years,  and  be 
a  hypocrite  after  all ;  possible  to  occupy  an  office  in  the  church  of  God, 
and  that  of  the  very  highest,  and  yet  to  be  a  Judas ;  and  one  may  not 
only  serve  Christ,  but  suffer  for  him  too,  and  yet,  like  Demas,  may  not 
persevere  to  the  end  ;  for  all  that  looks  like  grace  is  not  grace.  Where 
true  grace  is,  there  it  will  always  be ;  but  where  the  semblance  of  it  is, 
it  will  ofttimes  suddenly  disappear.  Search  thyself,  good  brother ; 
set  thine  house  in  order,  for  thou  must  die  and  not  live.  Hast  tlion 
the  faith  of  God's  elect  ?  Art  thou  built  on  Christ  ?  Is  thy  heart 
r^iewed  ?  Art  thou  verily  an  heir  of  heaven  ?  I  charge  every  man 
and  woman  within  this  place,  since  the  time  of  his  departure  may  be 
far  nearer  than  he  thinks,  to  take  stock,  and  reckon  up,  and  see  whether 
he  be  Christ's  or  no. 

But  if  the  time  of  my  departure  be  at  hand,  and  I  am  satisfied  that  it 
is  all  right  with  me,  is  there  not  a  call  for  me  to  do  all  I  can  for  my 
household?  Father,  the  time  of  your  departure  is  at  hand;  is  your  wife 
unsaved?  Will  you  pass  another  night  without  lovingly  speaking  to  her 
of  her  soul?  Are  those  dear  boys  um*egenerate  ?  Is  that  girl  still 
thoughtless  ?  The  time  of  your  departure  is  at  hand.  You  can  do  little 
more  for  the  lads  and  lasses;  you  can  do  little  more  for  the 
wife  and  the  brother.  Ohl  do  what  you  can  now.  Sister,  you  are 
consumptive;  you  will  soon  be  gone.  You  are  the  only  Christian 
in  the  family.  God  sent  you  there  to  be  a  missionary.  Do  not 
have  to  say,  when  you  are  dying,  **  The  last  hope  of  my  family  is 
going  out,  for  I  have  not  cared  for  their  souls."  Masters,  you  that  have 
servants  about  you,  you  must  soon  be  taken  away.  Will  you  not  do 
something  for  their  souls  ?  I  know  if  there  were  a  mother  about  to  go 
to  Australia,  and  she  had  to  leave  some  of  her  children  behind,  she 
would  fret  if  she  thought,  "  I  have  not  done  all  that  needs  to  be  done 
for  those  poor  children.  Who  will  care  for  them  now  their  mother  is 
gone?"  Well,  but  to  have  neglected  something  necessary  for  their 
temporal  comfort  would  be  little  in  comparison  with  not  having  cared 
for  their  souls !  Oh,  let  it  not  be  so  1  Let  it  not  be  a  thorn  in  your 
dying  pillow  that  you  did  not  fulfil  the  relations  of  life  while  you  had 
the  opportunity.    "  The  time  of  my  departure  is  at  hand." 

Then  there  is  a  third  lesson.  Let  me  try  to  finish  all  my  work,  not 
only  as  regards  my  dyty  to  my  family,  but  in  respect  to  all  the  world  so 
far  as  my  influence  or  ability  can  reach.  Rich  men,  be  your  own 
executors.  Do  what  you  can  with  your  substance  while  it  is  your 
own.  Men  of  talent,  speak  for  Jesus  before  your  tongue  has  ceased  to 
articulate,  and  becomes  a  piece  of  clay.  George  Whitfield  may  supply 
ns  with  a  fine  model  of  this  uniform  consistency.  He  was  so  orderly 
and  precise  in  his  habits,  and  so  scrupulous  and  holy  in  his  life,  that 
he  used  to  say  he  would  not  like  to  go  to  bed  if  there  were  a  i)air  of 
gloves  out  of  place  in  the  house,  much  less  were  his  will  not  made,  or 
any  part  of  his  duty  unfulfilled  to  the  best  of  his  knowledge.  He 
wished  to  have  all  right,  and  to  be  fully  prepared  for  whatever  might 


^i^''^ 

^ 


262  UETROPOUTAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

happcD,  SO  that,  if  he  never  woke  again  from  the  Blnmbers  of  the 
nijrht,  nobody  would  liave  cause  to  reflect  upon  anything  he  had  left 
undone,  entailing  needless  trouble  on  his  wife  or  his  children.  Sadi 
care  bestowed  on  what  some  account  to  be  trifles  is  a  habit  worthy  of 
our  imitation.  The  main  work  of  life  may  be  sadly  spoiled  by  negligence 
in  little  things.  This  is  a  striking  test  of  character.  *•  He  that  is 
faithful  in  that  which  is  least  is  faithful  also  in  much:  and  he  that  is 
unjust  in  the  least  is  unjust  also  in  much."  Oh,  then  !  time  is  fieetiDg, 
despatch  is  urgent ;  gather  up  your  thoughts,  quicken  your  hands,  speed 
your  pace,  for  God  commandeth  thee  to  make  haste.  If  you  have  ought 
to  do,  you  must  do  it  soon.  The  wheels  of  eternity  are  sonnding  behind 
you.  Press  on  !  If  you  are  to  run  a  race  you  must  run  it  fast,  for  Death 
will  soon  overtake  you.  You  may  almost  feel  the  hot  breath  of  the  white 
horse  of  Death  upon  your  cheeks  already.  0  God,  help  us  to  do  some- 
thing ere  we  go  hence  and  be  no  more  seen.  It  was  grand  of  the  apostle 
that  in  the  same  breath,  when  he  said,  "The  time  of  my  departure  is 
at  hand,"  he  could  also  say,  "  I  have  fought  a  good  fight,  I  haie 
finished  my  course,  I  have  kept  the  faith."  So  may  we  be  able  to  say 
when  the  time  of  our  departure  has  arrived. 

If  the  time  of  our  departure  is  at  hand,  let  it  cheer  us  amid  onr 
troubles.  Sometimes,  when  our  friends  go  to  Liverpool  to  sail  for 
Canada,  or  any  other  distant  region,  on  the  night  before  they  sail  they 
get  into  a  very  poor  lodjring.  I  think  I  hear  one  of  them  gmmbliDg, 
*'  What  a  hard  bed  !  What  a  small  room  !  What  a  bad  Took-ontI" 
'*  Oh,"  says  the  other,  "  never  mind,  brother ;  Ave  are  not  going  to  lire 
here  ;  we  are  off  to-morrow."  Bethink  you  in  like  manner,  ye  children 
of  poverty,  this  is  not  your  rest.  Put  up  with  it,  yon  are  away  to- 
morrow. Ye  sons  of  sorrow,  ye  daughters  of  weakness,  ye  children  of 
sickness,  let  this  cheer  you: — 

"  The  road  may  be  rough. 
But  it  cannot  be  loner, 
And  I'll  smooth  it  with  hope, 
And  cheer  it  with  song." 

Oftentimes  when  I  have  been  travelling  on  the  Continent  I  have  been 
obliged  to  put  up  at  an  hotel  that  was  full,  where  the  room  was  so 
inconvenient,  that  it  scarcely  furnished  any  accommodation  at  all.  But 
\^e  have  said,  ** Oh,  never  mind:  we  are  ofi^  in  the  morning !  What 
matters  it  for  one  night?"  So,  as  we  are  soon  to  be  gone,  and  the 
time  of  our  departure  is  at  hand,  let  us  not  be  ruffling  our  tempers 
al)out  trifles,  nor  raise  evil  spirits  around  us  by  cavilling  and  finaing 
I'ault.  Take  things  as  you  find  thtm,  for  we  shall  soon  be  up  and  away. 
And  if  the  time  of  my  departure  is  at  hand,  I  should  like  to  be  on 
good  terms  with  all  my  friends  on  earth.  Were  you  going  to  stop 
here  always,  when  a  man  treated  you  badly,  apart  from  a  Christian 
spirit,  you  might  as  well  have  it  out  Avith  him ;  but  as  we  are  going 
to  stop  such  a  little  while,  we  may  well  put  up  with  it.  It  is  not  desirable 
to  be  too  ready  at  taking  an  offence.  What  if  my  neighbour  has  an  ngly 
temper,  the  Lord  has  to  put  up  with  him,  and  so  I  may.  There  are 
some  people  with  whom  I  would  rather  dwell  in  heaven  for  ever  than 
bide  with  them  half  an  hour  on  earth.    Nevertheless,  for  the  love  of 


A  LAST  LOOK-OUT.  263 

ibe  bi'ethrcQ,  and  for  the  peace  of  the  church,  we  may  tolerate  much 
daring  the  short  time  we  have  to  brook  with  peevish  moods  and  perverse 
homonrs.  Does  Christ  love  them,  and  shall  not  we  ?  He  covers  their 
offences ;  why,  then,  should  we  disclose  them  or  publish  them  abroad  ? 
If  i  any  of  you  have  any  grievances  with  one  another,  if  there  is  any 
bickering  or  jealousy  between  you,  I  should  like  you  to  make  it  up 
to-night,  because  the  time  of  your  departure  is  at  hand.  Suppose 
there  is  some  one  you  spoke  harshly  to,  you  would  not  like  to 
hear  to-morrow  that  he  was  dead.  You  would  not  have  minded  what 
yon  said  to  him  if  he  had  lived,  but  now  that  the  seal  is  set  upon  all 
year  communications  one  with  another,  you  could  wish  that  the  last 
impress  had  been  more  friendly.  There  has  been  a  little  difference 
between  two  brothers — a  little  coldness  between  two  sisters.  Oh,  since 
one  or  other  of  yon  will  soon  be  gone,  make  it  up  !  Live  in  love,  as 
Christ  loved  you  and  gave  himself  for  you.  If  one  of  you  were  going 
to  Australia  to-morrow,  never  to  come  back  again,  and  you  had  had  a 
little  tiff  with  your  brother,  why  I  know  before  you  started  you  would 
say,  "  Come,  brother,  let  us  part  good  friends."  So  now,  since  you 
are  so  soon  to  depart,  end  all  strife,  and  dwell  together  in  blessed 
harmony  till  the  departure  actually  occurs. 

If  the  time  of  my  departure  is  at  hand,  then  let  me  guard  against 
being  elated  by  any  temporal  prosperity .•  Possessions,  estates,  creature 
comforts  dwindle  into  insignificance  before  this  out-look.  Yes,  you 
may  have  procured  a  comfortable  house  and  a  delightful  garden,  but  il 
is  not  your  rest :  your  tenure  is  about  to  expire.  Yes,  you  may  say, 
'*  God  did  prosper  me  last  year,  the  bank  account  did  swell,  the  premises 
y^ete  enlarged,  and  the  business  thrived  beyond  all  expectation."  Ah ! 
hold  them  loose.  Do  not  think  that  they  are  to  be  your  heaven.  Be  i^ery 
jealous  lest  you  should  get  your  good  things  here,  for  if  you  do  you  will 
not  have  them  hereafter.  Be  not  lifted  up  too  much  when  you  grasp 
the  gain,  of  which  you  must  so  soon  quit  your  hold.  As  I  said  of  the 
discomfort  of  the  hotel,  we  did  not  think  much  of  it,  because  we  were 
going  away.  So,  if  it  happens  to  be  veir  luxurious,  do  not  be  enamoured 
of  it,  for  you  must  go  to-morrow.  "  These  are  the  things,'*  said  one, 
when  he  looked  at  a  rich  man's  treasures,  *^  that  make  it  hard  to  die." 
But  it  need  not  be  so,  if  you  hold  them  as  gifts  of  God's  kindness, 
and  not  as  gods  to  be  worshipped  with  self-indulgence,  you  may  take 
leave  of  them  with  composure ;  **  knowing  in  yourselves  that  ye  have 
in  heaven  a  better  and  an  enduring  ^substance." 

Lastly,  if  the  time  of  our  departure  is  at  hand,  let  us  be  prepared  to 
bear  our  testimony.  We  are  witnesses  for  Christ.  Let  us  bear  our 
testimony  before  we  are  taken  up  and  mingle  with  the  cloud  of  witnesses 
who  have  finished  their  course  and  rested  from  their  labours.  Dost 
thou  say,  **  I  hope  to  do  that  on  my  dying  bed  ?  "  Brother,  do  it  now  : 
do  it  now,  for  yon  may  never  have  opportunity  to  do  it  then.  Mr. 
Whitfield  was  always  desirous  that  he  might  bear  a  testimony  for  Christ 
in  the  hour  of  death;  but  he  could  not  do  so  at  that  momentous  crisis, 
for  as  yon  well  know,  he  was  suddenly  taken  ill  after  preaching,  and 
very  soon  expired.  Was  this  to  be  grievously  deplored  ?  Ah,  no. 
Why,  dear  friends,  he  had  borne  so  many  testimonies  for  his  Lord  and 
Master  while  he  was  alive,  there  was  no  need  to  add  anything  in 


264  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

the  Inst  few  raoments  before  his  death,  or  to  supply  the  deficiendes 
of  a  life  devoted  to  the  proclamation  of  the  gospel.  Oh,  let  yoa  and  I 
bear  our  testimony  novf !  Let  us  tell  to  others  wherever  we  can  what 
Christ  hath  done  for  us.  Let  us  help  Christ's  cause  with  all  our  might 
while  it  is  called  to-day.  Let  us  work  for  Jesus  while  we  can  work  for 
him.  As  to  thinking  we  can  undo  the  effect  of  our  idleness  by  the  spas- 
modic effort  of  our  dying  breath,  that  were  a  vain  hope  indeed  com- 
pared with  living  for  Jesus  Christ.  Your  dying  testimony,  if  you  are 
able  to  bear  it,  will  have  the  greater  force  if  it  is  not  a  sickly  regret,  but 
a  healthy  confirmation  of  your  whole  career. 

I  only  wish  these  words  about  departure  were  applicable  to  all  here. 
^'Precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  is  the  death  of  his  saints."  But^ 
"  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  God,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of 
the  wicked,  but  that  the  wicked  turn  from  his  ways,  and  live."  0  uncon- 
verted man,  the  time  for  letting  loose  your  cable  draws  nigh ;  it  is  even 
at  the  door.  You  must  shortly  set  sail  for  a  far  country.  Alas !  then 
yours  is  not  the  voyage  of  a  passenger,  with  a  sweeter  clime,  a  happier 
home,  a  brighter  prospect  in  view.  Your  departure  is  the  banishment 
of  a  convict,  with  a  penal  settlement  looming  in  the  distance ;  fear  all 
rife,  and  hope  all  blank,  for  the  term  of  your  banishment  is  intermin- 
able. I  fear  there  are  some  of  you  who  may  depart  ere  long  full  of  gloom 
with  a  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment  and  of  fiery  indignation.  I  seem 
to  see  the  angel  of  death  hovering  over  my  audience.  He  may,  perhaps, 
select  for  his  victim  an  unconverted  soul.  If  so,  behind  that  death- 
angel  attends  there  something  far  more  grim.  Hell  follows  death  to  souls 
that  love  not  Christ.  Oh,  make  haste,  make  haste  1  Seek  Christ.  Lay 
hold  on  eternal  life ;  and  may  infinite  mercy  save  you,  for  Jesus  Christ's 
sake.    Amen  and  Amen. 


^'THE  TREASURY  OF   DAVID/' 

BY  C.  H.  SPURGEON.      Vols.  L  &  IL 

This  Work  is  the  substanc«  of  many  libraries.  It  contains  the  essence  of  all  the 
commentators  upon  the  Psalms,  both  ancient  and  modem.  Besides  containing 
<<riginnl  observations  by  the  Author,  it  is  crowded  with  the  wisdom  of  hundreds  of 
the  most  eminent  writers.  Reviewers  pronounce  the  work  to  be  of  the  highest 
value.  The  volumes  are  published  at  8s.  each,  and  contain  far  more  matter  than  is 
generally  sold  for  half  a  guinea.     Vol.  I.  is  now  in  the  fourth  thousand. 

Published  by  Paswiore  &  Ai-ahastkr,  Paternoster  Row,  and  may  be  had 

of  all  Booksellci*s. 


^^trujafitan  il^nlr^mHtk 


SELF-HUMBLING  AND  SELF-SEARCHING. 


DELIVEBED  BY 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,     NEWINOTON. 


*'  Look  not  upon  me,  because  I  am  black,  because  the  sun  hath  looked  upon  me : 
my  mother's  children  were  angry  with  me ;  they  made  me  the  keeper  of  the 
rineyards ;  but  mine  own  vineyard  have  I  not  kept." — Song  of  Solomon  i.  6. 

Whence  do  I  draw  my  text  but  from  the  very  fountain  of  love?  And 
to  wbom  bhall  I  address  my  discourse  but  to  the  friends  of  the  bride- 
groom ?  Ye  must  have  warm  hearts,  quick  sensibilities,  lively  emotions, 
to  interpret  the  sayings  and  sympathise  the  tender  notes  of  this  modt 
sacred  song. 

I  suppose  that  the  history  of  the  statues  in  St.  Paul's  Cathedral,  from 
year  to  year,  would  not  be  remarkably  interesting.  They  are  placed 
upon  their  pedestals ;  they  stand  there  quietly  ;  and  unless  some  terrible 
convulsion  should  occur,  probably  that  will  be  the  whole  of  their  history 
for  many  years  to  come,  as  it  has  been  for  many  years  past.  During 
the  time  in  which  any  one  of  those  statues  has  stood  there,  however, 
the  history  of  any  one  human  person  has  been  checkered  with  all  sorts  of 
incidents,  happy  and  sorrowful.  Aches  and  pains,  joys  and  rejoicings, 
depressions  and  exultations,  have  alternated  in  the  living ;  but  in  the 
cold  marble  there  has  been  no  such  change.  Many  of  you  in 
this  house  know  little  of  what  are  the  experiences  of  God's 
people.  If  you  hear  of  their  anxieties  and  encouragements,  their 
temptations  and  deliverances,  their  inward  conflicts  and  spiritual 
triumphs,  their  gloomy  depressions  and  cheerful  exultations — all  those 
things  seem  to  you  as  an  idle  tale.  The  living,  the  living,  shall  know 
the  secret ;  but  unto  the  mere  professor  this  thing  is  not  revealed. 

My  subject,  which    will  be  mainly  addressed  to   God's  working 

Eople — to  such  as  are  really  serving  him — will  appear  to  have  very 
tie  bearing  upon  any  here  present  who  do  not  understand  the 
spiritual  life,  and  they  will  probably  think  that  the  evening  to  them  is 
wasted.  Just  this  word  on  the  outset,  however,  I  would  drop  in  your 
ears.  If  you  do  not  know  anything  of  spiritual  life,  what  will  you  do  in 
the  end  of  your  natural  life  ?  If  there  be  no  work  of  God's  Spirit  upon 
your  soul,  and  you  are  a  stranger  to  the  living  experience  of  God's 
No.  990. 


26G  METROPOLITAN  TABERKACLE  PULPIT. 

children,  what  will  be  your  portion  for  ever?  It  must  be  diridedto 
yon  with  the  unbelievers.  Are  you  prepared  to  receive  it?  Are  yon 
willing  that  this  should  be  your  eternal  destiny?  Are  you  not,  rather, 
alarmed  ?  Are  you  not  made  anxious  and  desirous  if  by  any  means  you 
may  pass  into  that  better,  truer,  state  of  life  ?  Considerinj^  its  bound- 
less interests,  notwithstanding  all  the  present  struggles  and  sorrows  it 
may  entail  on  you,  do  you  not  wish  to  know  and  prove  what  spiritual 
life  means  ?  I  pray  God  you  may.  Let  me  remind  you  that  the  gospel 
preiiched  to  you  is  still  available  for  your  quickening ;  and  whosoever 
believeth  in  Christ  Jesus  is  bom  of  God,  and  is  possessor  of  that 
spiritual  life. 

Now,  in  conducting  the  people  of  God  to  a  special  survey  of  our  text, 
'*  Look  not  ui}on  me,  because  I  am  black,"  our  first  remark  shall  be 
this :  ihe  fairest  Christians  are  the  most  shamefaced  with  regard  to  them- 
selves. The  person  who  says,  "  Look  not  upon  me,  because  I  am  black," 
is  described  by  some  one  else  in  the  eighth  verse  as  the  "  fairest  among 
women."  Others,  who  thought  her  the  fairest  of  the  fair,  spoke  no  less 
than  the  truth  when  they  affirmed  it ;  but  in  her  own  esteem  she  felt 
hei-sclf  to  be  so  little  fair,  and  so  much  uncomely,  that  she  besought 
them  not  even  to  look  upon  her.  Why  is  it  that  the  best  Christiana 
depreciate  themselves  the  most  ? 

Is  it  not  because  they  are  most  accustomed  to  look  within  ?  They 
keep  their  books  in  a  better  condition  than  those  unsafe  tradesmen,  tiie 
counterpart  of  mere  professors,  who  think  themselves  **  rich  and  in- 
creased in  goods,"  when  they  are  on  the  very  verge  of  bankruptcy. 
The  Christian  in  his  right  state  tests  himself  to  sec  whether  he  be 
in  the  faith.  He  values  too  much  his  own  soul  to  go  on  blindly. 
He  knows  that  Heedless  and  Toolold  are  always  bad  pilots,  so  he  sets 
Caution  and  Self-examination  at  the  helm.  He  cries  to  God,  "  Search  me, 
and  know  my  heart."  He  is  accustomed  to  examine  his  actions  and  his 
motives — to  pass  his  words  and  his  thoughts  in  review.  He  does  not 
live  the  life  of  one  who  goes  recklessly  on  ;  but  he  stops  and  consideis 
his  ways ;  and  looks  well  to  the  state  of  everything  within  him  "  to 
have  always  a  conscience  void  of  offence  toward  God  and  toward  men.** 
8olomon  says,  "  The  wise  man  looks  to  the  state  of  his  flocks  and  his 
herds ;  "  and  it  is  no  marvel  if  any  one  suffer  loss  who  neglects  the 
counsel.  But  he  also  says,  **  Keep  thy  heart  with  all  diligence,  for  out 
of  it  are  the  issues  of  life ; ''  and  it  is  quite  certain  that  he  who  fails  in 
this  exercise  is  liable  to  every  kind  of  moral  disorder.  In  his  anxiety 
to  be  pure  from  evil,  the  godly  man  will  be  eager  to  notice  and  quick  to 
detect  the  least  particle  of  defilement ;  and  for  this  reason  he  discovers 
more  of  his  blackness  than  any  other  man  is  likely  to  see.  He  is  no 
blacker,  but  he  looks  more  narrowly,  and  therefore  he  sees  more  dis- 
tinctly the  spots  on  his  own  character. 

The  genuine  Cliristian,  also,  tries  himself  by  a  higher  standard.  The 
professor,  if  he  be  as  good  as  another  professor,  is  well  content.  He 
estimates  himself  by  a  comparison  with  his  neighbours.  He  has  no 
standard  but  that  of  ordinary  com.monplace  Clu-istianity.  Far  other- 
wise is  it  with  the  believer  who  walks  near  to  God;  he  asks  himself, 
"  What  manner  of  persons  ought  we  to  be,  in  all  holy  conversation  and 
godliness  ?  "   He  knows  the  law  to  be  spiritual,  and  therefore  he  judges 


BELF-HUHBLING  AND  SELF-SEARCHING.  267 

many  things  to  be  sinful  which  others  wink  at ;  and  he  coonta  some 
thiogs  to  be  important  daties  which  others  regard  as  trifles.^  The 
genuine  Christian  sets  up  no  lower  standard  than  perfection.  He  does 
not  judge  himself  by  others,  but  by  the  exact  measure  of  the  diyine 
requirements,  by  the  law  of  God,  and  especially  by  the  example  of 
his  Lord  and  Master ;  and  when  he  thus  sets  the  brightness  of  the 
Sarionr's  character  side  by  side  with  his  own,  then  it  is  that  he  cries 
out,  '*  Look  not  upon  me,  for  I  am  black/'  The  mere  professor  never 
does  this :  he  neither  scrutinises  himself  nor  observes  his  Master  with 
close  heed  and  strained  attention,  desiring  to  ascertain  the  truth  ;  but 
he  flatters  himself  in  his  own  eyes,  and  goes  on  presumptuously.  Not 
so  the  genuine  Christian  ;  he  hides  his  face,  signs  in  secret,  and  cries 
before  God,  because  he  is  not  what  he  wants  to  be;  not  what  his  Lord 
was ;  not  fully  conformed  to  Christ  in  all  things ;  and  just  because 
these  short-comings  grieve  and  vex  his  righteous  soul,  he  cries,  "  Look 
not  upon  me,  for  I  am  black."  All  the  while  he  may  be  of  the  highest 
fype  of  Christian,  yet  he  is  not  so  in  his  own  esteem.  He  may  be  a 
star  to  others,  but  he  is  a  blot,  as  he  thinks,  to  himself.  In  God's 
esteem  he  is  ''accepted  in  the  Beloved,"  but  in  his  own  esteem  he 
seems  to  himself  to  be  full  of  all  manner  of  evil,  and  he  cries  out 
against  it  before  his  Lord. 

Another  reason  why  the  fairest  Christians  are  generally  those  that 
think  themselves  the  blackest,  is  that  they  hav  emore  light.  A  person 
may  seem  to  be  very  fair  in  the  dark,  very  fair  in  the  twilight ;  but 
when  the  light  gets  strong,  and  the  eye  is  strengthened  to  perceive, 
then  it  is  that  spots  that  were  not  noticed  before  are  soon  discovered. 
Yon  have^  perhaps,  a  handkerchief  that  has  looked  to  jou  extremely 
white ;  so  it  has  been  in  comparison  with  other  linen :  but  one  day, 
when  there  has  been  a  fall  of  snow,  you  have  laid  your  handkerchief 
side  by  side  with  the  snow,  and  you  have  seen  that  it  was  very  far  from 
the  whiteness  which  you  imagined.  When  the  light  of  God  comes  into 
the  soul,  and  we  see  what  purity  really  is,  what  holiness  really  is, 
then  it  is  the  contrast  strikes  us.  Though  we  might  have  thought  we 
were  somewhat  clean  before,  when  we  see  God  in  his  light  we  see 
light,  and  we  abhor  ourselves  in  dust  and  ashes.  Our  defects  so  appal 
our  own  heart,  that  we  marvel  they  do  not  exhaust  his  patience. 

The  better  Christian  a  man  is,  the  more  abashed  he  always  feels ;  because 
to  him  sin  is  so  exceedingly  hateful,  that  what  sin  he  sees  in  himself  he 
loathes  himself  for  far  more  than  others  do.  The  ungodly  man  would  con- 
done very  great  sin  in  himself;  though  he  might  know  it  to  be  there,  it 
would  not  disturb  him  ;  but  the  Christian  being  another  sort,  having  a 
love  for  holiness  and  a  hatred  for  sin,  cannot  bear  to  see  the  smallest 
speck  of  sin  upon  himself.  He  knows  what  it  is.  There  arc  persons 
living  before  the  public  eye,  and  jealous  of  popularity,  who  appear 

Suite  indifferent  to  the  good  opinion  of  the  sovereign  in  whose  kingdom 
[ley  dwell ;  there  are  other  persons  favourites  at  court,  who  would  lie 
awake  at  night  tossed  to  and  fro  in  fear  if  they  thought  that  sometldng 
had  been  reported  to  the  sovereign's  ear  that  was  disloyal.  A  man  who 
fears  not  God,  will  break  all  his  laws  with  an  easy  conscience;  but  one 
who  is  the  favourite  of  heaven,  who  has  been  indulged  to  sit  at  royal 
banquets,  who  knows  the  eternal  love  of  God  to  him,  cannot  bear  that 


2()8  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

there  should  be  any  evil  way  in  him  that  might  grieve  the  Spirit  and 
bring  dishonour  to  the  name  of  Christ.  A  very  little  sin,  as  the  world 
calls  it,  is  a  very  great  sin  to  a  truly  awakened  Christian.  I  will  ask 
you  now,  dear  hearers  (most  of  you  are  members  of  this  or  of  other 
churches),  do  you  know  what  it  is  to  jfret  because  you  have  spoken  an 
unadvised  word  ?  Do  jou  know  what  it  is  to  smite  upon  your  breast, 
because  you  were  angry  ? — ^justly  provoked,  perhaps,  but  still,  being 
angry,  you  spoke  unadvisedly.  Have  you  ever  gone  to  a  sleepless 
couch,  because  in  business  you  have  let  fall  a  word,  or  have  done  an 
action  which,  upon  mature  deliberation,  you  could  not  justify?  Does 
the  tear  never  come  from  your  eye  because  you  are  not  like  your  Lord, 
and  have  failed  where  you  hoped  to  succeed?  I  would  give  little  for 
your  godliness,  if  you  know  nothing  of  this.  Repentance  is  as  much 
a  mark  of  a  Christian  as  faith  itself.  Do  not  think  we  have  done  ' 
with  repenting  when  we  come  to  Christ  and  receive  the  remission  of 
our  sins  by  the  blood  that  did  once  atone.  No  ;  we  shall  repent  as 
long  as  we  sin,  and  as  long  as  we  need  the  precious  blood  forcleansmg. 
While  there  is  sin,  or  a  proneness  to  any  kind  of  sin,  lurking  in  us,  the 
grace  of  God  will  miike  us  loathe  the  sin  and  humble  ourselves  before 
the  Most  High  on  account  of  it. 

Now,  I  think  our  text  seems  to  say  just  this :  there  were  some  that 
admired  the  church.    They  said  she  was  fair.    She  seemed  to  say, 
"Don't  say  it;  you  don't  know  what  I  am,  or  you  would  not  praise 
me.**    Oh,  there  is  nothing  that  brings  a  blush  to  a  genuine  Christian's 
face  like  praising  him ;  for  he  feels — "  Praise  such  a  heap  of  dirt  as  I 
am?.  Give  any  credit  to  such  a  worthless  worm  as  I  am?     No ;  do 
not  cast  admiring  glances  at  me  !    Do  not  say,  '  That  man  has  many 
virtues  and  many  excellences  ! '    *  Look  not  upon  me,  for  I  am  black.*" 
Are  there  not  some  who  will  imitate  any  Christian — and  be  very 
right  in  so  doing — any  Christian  who  is  eminently  godly  and  holy? 
There  will  be  many  who  will  follow  in  his  footsteps.    I  think  I  see 
such  a  man  turn  round  to  his  followers, and  say:  *'  Do  not  look  at  me; 
do  not  copy  me.     I  am  black.     Copy  a  better  model ;  even  Jesus.    If 
I  follow  in  his  footsteps,  follow  me  ;  but  inasmuch  as  I  have  gone  astray 
like  a  lost  sheep,  follow  the  shepherd ;  do  not  follow  my  example." 
Every  Christian,  in  proportion  as  he  lives  near  to  God,  will  feel  this 
self- abasement,  this  lowliness  of  heart  ;  and  if  others  talk  of  admiring 
or  of  imitating  him,  he  will  say,  "  Look  not  upon  me,  for  I  am  black." 
And  as  he  thus,  in  deep  humility,  begs  that  he  be  not  exalted,  he  will 
olieii  desire  others  that  they  would  not  despise  him.    It  will  come  into 
his  mind,  "  Such-and-such  a  man  of  God  is  a  Christian  indeed ;   as 
he  sees  my  weakness,  he  will  contemn  me.    Such-and-such  a  disciple  of 
Christ  is  strong  ;  he  will  never  be  able  to  bear  with  my  weakness. 
Such-and-such  a  Christian  woman  does,  indeed,  adorn  the  doctrine 


SELF-HCMBLINa  ASD  SELF-SEARCHING.  269 

of  God  her  Saviour ;  but  as  for  me,  alas  !  I  am  nob  what  I  ought 
to  be,  nor  what  I  would  be.  Children  of  God,  do  not  look  upon  me 
with  scorn.  I  will  not  say  that  you  have  motes  in  your  own  eyes.  I 
have  a  beam  in  mine.  Look  not  upon  me  too  severely.  Judge  me 
not  harshly.  If  you  do  look  at  me,  look  to  Christ  for  me,  and  pray 
that  I  may  be  helped ;  '  for  I  am  black,  because  the  sun  hath  looke(f 
upon  me.'"  Still  I  would  have  you  beware  of  affecting  aught  thaC 
you  do  not  feel.  Humility  itself  may  be  counterfeited  with  much 
ostentation.  Wlierever  there  is  anything  like  cant,  as  it  is  practised  by 
some  people  who  depreciate  themselves  but  do  not  mean  it,  it  is 
loathsome  to  the  last  degree.  I  recollect  a  very  proud  man,  certainly 
twice  as  proud  as  he  was  high,  who  used  to  pray  for  himself  as 
"  God*s  poor  dust."  There,  was  nothing,  I  am  sure,  about  his  conduct 
and  conversation  that  entitled  him  to  use  any  such  expression.  I  have 
heard  of  a  monk  who  said  he  was  full  of  sin — he  was  as  bad  as  Judas  ; 
and  when  somebody  said,  "  That  is  true,"  he  turned  round,  and  said, 
"  What  did  I  ever  do  that  you  should  say  so?  "  The  effrontery  of  the 
arrogant  is  not  more  odious  than  the  servility  of  the  sycophant.  There 
is  a  great  deal  of  self-abnegation  which  is  not  genuine ;  it  is  the  offspring 
of  self-Gonceit,  and  not  of  self-knowledge.  Much  that  we  say  of  our- 
selves would  mightily  offend  our  vainglory  if  anybody  else  said  the 
same  of  us.  Oh,  let  us  beware  of  mock  humilitv!  At  the  same 
time,  the  more  of  the  genuine  article  we  have  the  better,  and  the 
more  truthfully  we  can  cry  out  to  God's  people, "  Look  not  upon  me, 
because  I  am  black,"  the  more  clear  will  it  be  that  we  are,  after  all, 
amongst  the  fairest. 

But  I  pass  on.  The  most  diligent  Christian — ^Ict  this  stand  for  the 
second  observation — the  most  diligent  Cliristian  will  be  the  man  most 
afraid  of  the  evUs  connected  with  his  tvork.  "  Evils  connected  with  his 
work!  " says  one.  "Does  work  for  God  have  evils  contingent  upon  it  ?  " 
Yes ;  but  for  every  evil  connected  with  the  work  of  God,  there  are  ten 
evils  connected  with  idleness.  Nay,  all  you  professors  who  are  doing 
nothing,  are  wearing  yourselves  out  faster  by  rust  than  you  could  have 
done  by  honest  wear.  But,  you  see,  in  the  case  of  our  text,  there  was 
evil  connected  with  work.  She  had  been  made  a  keeper  of  the  vineyards, 
and  having  to  trim  the  vines,  the  sun  had  shone  upon  her ;  and  she  says, 
"  Look  not  upon  me,  because  I  am  black,  because  the  sun  hath  looked 
upon  me."  The  blackness  that  she  confessed  was  a  blackness  occasioned 
by  her  having  to  bear  the  burden  and  heat  of  the  day. 

And  now  I  speak  to  such  as  live  in  active  service,  doing  the  work  of 
God.  Dear  brethren,  there  are  certain  evils  comxected  with  our  life- 
work  coming  of  the  sun  that  looks  upon  us,  which  we  should  confess 
before  our  heavenly  Father.  I  speak  now  only  to  the  workers.  I  have 
known  some  whom  tiie  sun  has  looked  upon  in  this  respect ;  their  zeal 


270  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

has  grown  cold  through  non-success.    You  nirent  out,  first  of  all,  as  a 
Christian,  full  of  fiVe  and  life.    You  intended  to  push  the  church  before 
you,  and  drag  the  world  after  you.     Peradventure  you  thought  that 
you  were  going  to  work   a  Reformation  almost  as  great  as  that  of 
Luther.     Well,  much  of  that  was  of  the  flesh,  though  beneath  the 
surface  there  was  an  earnest  zeal  for  God  which  was  eating  yon  up. 
But  you  have  been  mixed  up  with  Christians  for  some  years  of  a  voy 
cool  sort.    Use  the  thermometer  to-night.    Has  not  the  spiritual  tem- 
perature gone  down  in  your  own  soul  ?     Perhaps  you  hare  not  seen 
many  conversions  under   your  ministry?    or  in  the  class  which  jofl 
conduct  you  have  not  seen  many  children  brought  to  Jesus?    Do  yon 
feel  you  are  getting  cool  ?  Then  wrap  your  face  in  your  mantle  to-nigbt^ 
and  say:  "  Look  not  upon  me,  for  in  losing  my  zeal  I  am  black,  for  the 
sun  hath  looked  upon  me."    Perhaps  it  has  affected  you  in  another  way, 
for  the  sun  does  not  bring  freckles  out  on  all  faces  in  the  same  place. 
Perhaps  it  is  your  temper  that  is  grown  sour  ?    When  you  joined  the 
church  you  felt  all  love,  and  you  expected,  as  you  had  a  right  to  do,  that 
everybody  would  reciprocate  the  same  feeling;  it  may  fee  that  since 
then  you  have  had  to  do  battle  against  contentions.      You   have 
been   in  a  part  of  the  church  where  there  has  been  a  strife,  not 
altogether  for  the  faith  ouce  delivered  to  the  saints,  but  something  of 
a  party  feeling  was  mixed  with  it,  and  you  have  had  to  take  some 
share  in  it    And   perhaps  you  have  gradually  acquired  a  carping, 
critical  habit,   so  that  where  you  used  to  enjoy  the  word,  you  are 
now  all  for  judging  the  preacher.    You  are  not  so  much  a  feeder  upon 
the  word,  as  a  mere  taster  of  the  dishes,  to  see  if  you  cannot  find  some  foolt 
with  their  flavour.    Wrap  your  face  again,  I  beseech  you,  in  your  mantle. 
Again  bow  before  God,  and  say:  "  Look  not  upon  me,  because  I  am 
black ;  the  sun  hath  looked  upon  me.    I  n  my  service  for  God  I  have  been 
impaired."    Perhaps,  dear  friend,  you  have  suffered  in  another  way !    I 
sometimes  suffer  in  this  respect  very  materially.    The  Christian's  walk 
ought  to  be  calm,  peaceful,  quiet,  unruffled.    Leaving  everything  with 
the  Lord,  and  waiting  his  will,  our  peace  should  be  like  a  river.    But 
you  know  that,  when  there  is  much  to  be  done  in  God's  service,  there 
is  a  very  strong  temptation  to  want  to  push  this   and   that  thing, 
forward  with  undue  haste.     Or  if  it  does  not  move  quickly  at  the  rate 
you  would  wish,  there  is  a  temptation  to  be  sad,  careful,  and  anxious; 
to  be,  in  fact,  like  Martha,  cumbered  with  much  service.    When  yon 
get  into  that  condition  it  is  an  injury  to  yourself  and  really  prejudicial 
to  your  own  work ;   for  they  serve  Christ  best  who  commune  with  him 
most,   and  broken  fellowship  means  broken  strength.     Yet  this  is 
often  our  trouble ;  our  energies  are  exhausted  by  worry  more  than  by 
work.     Part  of  our  duty  is  neglected  through  unexpected  cares  that 
have  distracted  our  thoughts.     Pardon  me,  if  I  transfer  the  thing  to 


8ELF-HUHBLIKQ  AlO)  SELF-8EABCHING.  271 

myself  in  a  figure.  Say  that  this  Tabernacle  wants  all  my  vigilance 
concentrated  apon  its  welfare.  Then  there  is  another  matter  that  wants 
instant  attention  at  the  same  time.  Here  is  a  soul  seeking  Christ;  here 
is  another  backsliding;  here  is  a  brother  falling  to  ears  with  a  brother. 
Innumerable  things  crowd  npon  one's  view  and  clamour  for  immediate 
investigation  till  one  gets  disturbed  and  troubled.  "  Look  not  npon  me, 
because  I  am  black;  because  the  sun  hath  looked  upon  me.  The  work  I 
have  engaged  in  for  thee  hath  brought  me  into  the  sun,  and  burnt  my 
face.**  It  ought  to  be  bright  and  fair  with  fellowship ;  it  is  soiled  and 
begrimed  with  service. 

Sometimes  this  evil  of  sun-bnming  will  come  in  the  shape  of  joy 
taken  away  from  the  heart  by  weariness.  I  do  not  think,  dear 
brethren,  any  of  us  are  weary  of  Qod*s  work.  If  so,  we  never  were 
called  to  it.  But  we  may  get  weary  in  it.  You  recollect,  some  of  you 
here — ^I  speak  to  such  as  often  preach  the  gospel — ^how  happy  you 
were  when  first  you  were  permitted  to  open  your  mouth  for  Christ  I  Oh, 
what  a  joy  it  was  I  What  a  pleasure  I  How  you  threw  your  whole 
fionl  into  it  \^  There  was  no  sleepiness  and  dulness  in  your  sermon  then. 
But  now,  year  after  year,  year  after  year,  your  brain  gets  weary,  and 
though  the  spirit  is  willing,  the  fiesh  is  weak;  the  joy  you  once 
had  in  the  service  was  your  strength,  and  it  has  somewhat  gone  from 
you.  The  toil  is  more  irksome  when  the  spirits  are  less  buoyant. 
Well,  I  would  advise  you  to  confess  this  before  God,  and  ask  for  a 
medicine  to  heal  you.  You  had  need  get  your  joy  back,  but  first  you 
must  acknowledge  that  you  have  lost  it.  Say,  *'  I  am  black,  because 
the  sun  hath  looked  upon  me." 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  a  bad  result  of  a  good  work  when  our 
humility  is  injured  thereby.  Place  a  Christian  man  in  a  position  where 
he  has  to  do  much  for  Christ,  and  is  much  thought  of  and  set  by:  let 
him  have  great  success :  and  the  tendency  will  be  for  him  to  compliment 
himself  as  though  he  were  some  great  one.  You  cannot  reap  great 
sheaves  for  the  Master  without  this  temptation  coming  over  your  soul. 
What  a  glorious  workman  you  are,  and  what  a  great  reward  will  your 
soul  have  for  having  done  so  well !  It  is  the  sun  looking  upon  you ; 
taking  away  the  fairness  of  your  humility,  freckling  and  blackening 
your  face  with  a  pride  that  is  obnoxious  to  God.  This  ought  to  be 
confessed  at  once  and  heartily  repented  of. 

I  do  not  think  I  shall  attempt  to  go  through  the  list  of  all  the  matters 
that  might  come  out  of  Christian  service.  It  will  suffice  mc  to  say, 
I  am  afraid  that  in  many  cases  our  motives  get  mixed.  Pare  and  simple 
at  first  in  our  service,  we  may  get  at  last  to  serve  Christ  only  because  it 
is  our  office  to  do  so.  Woe  to  the  man  that  preaches  only  because 
he  is  a  minister,  and  does  not  preach  because  he  loves  Christ !  We 
may  get  also  to  be  self-reliant.    It  is  a  great  mercy  for  God's  ministers 


272  HSTBOPOUTAN  TABERNACLE  PULI*1T. 

when  they  tremble  on  going  into  the  pulpit,  even  thongh  they  hate 
been  accustomed  to  preach  for  twenty  years.  Mai'tin  Luther  declares  that 
he  never  feared  the  face  of  man ;  and  all  who  knew  him  could  bear 
witness  that  it  was  even  so;  yet  he  said  he  never  went  up  the  stairs  of 
the  pulpit  at  Wittenburg  but  he  felt  his  knees  knock  together  with 
fear  lest  he  should  not  be  faithful  to  God  and  his  truth.  When  we 
begin  to  rely  upon  ourselves,  and  think  we  can  do  it,  and  our  experience 
and  our  practice  will  suffice  to  bear  us  safely  through  the  next  discourse 
without  help  from  on  high,  then  the  sun  has  looked  upon  us,  and 
blackeued  our  face  indeed,  and  the  time  of  our  usefulness  draws  to  a 
close.  Come,  Christian  people,  brethren  and  sisters,  thankful  though  I 
am  thaD  I  can  address  so  large  a  number  who  are  engaged  in  the 
Master's  work,  I  beseech  you,  let  us  go  together  to  the  footstool  of  the 
heavenly  grace,  confess  there  our  blackness,  and  own  that  much  of  it 
has  come  upon  us  even  while  we  were  engaged  in  the  service  of  God. 

In  the  third  ])lace,  the  most  ivaichful  Christian  is  conscious  of  Oit 
danger  of  self -neglect ,  That  is  the  next  part  of  our  text.  **  They  made 
me  the  keeper  of  the  vineyards;  but  mine  own  vineyard  have  I  not  kept." 

Solemnly,  let  me  speak  again  to  my  brethren  who  are  seeking  to 
glorify  Christ  by  their  lives.     I  met  some  time  ago  with  a  sermon  by 
that  famous  divine,  Mr.  Henry  Melvill,  which  consists  all  through  of  one 
solitary  thought,  and  one  only  image  well  worked  out.    I  will  give  you 
the  pith  of  what  took  some  eight  pages  to  get  through.     He  supposes 
a  man  to  be  a  guide  in  Switzerland.    It  is  his  duty  to  conduct  travellers 
in  that  country  through  the  sublime  passes,  and  to  point  out  to  them 
the  glories  of  the  scenery,  and  the  beauties  of  the  lakes,  and  streams, 
and  glaciers,  and  hills.    This  man,  as  he  continues  in  his  office,  almost 
inevitably  gets  to  repeat  his  descriptions  as  a  matter  of  course  ;  and 
everybody  knows  how  a  guide  at  last  comes  to  "  talk  book,"  and  just 
iterate  words  which  do  not  awaken  any  corresponding  feeling  in  his 
own  mind.    Yet  when  he  began,  perhaps  it  was  a  sincere  love  of  the 
sublime  and  the  beautiful  that  led  him  to  take  up  the  avocation  of  a 
guide  ;  and  at  first  it  really  was  to  him  a  luxury  to  impart  to  others 
what  he  had  felt  amidst  the  glories  of  nature ;  but  as,  year  after  year, 
to   hundreds  of  different  parties,  he  had  to  repeat  much  the  same 
descriptions,  call  attention  to  the  same  sublimities,  and  indicate  the 
same  beauties,  it  is  almost  impossible  but  that  he  should  get  to  be  at 
last  a  mere  machine.    Through  the  hardening  tendency  of  custom,  and 
the  debasing  influence  of  gain,  his  aptest  descriptions  and  most  exquisite 
eulogies  come  to  be  of  no  greater  account  than  the  mere  language  of  a 
hireling.     This  thought  I  will  not  work  out  in  extenso  as  that  famous 
preacher  has  done,  but  I  give  it  to  you  as  a  cutting,  which  may 
germinate  if  planted  in  the  garden  of  your  heart.    Every  worker  for 
Christ  is  deeply  concerned  in  the  application  of  this  parable ;  because  the 


SBLF-HUHBLING  AND  6ELF-SEABCHING.  278 

peril  of  self-complaoencjy  increases  in  precisely  the  same  ratio  as  the 
zeal  of  proselytising.  When  counselling  others,  you  think  yourself 
'wise.  When  warning  others,  you  feel  yourself  safe.  When  judging 
others,  you  suppose  yourself  above  suspicion.  You  began  the  work  with 
a  flush  of  ardour ;  it  may  be  with  a  fever  of  enthusiasm ;  a  sacred  instinct 
prompted,  a  glowing  passion  moved  you.  How  will  you  continue  it? 
Here  is  the  danger — ^the  fearful  danger — lest  you  do  it  mechanically, 
fall  into  a  monotony,  continue  in  the  same  train,  and  use  holy  words  to 
others  with  no  corresponding  feeliug  in  your  own  soul.  May  we  not 
stir  others  up  to  devout  emotions,  and  yet  our  own  hearts  fail  to  bum 
with  the  sacred  fire?  Oh,  may  it  not  be  easy  for  one  to  stand  as  a  sign- 
post on  the  road  to  heayen,  and  never  stir  himself?  Every  preacher 
who  judges  himself  aright  knows  that  this  is  the  risk  he  incurs ; 
and  I  believe  the  same  danger  in  a  measure  threatens  Christians 
in  every  form  of  work  in  which  they  occupy  themselves  for 
Christ.  Dear  friends,  beware  of  reading  the  Bible  for  other  people. 
Get  your  own  text — ^your  own  morsel  of  marrow  and  fatness— out  of 
Scripture;  and  do  not  be  satisfied  to  be  sermon-makiDg  or  lesson- 
makingibr  your  class  in  the  Sunday-school.  Feed  on  the  word  yourselves, 
or  else  your  own  vin^ard  will  not  be  kept.  When  you  are  on  your  knees 
in  prayer,  pray  for  others  by  all  means;  but,  oh,  let  private  prayer  be 
kept  up  with  a  yiew  to  your  own  edification  and  your  own  growth  in 
grace  as  well.  Preach  not  the  Saviour's  blood,  and  yet  be  without  the 
blood  mark  on  yourselves.  Tell  not  of  the  fountain,  and  yet  go 
unwashed.  Do  not  point  to  heaven,  and  then  turn  your  back  to  it  and 
go  down  to  hell.  Fellow-workers,  look  to  yourselves,  lest  after  having 
preached  to  others  ye  yourselves  should  be  cast  away.  Your  neigh- 
bours certainly,  but  yourselves  also;  the  children  in  your  class  cer- 
tainly, your  own  children  at  home  certainly,  but  look  to  yourselves 
also,  oh,  ye  that  are  workers  in  God's  house^  lest  ye  keep  the  vineyards 
of  others  and  your  own  vineyards  be  not  kept.  It  is  very  possible  for  a 
man  to  get  to  dislike  the  very  religion  which  he  feels  bound  still  by  force 
of  custom  to  go  on  teaching  to  others.  "  Is  that  possible  ?"  says  one. 
Alas  !  that  it  is.  Have  you  never  heard  of  the  flower-girl  in  the  streets  ? 
What  is  her  occupation?  I  dare  say  some  girls  like  her  have  passed  by 
and  seen  her  with  a  great  basket  full  of  violets,  and  said :  "  What  a 
delightful  occupation,  to  have  that  fragrant  smell  for  ever  near  to  one  !" 
Yes,  but  there  was  one  girl  who  sold  them,  and  said  she  hated  the  smell  of 
violets.  She  had  got  to  loathe  them,  and  to  think  that  there  was  no 
smell  in  the  world  so  oflPensive,  because  they  were  always  under  her 
nostrils  all  day,  and  taken  home  to  her  little  scanty  room  at  night,  and 
having  nothing  but  violets  around  her,  she  hated  them  altogether. 
And  I  do  believe  that  there  are  persons  without  the  grace  of  Christ 
in  their  hearts   who  keep  on  talking  about  grace,  and  mercy,  and 


274  METROPOLITAN  TABEBNACLB  PULPIT. 

practising?  prayer,  and  yet  in  their  heart  of  hearts  they  hate  the  T&rj  frag- 
rance of  the  name  of  Jesus,  and  need  that  there  should  come  upon  them 
an  awakening  out  of  their  sleep  of  presumption  and  hypocrisy,  to  make 
them  know  that  though  they  thought  they  were  the  friends  of  God,  they 
were,  after  all,  his  enemies.  They  were  mere  keepers  of  other  men's 
vineyards,  but  their  own  vineyards  had  gone  to  ruin. 

Our  last  reflection  is  of  the  deepest  unportance.  The  most  cm- 
scieniions  Christian  will  he  the  first  to  enquire  for  the  antidote^  and  k 
use  the  cure. 

What  is  the  cure  ?  The  cure  is  found  in  the  verse  next  to  my  text 
'^  Look  not  upon  me,  because  I  am  black,  because  the  snn  hath  looked 
upon  me.  They  made  me  the  keeper  of  the  vineyards;  but  mine  own  vine- 
yard have  I  not  kept."  What  next  ?  "  Tell  me,  O  thon  whom  my 
soul  loveth,  where  thou  feedest,  where  thou  makest  thy  flock  to  rest  at 
noon :  for  why  should  I  be  as  one  that  tumeth  aside  by  the  flocks  of 
thy  companions  ?"  See,  then,  you  workers,  if  you  want  to  keep  up  your 
freshness,  and  not  to  get  blackened  by  the  sun  under  which  you  labour, 
go  to  your  Lord  again — go  and  talk  to  him.  Address  him  again  by 
that  dear  name,  ^'Thou  whom  my  soul  loveth."  Ask  to  have  your 
first  love  rekindled ;  strive  after  the  love  of  your  espousals.  There 
are  men  in  married  life  who  seem  to  have  forgotten  that  they  ever 
loved  their  wives ;  but  there  are  others  concerning  whom  the  hymn  is 
true — 

"  And  as  year  rolls  ailer  year, 
Each  to  other  still  more  dear.** 

So  there  are  some  Christians  who  seem  to  forget  that  they  ever  loved 
the  Saviour;  but  I  trow  there  are  others  in  whom  that  love  deepens  and 
becomes  more  fervent  as  each  year  passes  over  their  heads.  If  any  of 
you  are  at  faulc  in  this,  do  not  give  sleep  to  your  eyelids  to-night  till 
you  have  renewed  your  espousal  love.  Thy  Lord  recollects  it>  if  thou 
dost  not,  for  he  says :  '*  I  remember  thee,  the  kindness  of  thy  youth,  the 
love  of  thine  espousals,  when  thou  wentest  after  me  in  the  wilderness, 
in  a  land  that  was  not  sown."  You  did  some  wild  things  in  those 
early  days.  You  were  a  great  deal  more  zealous  than  wise ;  but,  though 
ycu  look  back  upon  that  with  censure,  Christ  regards  it  with  delight. 
He  wishes  you  were  now  as  you  were  then.  Perhaps  to-day  you 
are  not  quite  cold  to  him.  Do  not  flatter  yourself  on  that  account ; 
for  he  has  said,  "  I  would  thou  wert  cold  or  hot."  It  is  just  lukewarm- 
nc'Bs  that  he  loathes  most  of  all,  and  he  has  threatened  to  spue  the 
lukewarm  out  of  his  mouth.  Oh,  to  be  always  full  of  love  to  him !  You 
will  never  get  any  hurt  by  working  for  him  then;  your  work  will  do 
you  good.  The  sweat  of  labour  will  even  make  your  face  the  fairer. 
The  more  you  do  for  souls,  the  purer,  and  the  holier,  and  the  more 
Christlike  will  you  be,  if  you  do  it  with  him.   Keep  up  the  habit  of  sitting 


BBLF-HUKBLINO  AND  SELF-SEARCHING.  275 

at  hie  feet,  like  Mary,  as  well  as  serving  him  with  Martha.  You  can  keep 
the  two  together ;  thej  will  balance  each  other,  and  you  shall  not  be  barren 
or  onfioiitriil,  neither  shall  you  fall  into  the  blackness  which  the  sun  is  apt 
to  breed.  0  for  more  nearness  to  Christ,  more  lore  to  Christ,  and  closer 
communion  with  him !    Did  you  notice  what  the  spouse  said :  "  Tell  me^ 

0  thou  whom  my  soul  loreth,  where  thou  feedest  ?  "  I  suppose  her 
object  was  to  go  and  feed  with  him.  Look  to  the  feeding  of  your  own 
soul,  Christian.    When  a  man  says,  "  I  have  a  hard  day's  work  to  do, 

1  shall  have  no  time  to  eat,"  you  know  full  well  that  he  is  losing  time 
where  he  thinks  he  gains  it ;  for  if  he  does  not  keep  himself  in  good 
repair  he  will  sicken  by-and-by,  and  in  the  long  run  he  will  do  less  than 
if  he  gave  himself  due  pause.  So  is  it  with  your  soul.  You  cannot 
give  out  a  vital  energy  which  you  have  not  got  in  you  healthy  and 
vigorous  ;  and  if  you  have  not  got  power  from  God  in  your  own  sou), 
power  cannot  come  out  of  you,  for  it  is  not  there.  Do,  therefore,  feed 
upon  Christ.  Or  do  you  feel  yourself  like  that  guide  of  whom  we  spoke 
just  now  ?  Has  the  routine  of  service  blunted  your  sensibilities,  till 
you  gaze  unmoved  on  those  objects  of  beauty  and  marvel  that  should 
awaken  every  passion  and  thrill  every  nerve  of  your  being  ?  Ask  then 
in  what  way  he  might  keep  up  his  interest  in  the  lakes  and  the 
mountains?  Would  it  not  be  well  for  him,  occasionally,  at  any  rate,  to 
take  a  lonely  journey  to  find  out  new  features  in  the  gorgeous  scenery, 
or  to  stand  in  solitude,  and  see  the  hills  in  a  iresh  light,  or  mark  the  forest 
trees  in  diflferent  states  of  the  weather  ;  so  that  he  might  again  renew  his 
own  sensations  of  admiration,  and  of  gratitude  to  God  for  having  created 
such  sublimities?  Then  I  can  readily  believe  his  enthusiasm  would  in- 
crease rather  than  abate  by  an  increasing  familiarity  with  the  landscape. 
And  you,  worker  for  God,  you  must  go  to  God  alone ;  feed  on  precious 
truth  for  yourself ;  dig  into  the  deep  things  of  God  and  enrich  your  own 
spirit.  Thus  you  may  serve  God  as  much  as  ever  you  will :  you  will  get  no 
hurt  therefrom.  Did  you  notice  that  she  also  asked :  "  Tell  me  where 
thou  makest  thy  flock  to  rest  at  noon  ?"  Best  is  what  the  worker  wants. 
Where  is  the  rest  of  Christ's  flock  but  in  his  own  dear  bosom  ?  Where 
is  there  repose,  but  in  his  own  fidelity,  in  the  two  immutable  things 
wherein  it  is  impossible  for  God  to  lie — the  oath  and  the  promise  ?  Oh, 
never  turn  away  from  that  rest !  Turn  into  it  again,  to-night,  beloved. 
Aa  for  me,  I  feel  I  want  my  Saviour  more  than  ever  I  did.  Though  I  have 
preached  his  gospel  now  these  five-and-twenty  years  and  more,  I  need  still 
to  come  and  cling  to  his  cross  as  a  guilty  sinner,  and  find  ^'  life  for  a  look 
at  the  crucified  One,"  just  as  I  did  at  first.  0  that  God*s  grace  may  ever 
keep  the  most  ardent  among  us  always  faithful  with  our  own  soul, 
abiding  in  the  Lord,  and  rejoicing  in  him  I 

I  have  done.    This  is  my  word  to  workers.    Let  me  only  say  to 
yon  for  whom  there  has  seemed  nothing  in  the  sermon,  if  you  are 


276  METROPOLITAN  TABEBHAGLE  PULPIT. 

not  workers  for  Christ,  70a  are  workers  against  him*  ^  He  that  is 
not  with  me  is  against  me ;  and  he  that  gathereth  not  with  me  scattereth 
abroad."  0  sonls,  why  should  you  stand  out  against  the  Saviour  ?  Wby 
should  you  resist  him  ?  Bleeding  out  his  life  for  his  enemies,  the  mirror 
of  disinterested  loye,  what  is  there  in  him  that  can  make  you  fight 
against  him  ?  Drop  your  weapons,  man !  Drop  them  to-night,  I 
charge  you  by  the  living  God  !  And  come  now,  ask  pardon  through 
the  precious  blood,  and  it  shall  be  given  you.  Seek  a  new  heart, 
and  a  right  spirit.  The  Holy  Ghost  will  work  it.  From  this  night 
be  a  worker  for  Christ.  The  church  wants  you.  The  armies  of  Christ 
need  recruiting.  Take  the  profferred  blessing,  and  become  a  soldier 
of  the  cross;  and  may  the  Lord  build  up  his  Zion  by  many  of  yon 
who  were  not  his  people  aforetime,  but  of  whom  it  is  said:  '^They 
were  not  my  people,  but  they  shall  be  the  people  of  the  living  God.'' 


'^THE  TEEASURY  OF  DAVID.^ 

BY  C.  H.  SPURGEON.     Vols.  L  &  EL 

This  Work  is  the  substance  of  many  Libraries.  It  contains  the  essence  of  all  the 
commentators  upon  the  Psahns,  both  ancient  and  modem.  Besides  containiiif 
original  observations  by  the  Author,  it  is  crowded  with  the  wisdom  of  hundreds  oi 
the  most  eminent  writers.  Reviewers  pronounce  the  work  to  be  of  the  highest 
value.  The  volumes  are  published  at  Ss.  each,  and  contain  far  morA  matter  than  it 
g(  !ierally  sold  for  half  a  guinea.    Vol.  I.  is  now  in  the  fourth  thousand. 

Pulijishcd  by  Paesmob£  &  Alabaster,  Paternoster  Row,  and  may  be  had 

of  all  Booksellers. 


PetrApIttHin  ^mlwmk 


THE   FOUSFOLD  TBEASU&E. 


Deuyessd  oh  Thursday  Evening,  Apbil  27th,  1871,  by 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNAOLB,     NSWINOTON. 


'*  But  of  him  are  ye  in  Christ  Jesns,  who  of  Otod  is  made  unto  us  wisdom,  and 
^hteousnees,  and  sanctification,  and  redemption :  that,  according  as  it  is  written, 
9  that  glorieth,  let  him  glory  in  the  Lord.'' — 1  Cor.  L  30,  81. 

Te  meet  somewhere  in  the  Old  Testament  with  the  expression  *^  salt 
ithont  prescribing  how  much."  Beyond  all  question  the  name, 
erson,  and  work  of  Jesns  are  the  salt  and  savonr  of  every  true  gospel 
linistry ,  and  we  cannot  have  too  mnch  of  them.  Alas !  that  in  so  many 
linistries  there  is  snch  a  lack  of  this  first  dainty  of  the  feast,  this 
ssence  of  all  sonl-satisfying  doctrine.  We  may  preach  Christ  without 
rescribing  how  much,  only  the  more  we  extol  him  the  better.  It  would 
e  impossible  to  sin  hj  excess  in  preaching  Christ  crucified.  It  was 
n  ancient  precept,  "  With  all  thine  ofFerings  thou  shalt  offer  salt;"  let 
i  stand  as  an  ordinance  of  the  sanctuary  now :  "  With  all  thy  ser- 
lonisings  and  diseoursings  thon  shalt  ever  mingle  the  name  of  Jesus 
/hrist ;  thou  shalt  ever  seek  to  magnify  the  alpha  and  omega  of  the 
»lan  of  redemption.**  The  apostle  in  the  first  chapter  of  this  epistle 
rag  anxious  to  speak  to  the  Corinthians  about  their  divisions  and  other 
erious  faults;  but  he  could  not  confine  himself  to  that  unpleasant 
heme ;  as  naturally  as  possible  his  heart  bounded  over  the  mountains  of 
livision  to  his  Lord  and  Master.  Divisions  did  but  remind  him  of  the 
peat  uniting  one  who  has  made  all  his  people  one,  and  human  follies 
lid  but  drive  him  nearer  to  the  infallible  Christ  who  is  the  wisdom  of  God. 
rhough  Paul  had  to  write  many  sharp  things  to  those  ancient  Plymouth 
Brethren  at  Corinth,  yet  how  sweetly  did  he  prevent  all  bitterness  by 
dipping  his  pen  in  the  honeyed  ink  of  love  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  and 
ainiration  of  his  person  and  work !  Let  us,  dear  friends,  if  we  have  to 
preach,  preach  Christ  crucified ;  and  if  we  are  private  persons,  let  us  in 
our  household  life,  and  in  all  our  conversation,  make  his  name  to  be  as 
ointment  poured  forth.  Let  your  life  be  Christ  living  in  vou.  May  you  be 
like  Asher,  of  whom  it  is  said,  he  dipped  his  foot  in  oil ;  may  you  be  so 
uiointed  with  the  Spirit  of  your  Lord  that  wherever  you  put  down  your 
^oot^  you  may  leave  an  impression  of  grace.  The  balmy  south  wind 
Xo.  991. 


278  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

bears  token  of  having  passed  over  sunny  lands  ;  may  the  ordinary  l3ent 
and  current  of  your  life  bear  evidence  in  it  that  you  have  communrf 
with  Jesus. 

To-night  we  have  before  us  a  text  which  is  extraordinarily  compre- 
hensive, and  contains  intinitely  more  of  meaning  than  mind  shall  gnu^ 
or  tongue  shall  utter  at  this  hour.  Considering  it  carefolly,  tet  ds 
observe,  first,  that  the  apostle  here  attributes  the  fact  that  we  are  in 
Christ  Jesus  to  the  Lord  alone.  He  shows  that  there  is  a  connecfcicm 
between  our  very  being  as  Christians,  and  the  love  and  grace  of  God 
in  Christ.  "  Of  him  "  (that  is  of  God)  "  are  ye  in  Christ  Jesus."  So 
we  will  first  speak  about  our  spiritual  existence.  Then  Paol  goes  on  to 
write  of  our  spiritual  wealth,  which  he  sums  up  under  four  heads: 
wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redemption;  bnt  which  in- 
deed, I  might  say,  he  sums  np  under  one  head,  for  he  declares  that 
Christ  is  made  of  God  unto  us  all  these  four  things :  and  then  he 
closes  the  chapter  by  telling  us  where  our  ghrying  ought  to  go— it 
should  return  to  the  source  of  our  spiritual  existence  aud  heavenly 
wealth.    "  He  that  glorieth,  let  him  glory  in  the  Lord." 

L   To   begin,   then,   where  God  began  with  us — OUR    spiritual 

EXISTENCE. 

'*  Of  him  are  ye  in  Christ  Jesus."     Different  translators  have  read 
this  passage  in  divers  ways.    **  Of  him,'*  they  think  properly  should  be 
"  Through  him:*'  that  is,  "Through  God  we  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  Are 
you  tiiis  day  united  to  Christ — a  stone  in  that  building,  of  which  he  is 
both  foundation  and  topstone — a  limb  of  that  mystical  body,  of  which 
he  is  the  head  ?    Then  you  did  not  get  there  of  yourself.    No  stone  in 
that  wall  leaped  into  its  place ;  no  member  of  that  body  was  its  own 
creator.   You  come  to  be  in  union  with  Christ  through  God  the  Father. 
You  were  ordained  unto  this  grace  by  his  own  purpose,  the  purpose  of 
the  Infinite  Jehovah,  who  chose  you,  or  ever  the  earth  was.     "Te  have 
not  chosen  me,  but  I  have  chosen  you."    The  first  cause  of  your  union 
with  Christ  lies  in  the  purpose  of  God  who  gave  you  grace  in  Christ  Jesus 
from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world.     And  as  to  the  purpose,  so  to  the 
power  of  God  is  your  union  with  Christ  to  be  attributed.    He  brought  you 
into  Christ;  you  were  a  stranger,  he  brought  you  near;  you  were  an 
enemy,  he  reconciled  you.     You  had  never  come  to  Christ  to  seek  for 
mercy  if  first  of  all  the  Spirit  of  God  had  not  appeared  to  you  to  show 
you  your  need,  and  to  lead  you  to  cry  for  the  mercy  that  you  needed. 
Through  God's  operation  as  well  as  through  God*s  decree  you  are  tiiis 
day  in  Christ  Jesus.    It  will  do  your  souls  good,  my  brethren,  to  think 
of  this  very  common-place  truth.    Many  days  have  passed  since  yonr 
conversion,  it  may  be,  but  do  not  forget  what  a  high  day  the  day  of 
your  new  birth  was ;  and  do  not  cease  to  give  glory  to  that  mi^tf 
power  ^vhich  brought  you  out  of  darkness  into  marvellous  light,     xon 
did  not  convert  yourself ;  if  you  did,  you  still  have  need  to  be  converted 
ap:aiu.     Your  regeneration  was  not  of  the  will  of  man,  nor  of  blood,  nor 
of  birth  ;  if  it  were  so,  let  me  tell  you  the  sooner  you  are  rid  of  it  the 
better.  The  only  true  regeneration  is  of  the  will  of  God  and  by  the  opera*    | 
tion  of  the  Holy  Ghost.    **By  the  grac6  of  God  I  am  what  I  am.'*    j 
He  *Miath  begotten  us  again  unto  a  lively  hope."      "He  that  hath 
wrought  ns  to  the  selfsame  thing  is  God."    "  Of  him  are  ye  in  Obrifit 


THB  FOURFOLD  TRSASUBB.  279 

Jesus."  Thronph  the  operation  and  will  and  purpose  of  God  are  yon  this 
daj  a  member  of  Christ's  bodj  and  one  with  Jesns.  Give  all  the  glorj, 
then,  to  the  Lord  alone. 

But  suppose  we  read  it  as  we  have  it  in  the  text,  and  then  we  shall 
not  have  an  allusion  to  the  source  of  our  spiritual  life,  but  to  the 
dignity  of  it.  "  Of  God  are  ye  in  Christ  Jesus."  Being  in  Christ 
you  are  of  God.  Not  of  the  earth  earthy  now,  not  of  Satan,  not  of 
the  bondage  of  the  law,  not  of  the  powers  of  evil,  but  of  God  are  you  $ 
God's  husbandry,  God's  people,  God's  children,  God's  beloved  ones. 
"  Ye  are  of  God,"  little  children,  "  and  the  whole  world  lieth  in  wicked- 
ness." On  you  hath  God's  light  shone,  to  you  hath  God's  life  come,  in 
you  God's  love  is  made  manifest,  and  in  you  shall  God's  glory  be  fully 
revealed.  What  a  dignity  is  this  to  be  '*  of  God  !"  Some  have  thought 
it  a  great  thing  to  have  it  said,  ''  These  are  they  which  are  of  the 

Eince's  household,"  and  others  have  been  yet  more  boastful  when  they 
Te  been  pointed  at  as  parts  of  an  imperial  court ;  bnt  you  are  of 
the  divine  family,  descenoed  from  him  who  only  hath  immortality. 
''They  shall  be  mine,  saith  the  Lord,  in  the  day  when  I  make  up  my 
jewels."  '*  For  the  Lord's  portion  is  his  people,  Jacob  is  the  lot  of  his 
inheritance."  Of  God,  are  you,  every  one  of  you  who  are  in  Christ  Jesus: 
ye  are  Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's.  The  Creator,  the  Upholder,  the 
Sablime,  the  Invisible,  the  Infinite,  the  Etemid  claims  you.  You  have 
a  part  and  lot  with  him,  and  you  are  herein  uplifted  to  the  highest  degree 
of  exaltation  because  you  are  in  Christ. 

Here,  then,  you  have  the  dignity  of  the  Christian  life — it  is  of  God, 
as  its  source  is  through  God. 

But  note  the  essence  of  the  Christian  life.  "  Of  God  are  ye  in  Christ 
Jwu^r  You  have  no  life  before  the  Lord,  except  as  you  are  in 
Christ  Jesus.  Apart  from  him,  you  are  as  the  branch  that  is  severed 
from  the  vine— dead,  withered,  useless,  obnoxious,  rotten.  Men  gather 
these  branches,  and  cast  them  into  the  fire,  and  they  are  burned.  A 
ghastly  sight  it  must  be  on  the  battle-field,  to  see  on  all  sides  arms, 
kgs,  and  various  portions  of  limbs  torn  away  from  the  bodies  to  which 
they  belonged,  and  scattered  in  hideous  disorder  !  Once  of  the  utmost 
lOTice,  these  severed  limbs  are  useless  now.  Every  one  knows  that 
th^  are  dead,  for  thev  cannot  live  divided  from  the  vital  regions :  even 
thus  if  you  and  I  could  be  separated  from  Christ,  our  vital  head,  death — 
spritoal  death — must  be  the  inevitable  result.  Our  life  hinges  upon 
union  to  our  Lord.  '*  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also."  Out  of  Christ 
we  abide  in  death,  but  in  Christ  we  live,  and  we  are  of  God.  Our 
^iritual  being,  and  the  fact  that  our  spiritual  being  is  an  exalted  one, 
both  hang  upon  this — that  we  are  in  Christ.  Beloved  Christian  friends, 
I  can  congratulate  you  upon  your  being  able  to  know  that  you  are  in 
CSirist,  and  that  so  you  are  of  God ;  but  I  must  not  speak  so  broadly 
to  all  this  congr^ation.  I  must  rather  put  a  grave  enquiry,  and  ask 
each  of  my  hearers :  Are  you  all  in  Christ  Jesus  ?  Could  the  apostle 
write  to  you,  and  say :  "  Of  God  are  you  in  Christ  Jesus."  Have  you 
wcr  been  the  subject  of  a  work  of  God,  putting  you  into  Christ  Jesus? 
Arc  you  now  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  bo  as  to  be  depending  for  everything 
qx)n  him,  dwelling  in  him,  and  he  in  you;  feeling  his  life  within 
you,  and  that  your  life  is  hid  with  him  in  God?    Beloved  hearer^ 


280  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

there  is  no  joj  in  this  world  like  union  with  Christ.  The  more  we  can 
feel  it,  the  happier  we  are,  whatever  our  circumstances  may  be.  But  if 
you  are  without  Christ,  you  are  without  hope.  Joy  comes  not  where 
Jesus  comes  not.  No  Saviour,  then  no  peace  in  life  or  death.  Oh 
remember,  beloved  hearer,  that  you  will  soon  die.  Where,  where  will 
you  look  for  consolation  in  your  last  moments?  Your  soul  will  soon 
have  to  fly  through  tracks  unknown,  and  face  the  burning  throne  of 
judgment  What  will  you  do  then,  without  the  hand  of  love  to  guide 
you  and  the  righteousness  of  Ciirist  to  cover  you  ?  He  who  wraps  him- 
self about  with  Christ's  matchless  robe  can  say — 

**  Bold  shall  I  stand  in  that  great  day, 
For  who  aught  to  my  charge  shall  fay  ? 
While  through  thy  blood  absolved  I  am 
From  8in*s  tremendous  curse  and  shame.** 

But  he  that  hath  no  Saviour,  it  were  better  for  him  that  he  had  never 
been  bom.  That  day  is  cursed,  and  hath  no  blessing,  on  which  he  first 
saw  the  light.  Jesus  Christ  is  willing  to  receive  jon  if  you  desire  to 
come  to  him.  Nouh*s  ark  was  shut,  but  not  until  the  flood  came,  it 
was  open  till  then ;  Christ  is  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  and  the  door  is 
not  shut  yet.  Let  not  this,  however,  cause  you  to  delay,  for  the  flood 
will  rise,  and  the  rains  will  fall,  and  then  to  those  who  shall  knock  at 
the  door,  it  will  be  said,  "  Too  late !  too  late !  Ye  cannot  enter 
now." 

Of  him,  beloved  believers  in  Christ,  are  ye  in  Christ  Jesns.  All 
you  are,  even  to  your  bare  existence  as  Christians,  you  have  to  trace 
to  "  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  according  to  his 
abundant  mercy  hath  begotten  us  again  unto  a  lively  hope  by  the 
resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead,  to  an  inheritance  in- 
corruptible and  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away." 

XL  Now  let  us  turn  to  the  second  part  of  our  subject,  and  con- 
template OUR  SPIRITUAL  WEALTH.  Christ  Jesus  is  of  God  made  nnto 
us  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctiflcation,  and  redemption.  Here  are 
four  things—only  it  is  to  be  noticed  that  in  the  onrinal  Greek  the 
second  and  third  have  a  peculiar  connecting  link,  which  the  others 
have  not.  The  wisdom  stands  alone,  and  the  redemption,  but 
the  righteousness  and  sanctiflcation  have  a  special  link,  as  though 
we  should  be  taught  that  they  always  go  together,  that  they  should 
always  be  considered  as  united — a  warning  to  modem  theology,  which 
so  often  divideth  what  God  hath  joined  together. 

Let  us  take  the  flrst  blessing  flrst,  asking  to  be  partakers  of  it  at 
this  very  moment.  Jesus  Christ  is  made  unto  us  wisdom.  You 
noticed  when  we  read  the  chapter  that  the  apostle  had  been  speaking 
of  some  other  wisdom  which  ne  treated  somewhat  roughly.  It  had 
set  itself  up  in  opposition  to  the  cross  of  Christ,  and  the  apostle 
handled  it  with  no  gentle  handling.  There  have  always  been  those 
in  the  world  who  have  conceived  that  wisdom  would  come  to  them  as 
the  result  of  the  exercise  of  their  own  thoughts  assisted  by  cnlture; 
that  is  to  say,  they  hoped  to  know  divine  truth  by  their  own  thoughts 
and  the  additional  light  arising  from  the  thoughts  of  other  men« 
They  fancied  that  wisdom  would  rise  out  of  the  human  mind,  and 
would  not  need  to  be  taught  us  from  above.    There  were  those  in 


THK  FOURFOLD  TREASUaE.  281 

Paal*8  days  who  were  always  ruminating,  considering,  contemplating 
with  themselves,  and  then  disputing,  dialoguing,  and  conversing  with 
others.  These  were  the  philosophers  of  the  time.  They  looked  for 
wisdom  through  man,  and  expected  to  find  it  in  the  shallow  brain  of  a 
poor  son  of  Adam.  They  so  believed  that  they  themselves  were  wise  ; 
that  though  they  affected  modesty  and  did  not  call  themselves  **  the 
Sophoi,  or  wise,'*  but  "  the  Philosophoi,"  or  lovers  of  wisdom,  yet  for 
all  that,  in  their  innermost  hearts  they  esteemed  themselves  to  be  an 
inner  circle  of  instructed  persons,  and  they  looked  upon  the  rest  of 
mankind  as  the  unilluminated  and  the  ignorant.  They  had  found  a 
treasure  which  they  kept  to  themselves,  and  virtually  said  to  their 
fellow-men,  "You  are  almost  without  exception  hopelessly  ignorant." 
Now,  the  apostle,  instead  of  pointing  to  his  own  brain,  or  pointing  to 
the  statue  of  Socrates  or  Solon,  says  Jesus  Christ  is  made  of  God  unto 
us  wisdom.  We  look  no  more  for  wisdom  from  the  thoughts  that 
spring  of  human  mind,  but  to  Christ  himself;  we  do  not  expect  wisdom 
to  come  to  us  through  the  culture  that  is  of  man,  but  we  expect  to  be 
made  wise  through  sitting  at  our  Master's  feet  and  accepting  him  as 
wisdom  from  God  himself.  Now,  as  it  was  in  the  apostle's  day,  so  is 
it  very  much  at  this  present.  There  are  those  who  will  have  it  that 
the  gospel — the  simple  gospel — such  as  might  have  been  preached  by 
John  Bunyan  or  Whitfield,  or  Wesley,  and  others,  was  very  well  for 
the  many,  and  for  the  dark  times  in  which  they  lived — the  great  mass 
of  mankind  would  be  helped  and  improved  by  it ;  but  there  is  wanted, 
according  to  the  wiseacres  of  this  intensely  luminous  century,  a  more 
progressive  theology,  far  in  advance  of  the  Evangelism  now  so  generally 
ridiculed.  Men  of  mind,  gentlemen  of  profound  thought,  are  to  teach 
us  doctrines  that  were  unknown  to  our  fathers ;  we  are  to  go  on  im- 
proving in  our  knowledge  of  divine  truth  till  we  leave  Peter  and  Paul, 
and  those  other  old  dogmatists  far  behind.  Nobody  knows  how  wise 
we  are  to  become.  Brethren,  our  thoughts  loathe  this;  we  hate  this 
cant  about  progress  and  deep  thought ;  we  only  wish  we  could  know  as 
much  of  Christ  as  the  olden  preachers  did.  We  are  afraid  that  instead 
of  getting  into  greater  light  through  the  thinkings  of  men,  the  specu- 
lations and  contemplations  of  the  scribes,  ancient  and  modern,  and  the 
discoveries  of  the  intellectual  and  eclectic,  have  made  darkness  worse, 
and  have  quenched  some  of  the  light  that  was  in  the  world.  Again 
has  it  been  fulfilled  :  *'  I  will  destroy  the  wisdom  of  the  wise,  and  will 
bring  to  nothing  the  understanding  of  the  prudent.  Where  is  the  wise  ? 
where  is  the  scribe?  where  is  the  disputer  of  this  world?  hath  not  God 
made  foolish  the  wisdom  of  this  world?"  It  seemeth  to  me  to  be 
greater  wisdom  to  believe  what  Christ  hath  said  than  to  believe  what 
my  deepest  thoughts  have  discovered ;  and  though  I  have  thought  long 
upon  a  subject,  and  turned  it  over  and  over,  and  think  I  know  more 
of  it  than  another  man,  yet,  in  one  simple  word  of  Christ  there  is  more 
wisdom  than  in  all  my  thoughts  and  ruminatings.  I  am  never  to  look 
to  myself  for  wisdom,  and  to  fancy  that  I  am  the  creator  of  truth  or 
the  revealer  of  it ;  but  ever  to  go  to  him,  my  Lord,  my  teacher,  my  all, 
and  to  believe  that  the  highest  culture,  the  best  results  of  the  highest 
education  are  to  be  found  by  sitting  at  his  feet,  and  the  best  results  of 
the  deepest  meditation,  too,  are  to  be  gained  in  lying  down  in  the 


282  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

green  pastures,  beside  the  still  waters,  where  he,  as  the  good  Shepherd, 
leads  me.  Brethren,  when  we  read  that  Christ  is  made  of  God  unto 
us  wisdom,  let  ns  recollect  what  wisdom  is.  Wisdom  is,  I  suppose,  the 
right  use  of  knowledge.  To  know  is  not  to  be  wise.  Many  men  Imow 
a  great  deal,  and  are  all  the  more  fools  for  what  they  know.  There 
is  no  fool  so  great  a  fool  as  a  knowing  fool.  But  to  know  how  to  use 
knowledge  is  to  have  wisdom.  Now,  that  man  is  wise  in  three  respects 
who  has  Christ  for  his  wisdom.  Christ's  teaching  will  make  him  wise 
of  thought,  and  wise  of  heart.  All  you  want  to  know  of  God,  of  sin, 
of  life,  of  death,  of  eternity,  of  predestination,  of  man's  responsibility, 
Christ  has  either  personally,  or  oy  his  Spirit  in  the  word  of  God,  taagfat 
you.  Anything  that  you  find  out  for  yourself,  anything  over  and  aboTe 
revelation,  is  folly,  but  whatever  he  has  taught  is  wisdom ;  and  be  has 
so  taught  it  that  if  you  learn  it  in  the  spirit  in  which  he  would  have 
you  learn  it,  it  will  not  be  dry,  dead  doctrine  to  you,  but  spirit  and 
life ;  and  his  teaching  will  endow  yon  with  wisdom  as  well  as  know- 
ledge. Scholars  at  the  cross-foot  let  us  always  be.  Never  let  ns  go 
to  any  other  school  than  Schola  crucis,  for  the  learners  of  the  cross  are 
the  favourites  of  wisdom.  Let  Corpus  Christi  be  the  college  in  which 
we  study.  To  know  Jesus,  and  the  power  of  his  resurrection,  this  is 
wisdom. 

But,  in  addition  to  profiting  by  our  Lord's  instruction,  the  Christian 
learns  wisdom  through  his  Master's  example.  "  "Wherewithal  shall  a 
young  man  cleanse  his  Vay  ? "  How  shall  I  be  made  wise  in  action  ? 
Policy  says,  "Adopt  this  expedient  and  the  other;"  and  the  mass  of 
mankind  at  this  age  are  guided  by  the  policy  of  the  hour  ;  but  policy  is 
seeming  wisdom  and  real  folly.  Remember  it  is  always  wisest  to  act 
in  any  condition  as  Jesus  would  have  acted,  supposing  him  to  have  been 
in  that  condition.  Never  did  he  temporise,  rrinciple  guided  him,  not 
fashion  nor  personal  advantage.  You  shall  never  be  a  fool  if  yon  follow 
Christ,  except  in  the  estimation  of  fools ;  and  who  wishes  to  be  wise  in 
a  fool's  esteem?  But  sometimes  it  may  be  said:  "To  do  as  Christ 
would  have  done  would  involve  me  in  present  difficulty  or  loss."  It  is 
true ;  but  there  is  no  man  that  loseth  aught  in  this  life  for  Christ's 
sake  who  shall  remain  a  loser,  for  he  shall  receive  tenfold  in  this  life, 
and  in  the  world  to  come  life  everlasting.  The  wisest  action  is  not 
always  the  most  pecuniarily  profitable.  It  is  wise  sometimes  for  mefi 
to  be  poor,  ay,  even  to  lose  their  lives.  Truest  wisdom — not  sham 
wisdom,  not  temporary  wisdom — you  shall  manifest  by  following  the 
example  of  Christ,  though  it  lead  you  to  prison  or  to  death.  His 
teachings  and  his  example,  together,  will  give  you  the  wisdom  which 
Cometh  from  above. 

Above  all,  if  you  have  the  Redeemer's  presence,  he  will  be  made  of 
God  unto  you  wisdom  in  a  very  remarkable  sense.  Never  forget  or 
doubt  that  Jesus  is  still  with  his  people.  They  who  know  how  to  enter 
into  the  secret  place  of  the  tabernacles  of  the  Most  High,  find  him  still 
at  the  mercy-seat.  He  feedeth  among  the  lilies,  and  they  who  know 
the  lilies  know  where  to  find  him  ;  and  those  who  live  Avith  him,  and 
catch  his  spirit,  have  their  garments  perfumed  as  his  are  with  myrrh, 
and  aloes,  and  cassia.  These  may  be  thought  to  be  mad  by  some,  and 
others  may  call  them  fanatical  enthusiasts ;  but  these  are  the  wisest 


THE  FOURFOLD  TREASUEE.  283 

of  mankind.  0  happy  men  that  live  at  the  gates  of  heaven  while  yet 
on  earth,  that  sit  at  the  feet  of  the  blessed  in  the  heavenly  places  in 
Christ  Jesns  while  they  are  toiling  al on o:. through  the  pilgrimage  of 
this  life  I  This  is  to  be  wise,  to  have  Christ's  teaching,  Christ's  example, 
and  above  all,  Christ's  presence;  so  may  the  poorest  find  the  Lord 
Jesns  made  of  God  nnto  them  wisdom. 

Paosc  JQst  a  minute.  Let  none  of  us  ever  be  so  foolish  as  to  suppose 
that  when  we  have  received  Jesus  and  his  gospel,  we  have  occasion  to 
blnsh  when  we  are  in  the  company  of  the  very  wisest  of  the  present 
daj.  Carry  a  bold  face  when  you  confront  the  brazen  faced  philosophy 
which  insnlts  your  Lord.  The  man  who  does  not  believe  the  Bible 
does  not  know  so  much  as  thou  dost.  Blush  not,  though  with  mimic 
wisdom  the  unbeliever  tries  to  laugh  or  argue  thee  down.  He  who  knows 
not  Christ,  though  he  propounds  wonderful  theories  as  to  the  creation 
of  mankind  and  the  formation  of  the  world,  and  though  he  has  a  glib 
tongue,  is  only  an  educated  fool,  a  learned  idiot,  who  thinks  his  own 
mshlisrht  brighter  than  Ood's  own  sun.  ''  Ah !  but  he  has  been  to 
college,  and  he  has  a  degree,  and  he  is  esteemed  by  men ;  for  he  has 
written  books  that  nobody  can  comprehend."  '*  The  fool  hath  said  in 
his  heart,  There  is  no  God  ;"  and  I  do  not  care  even  if  he  be  a  Solon, 
if  he  has  said  that  there  is  no  God,  he  is  a  fool.  Do  not  blush,  then,  if 
yon  find  yourself  in  his  company ;  do  not  make  yourself  the  blushing 
one  because  the  fool  is  there.  Self-conceit  were  to  be  avoided  and 
loathed ;  but  this  is  not  self-conceit,  but  a  holy  courage  in  a  case 
which  demands  of  you  to  be  courageous.  To  know  Christ  is  the  best 
of  all  philosophy,  the  highest  of  all  sciences.  Angels  desire  to  look 
into  this ;  but  I  do  not  know  that  they  care  a  fig  for  half  the  sciences 
so  valued  among  men.  If  you  know  Christ  you  never  need  be  afraid 
of  being  ashamed  and  confounded  whatever  company  you  may  be  in. 
If  you  stood  in  a  senate  of  emperors,  or  amidst  a  parliament  of  philo- 
sophers, and  only  told  them  of  the  God  that  came  in  human  ficsh,  and 
loved,  and  lived,  and  died  to  redeem  mankind,  you  would  have  told 
them  a  greater  mystery  and  a  profounder  secret  than  reason  could 
discover.  Be  not  ashamed,  then,  amid  the  intellectual  pride  of  this 
boastful  age. 

At  the  fame  time  let  me  remind  you  of  another  evil :  do  not  seek 
to  complete  your  wisdom  at  any  other  source:  be  satisfied  that  in 
keeping  close  to  Christ  you  have  the  highest  and  truest  wisdom.  As 
I  would  not  have  you  cowed  before  the  pretender,  neither  would  I  have 
you  envy  him,  or  seek  to  supplement  the  wisdom  that  is  in  Christ 
Jesus  by  the  wisdom  that  is  of  man.  Are  you  so  foolish,  having  begun 
with  Jesus,  will  you  end  with  a  German  neologian,  or  a  French  wit,  or 
a  Puseyite  dreamer  ?  Have  you  taken  Christ's  word  to  be  your  guide, 
and  will  you  go  and  tack  on  to  that  some  decree  of  Convocation,  some 
rubric  of  a  church,  some  minute  of  Conference,  or  other  invention  of 
human  brain  and  fallen  fancy  ?  God  forbid !  Array  yourself  solely  in 
this  armour  of  gold,  and  go  forth  and  gleam  in  the  sv.n,  and  angels 
themselves  shall  marvel  at  you  as  they  see  your  brightness.  "  Jesus 
Christ  is  made  of  God  unto  you  wisdom." 

It  is  high  time  for  us  to  proceed  to  review  the  next  blessing.  He  is 
made  of  God  unto  us  righteousness.    This  was  a  great  want  of  ours, 


I 


284  METUOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT, 

for  naturally  we  were  unrighteous,  and  to  this  hour  in  ourselrcs  we 
are  the  same.    Kighteous  we  must  be  to  be  acceptable  with  God,  but 
righteous  we   certainly  are  not  personally,  and   by  merit.  All  oar 
righteousnesses  are  as  filthy  rags,  and  we  are  unable  to  stand  before 
the  great  King ;  but  there  is  one  who  says :   "  Take  awa^  his  fitthj 
garments  from  him,"  and  that  same  Deliverer,  even  the  Lord  Jesos 
Christ,  is  made  of  God  unto  us  righteousness.     You  know  how  we 
usually  speak  of  this  as  a  double  work.    His  blood  cleanseth  us  from  all 
guilt;  by  it  pardon  is  bestowed  upon  the  believer.    He  that  looks  to 
Christ  is  absolved  from  all  sin — completely  so.    Then,  in  addition  to 
that  cleansing,  which  we  call  pardon,  there  is  the  clothing,  the  arraying 
in  the  righteousness  of  Christ — in  a  word,  there  is  justification  bj 
faith.     The  doctrine  of  imputed  righteousness  seems  to  me  to  be 
firmly  established  in  the  word  of  God.    Yet  I  have  sometimes  Dsuicied 
I  have  heard  a  little  too  much  stress  put  upon  the  word  "  imputed," 
and  scarcely  enough  upon  the  word  **  righteousness;"  for  though  I  know 
that  righteousness  is  imputed  to  us,  yet  I   believe  it  is  not  aU  the 
truth  that  we  are  righteous  by  imputation.    It  is  true,  most  true,  but 
there  is  something  true  beyond  it.    Not  only  is  Christs  righteous- 
ness imputed  to  me,  but  it  is  mine  actually,  for  Christ  is  mme.  He 
who  believes  in  Jesus,  has  Jesus  Christ  to  be  his  own  Christ,  and  the 
righteousness  of  Christ  belongs  to  that  believer,  and  is  his.    We  are 
not  merely  imputedly  righteous,  but  the  righteousness  of  our  snbstitate 
is  legally,  actually,  truly  our  righteousness.    I  am  not  now  speaking 
of  nature — that  would  have   to   do  with   sanctification — ^but  I  am 
speaking  of  repute  before  God.     He  reckons  us  to  be  righteous  in 
Christ,  and  he  does  not  reckon  wrongly ;  the  imputation  is  not  a  legal 
fiction  or  a  charitable  error.    We  are  righteous.    Depend  upon  it,  GcS's 
imputation  is  not  like  human  imputation,  which  makes  a  thing  to  be 
what  it  is  not :  we  are  in  Christ  made  actually  righteous,  because  we 
are  one  with  him.    Do  you  think  that  there  is  an  unrighteous  member 
of  Christ's  body?     God  forbid  I    Do  you  think  Christ  mystical  to  be  a 
building  with  an  unholy  stone  in  it?    Is  Christ  a  vine  with  branches, 
which  bear  deadly  fruit  ?    As  he  is,  so  are  we  also  in  this  respect.  His 
salt  has  seasoned  the  whole  lump.    In  the  mystical  body,  every  member 
is  made  righteous  before  God,  because  joined  to  the  living  head.    Here 
is  an  actual  righteousness  given  to  us  through  the  righteousness  of 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.    He  is  made  of  God  unto  us  righteousness. 
Consider  this,  0  believer — you  are  to-night  righteous  before  God.   You 
are  a  sinner  in  yourself  worthy  to  be  condemned,  but  God  does  not  con- 
demn you,  nor  ever  will  he  do  so,  for  before  the  eye  of  his  justice  you 
are  arrayed  in  perfect  righteousness.    Your  sin  is  not  upon  you:  it 
was  laid  upon  the  Scapegoat's  head  of  old.    All  your  iniquities  were 
made  to  meet  upon  the  head  of  the  Crucified  Saviour  :  he  bore  your 
transgressions  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree.     Where  are  your  sins 
now  ?    You  may  ask  the  question  without  fear,  for  they  have  ceased 
to  be.     *'  As  far  as  the  cast  is  from  the  west,  so  far  hath  he  removed 
our  transgressions  from  us."     **  He  hath  cast  our  iniquities  into  the 
depths  of  the  sea."     Glory  be  to  his  name,  there  is  no  sin  in  existence 
against  a  believer.     Is   it  not   written  :    "  He  hath  finished   trans- 
gression,   made  nn  end  of  sin  [what  stronger  expression  can  there 


s 


THE  FOUBFOLD  TREASURE.  285 

be?],  and  brotight  in  eyerlasting  righteousness'*?  And  that  is  true 
of  you  to-night.  Christian,  as  true  of  you  to-night  as  it  will  be 
when  YOU  are  in  heaven.  You  are  not  so  sanctified  tonight  as 
on  will  be  in  the  glory  land,  but  you  are  as  righteous  as  you  can 
even  there.  In  God's  sight  you  are  as  much  "  accepted  in  the 
BeloTed,*"  as  you  will  be  when  you  stand  on  the  sea  of  glass  mingled 
with  fire.  You  are  beloyed  of  God,  and  dear  to  him  and  justified, 
80  that  even  to-night  you  can  say :  "  Who  shall  lay  anything  to 
the  charge  of  God's  elect?  It  is  God  that  justifieth.  Who  is  he  that 
oondemneth?"  You  cannot  lift  up  a  louder  boast  than  that,  even 
when  you  shall  see  your  Saviour,  and  shall  be  like  him  because 
you  see  him  as  he  is.  By  faith  this  righteousness  is  yours  at  this 
present  moment,  and  will  always  be  yours  without  a  change :  yours 
when  your  spirit  is  cast  down,  as  much  as  when  your  joys  abound. 
You  are  accepted  not  because  of  anything  in  yourself,  but  because  you 
stand  in  the  Lord  your  righteousness. 

I  remarked  some  time  ago  that  the  next  blessing  in  our  text  is  pinned 
on  to  this  one.  I  need  not  not  say  much  about  that  fact,  but  just  note 
it.  Righteousness  and  sanctification  must  always  go  together,  and 
though  they  are  two  different  things,  or  else  there  would  not  have  been 
two  different  words,  yet  they  blend  into  each  other  most  remarkably, 
hence  the  Greek  joins  the  two  words  by  a  close  link.  Our  sanctification 
is  all  in  Christ ;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  because  we  are  in  Christ  that  we  have 
the  basis  of  sanctification,  which  consists  in  being  set  apart.  A  thing  was 
sanctified  of  old,  under  the  law,  when  it  was  set  apart  for  God's  service. 
We  were  sanctified  in  Christ  Jesus  when  we  were  set  apart  by  the  divine 
Spirit  to  be  the  Lord's  own  peculiar  people  for  ever.  Election  is  the 
basis  of  sanctification.  Moreover,  the  power  by  which  we  are  sanctified 
comes  to  us  entirely  by  virtue  of  our  union  with  Christ.  The  Holy 
Spirit  who  sanctifies  us  through  the  truth,  works  in  us  by  virtue  of  our 
union  with  Jesus.  That  which  becomes  holy  in  us  is  the  new  life.  The 
old  nature  never  changes  into  a  holy  thing ;  the  carnal  mind  is  not 
reconciled  to  God,  neither,  indeed,  can  be.  The  old  man  is  not  sent  to 
the  hospital  to  be  healed,  but  to  the  cross  to  be  crucified.  It  is  not  trans- 
formed and  improved,  but  doomed  to  die  and  to  be  buried.  The  ordi- 
nance of  baptism,  which  is  placed  at  the  outset  of  Christian  life,  is  meant 
to  show,  by  our  immersion  in  the  liquid  tomb,  that  it  is  by  death  and 
burial  that  we  pass  into  life  by  the  power  of  resurrection.  If  any  man 
be  in  Christ,  he  is  not  an  old  creature  mended  up :  he  is  a  new  creature. 
*•  Old  things  are  passed  away;  behold  all  things  are  become  new."  Now, 
it  is  because  this  new  life  is  the  great,  the  true  matter  of  sanctification, 
and  because  it  comes  to  us  by  virtue  of  our  oneness  with  Christ,  that 
Jesus  Christ  is  made  to  us  the  power  and  the  life  by  which  we  are 
sanctified.  Beloved,  let  your  hearts  add  another  meaning :  let  Jesus 
always  be  the  motive  for  your  sanctification.  Ts  it  not  a  strange  thing 
that  some  professors  should  look  to  Christ  alone  for  pardon  and  justifi- 
cation, and  run  away  to  Moses  when  they  desire  sanctification  ?  For 
instance,  you  will  hear  persons  preach  this  doctrine:  "The  Christian 
is  to  be  holy,  because  ii  he  be  not  holy  he  will  fall  from  grace  and 
perish.**  Do  you  not  hear  the  crack  of  the  old  legal  whip  in  all  that? 
What  is  that  but  the  yoke  of  that  covenant  which  none  of  our  fathers 


286  METROFOLITAir  TABEBKACLB  FDLPIT. 

were  able  to  bear  ?  It  is  tbe  bondage  of  Egypt,  not  the  freedom  of  dn 
children  of  God.  ChriBt  talks  not  so,  nor  his  gospel.  Think  not  te 
make  thyself  holy  by  motives  of  that  kind.  They  are  not  right  motim 
for  a  child  of  God.  How  then  should  we  urge  the  child  of  God  to 
holiness?  Should  it  not  be  in  this  way :  "Thou  art  God's  child:  waK 
worthy  of  him  who  ip  thy  Father"?  His  love  to  thee  will  neyer  oeaae. 
He  cannot  cast  thee  nway  :  he  is  faithful  and  never  changes,  thoefon 
love  him  in  return.  This  is  a  motive  fit  for  the  child  of  the  free  wcNiian, 
and  it  moves  his  heart.  The  child  of  the  bond  woman  is  driven  I7 
the  whip,  but  the  child  of  the  free  woman  is  drawn  by  cords  of  lore. 
"The  love  of  Christ  constraineth  us;"  not  fear  of  hell,  but  love  of 
Christ ;  not  fear  that  God  will  cast  us  away,  for  that  he  cannot  do, 
but  the  joy  that  we  are  saved  in  the  Lord  with  an  everlasting  sain- 
tion  constrains  us  to  cling  to  him  with  all  our  heart  and  soul,  for  eier 
and  ever.  Rest  assured,  if  motives  fetched  from  the  gospel  will  not  kill 
sin,  motives  fetched  from  the  law  never  will.  If  you  cannot  be  pniged 
at  Calvary,  you  certainly  cannot  be  cleansed  at  Sinai.  If  '^  the  water  and 
the  blood,  from  the  riven  side  which  flowed,'*  are  not  sufficient  to  purify 
thee,  no  blood  of  bulls  or  of  goats — I  mean,  no  argument  from  the 
Jewish  law,  or  hope  of  salvation  by  your  own  efforts — will  ever  farnidi 
motives  sufficiently  strong  to  cast  out  sin.  Let  your  reasons  for 
being  holy  be  found  in  Christ,  for  he  is  made  of  Ood  nnto  joa 
sanctification  I  I  have  ever  found,  and  I  bear  my  witness  to  it,  that  tbe 
more  entirely  for  the  future  as  well  as  for  the  present,  I  lean  npon  mv 
Lord,  the  more  conscious  I  am  of  my  own  emptiness  and  nnworthiness; 
and  the  more  completely  I  rest  my  whole  salvation  npon  Uie  grace  of 
God  in  Christ  Jesus,  the  more  carefully  do  I  walk  in  my  daily  life.  I 
have  always  found  that  self-righteous  thoughts  very  soon  lead  to  sinful 
actions ;  but  that,  on  the  other  hand,  the  very  faith  which  leads  to 
assurance,  and  makes  the  heart  rest  in  the  fisiithfulness  of  Ood  in 
Christ,  purifies  the  soul.  '<  He  that  hath  this  hope  in  him  purifieth 
himself,  even  as  he  is  pure."  Jesus,  the  Saviour,  saves  us  from  oar 
sins,  and  is  made  of  God  to  us  "  sanctification.*' 

Now,  the  last  item  of  our  boundless  wealth  catalogued  in  the  text  is 
** redempfionJ*  Somebody  says:  "That  ou^ht  to  have  come  first; 
because  redemption,  surely,  is  the  first  blessing  that  we  enjoy."  Ay, 
bnt  it  is  the  last  as  well.  It  is  the  alpTia  blessing,  I  grant  yon  that— 
but  it  is  the  omega  blessing  too.  You  are  not  yet  redeemed  altogether. 
By  price  you  are — for  he  that  redeemed  you  on  the  tree  did  not  leaTC 
unpaid  a  penny  of  your  ransom ;  but  you  are  not  yet  altogether  redeemed 
by  power.  In  a  measure,  you  are  set  free  by  divine  power,  for  yon  have 
been  brought  up  out  of  the  Egypt  of  your  sin,  you  have  been  delivered 
from  the  galling  bondage  of  your  corruption,  and  led  through  the  Red 
Sea,  to  be  fed  upon  the  heavenly  manna  ;  but  you  are  not  altogether 
redeemed  by  power  us  yet.  There  are  links  of  the  old  chains  yet  to 
be  6napj)ed  from  off  you,  and  there  is  a  bondage  still  about  you  from 
which  you  are  ere  long  to  be  delivered.  Yon  are  "  waiting  for  the  adoption, 
to  wit,  the  redemption  of  the  body."  You  will  fall  asleep,  rejoicing 
that  yon  were  redeemed;  but  you  will  not,  even  when  you  die,  have  re- 
ceived the  full  redemption.  When  will  that  come — the  full  redemption? 
Only  at  the  second  advent  of  the  Lord  Jesus ;  for  when  the  Lord  shall 


THE  F0X7BF0LD  TBEASUHE.  287 

descend  from  heaven  with  a  shont,  then  the  bodiesof  his  saints,  which  have 
long  been  lying  in  the  prison-honse  of  the  sepolchre,  shall  be  redeemed  by 
a  glorious  redemption  irom  the  power  of  death.  '*  I  know  that  my  redeemer 
livetb."  The  bodies  of  the  saints  shall  come  again  from  the  land  of  the 
enemy.  Then  their  body,  soul,  and  spirit — their  entire  manhood,  which 
Christ  hath  bought,  shall  be  altogether  free  from  the  reign  of  the  enemy. 
Then  will  redemption  be  completed.  Remember  the  saints  in  heaven 
without  us  cannot  be  ma4e  perfect,  that  is  to  say,  they  wait  till  we 
anriTe  among  them  ;  and  when  all  the  rest  of  the  chosen  ones  shall  be 
^hered  in,  and  the  fulness  of  time  has  come,  then  shall  the  bodies  of 
the  dead  arise ;  and  then,  in  body  and  soul  made  perfect,  the  year  of 
the  redeemed  shall  have  fully  come.  '*  Lift  up  your  heads ;  for  your 
redemption  draweth  nigh.''  Here,  then,  is  my  joy,  that  Christ  is 
my  r^emption.  My  soul  is  free  from  sla?ery,  but  my  poor  trembling 
and  much  suffering  body  feels  the  chains  of  death.  Weakened  by  pain, 
my  body  shall  in  all  probability  bow  before  the  stroke  of  death's  sword. 
Unless  the  Lord  soon  come,  it  must  be  the  portion  of  this  frame  to 
feed  the  worm  and  mingle  with  the  dust ;  but,  0  my  body,  thou  art 
redeemed,  and  thou  shalt  rise  in  power  and  incorruption;  thou  shalt  yet 
•doie  the  Lord  without  weariness,  and  without  pain  shalt  thou  serve 
him  day  and  night  in  his  temple.  Even  thou,  0  my  weary  body  ;  even 
thou  shalt  be  made  glorious  like  unto  the  Lord  himself.  Thou  shalt 
rise  and  live  in  the  brightness  of  his  presence. 

All,  then,  that  you  can  possibly  want,  0  Christian,  is  in  Christ.  You 
cannot  conceive  a  need  which  Jesus  does  not  supply.  **  Wisdom,  right- 
eousness, sanctification,  redemption,"  you  have  all  in  him.  Some  gather 
a  flower  here;  some  gather  another  there  ;  some  will  go  farther,  and 
pluck  another  there ;  and  some  will  go  yet  beyond  to  grasp  a  fourth ; 
but  when  we  win  Christ  we  have  a  posey ;  we  have  all  sweet  flowers  in 
one. 

**•  All  human  beauties,  all  divine, 
In  my  Beloved  meet  and  shine ; 
Thou  brightest,  sweetest,  fairest  one, 
That  eyes  have  seen  or  angels  known." 

But  we  cannot  stay  on  this  tempting  subject,  though  even  amid  my 
present  pain  I  would  fain  talk  on  by  the  hour  together ;  and  therefore 
I  must  finish  with  the  last  point ;  and  on  that  only  a  word. 

You  see  then,  brethren,  our  very  existence  as  Christians,  and  all  that 
we  possess  as  Christians,  we  get  from  God  by  Jesus  Christ;  let  all  our 
alary  then  be  unto  him.  What  insanity  it  is  to  boast  in  any  but  in  our 
Lord  Jesus  !  How  foolish  are  they  that  are  proud  of  the  beauty  of  their 
fl^ — worms'  meat  at  the  best !  How  foolish  are  they  who  are  proud  of 
their  wisdom  I  The  wisdom  of  which  a  man  is  proud,  is  but  folly  in  a 
thin  disguise.  How  foolish  are  they  that  are  vain  of  their  wealth  I 
He  must  be  a  poor  man  who  can  think  much  of  gold.  He  must  be  a 
beggar  indeed  who  counts  a  piece  of  dirt  a  treasure.  They  that  know 
Christ,  always  value  these  things  at  their  right  estimate,  and  that  is 
low  indeed.  If  any  glory — and  I  suppose  it  is  natural  to  us  to  glory, 
there  is  a  boasting  bump  on  all  our  heads — let  us  glory  in  the  Lord; 
iud  here  is  a  wide  field  and  ample  sea- room.    Now,  put  out  every 


286  METBOFOLITAir  TABEBKACLB  FDLPIT. 

were  able  to  bear  ?  It  is  the  bondage  of  Eorypt,  not  the  freedom  of  dn 
children  of  God.  Christ  talks  not  so,  nor  his  gospel.  Think  not  to 
make  tiiyself  holy  by  motives  of  that  kind.  They  are  not  right  motim 
for  a  child  of  God.  How  then  should  we  urge  the  child  of  God  to 
holiness?     Should  it  not  be  in  this  way :  **Thou  art  God's  child:  waK 

■ 

worthy  of  him  who  i^  thy  Father"?    His  love  to  thee  will  never  cease. 
He  cannot  cast  thee  away :  he  is  faithful  and  never  changes,  therefore 
love  him  in  return.   This  is  a  motive  fit  for  the  child  of  the  free  woman, 
and  it  moves  his  heart.    The  child  of  the  bond  woman  is  drivail^ 
the  whip,  but  the  child  of  the  free  woman  is  drawn  by  cords  of  love. 
"The  love  of  Christ  constraineth  us;"  not  fear  of  hell,  but  love  of 
Christ ;  not  fear  that  God  will  cast  us  away,  for  that  he  cannot  do, 
but  the  joy  that  we  are  saved  in  the  Lord  with  an  everlasting  saln- 
tion  constrains  us  to  cling  to  him  with  all  our  heart  and  soul,  for  ever 
and  ever.    Rest  assured,  if  motives  fetched  from  the  gospel  will  not  kill 
sin,  motives  fetched  from  the  law  never  will.     If  yon  cannot  be  purged 
at  Calvary,  you  certainly  cannot  be  cleansed  at  Sinai.    If*'  the  water  and 
the  blood,  from  the  riven  side  which  flowed/'  are  not  sufficient  to  purify 
thee,  no  blood  of  bulls  or  of  goats — I  mean,  no  argument  from  the 
Jewish  law,  or  hope  of  salvation  by  your  own  eflforts — will  ever  furnish 
motives  sufficiently  strong  to    cast  out   sin.     Let  your  reasons  for 
being  holy  be  found  in  Christ,  for  he  is  made  of  God  nnto  yoa 
sanctification  I     I  have  ever  found,  and  I  bear  my  witness  to  it,  that  the 
more  entirely  for  the  future  as  well  as  for  the  present,  I  lean  npon  my 
Lord,  the  more  conscious  I  am  of  my  own  emptiness  and  nnworthiness; 
and  the  more  completely  I  rest  my  whole  salvation  upon  the  grace  of 
God  in  Christ  Jesus,  the  more  carefully  do  I  walk  in  my  daily  life.    I 
have  always  found  that  self-righteous  thoughts  very  soon  lead  to  sinful 
actions ;  but  that,  on  the  other  hand,  the  very  iaith  which  leads  to 
assurance,  and  makes  the  heart  rest  in  the  faithfulness  of  God  in 
Christ,  purifies  the  soul.    '*  He  that  hath  this  hope  in  him  pnrifieth 
himself,  even  as  he  is  pure."    Jesus,  the  Saviour,  saves  us  from  our 
sins,  and  is  made  of  God  to  us  "sanctification.** 

Now,  the  last  item  of  our  boundless  wealth  catalogued  in  the  text  is 
^^ redemption,^'  Somebody  says:  "That  ought  to  have  come  first; 
because  redemption,  surely,  is  the  first  blessing  that  we  enjoy."  Ay, 
but  it  is  the  last  as  well.  It  is  the  alpha  blessing,  I  grant  yon  that — 
but  it  is  the  omega  blessing  too.  You  are  not  yet  redeemed  altogether. 
By  price  you  are — for  he  that  redeemed  you  on  the  tree  did  not  leave 
un])aid  a  i)€nny  of  your  ransom ;  but  you  are  not  yet  altogether  redeemed 
by  power.  In  a  measure,  you  are  set  free  by  divine  power,  for  you  have 
been  brought  up  out  of  the  Egypt  of  your  sin,  you  have  been  delivered 
from  the  galling  bondage  of  your  coiTuption,  and  led  throngh  the  Red 
Sea,  to  be  fed  upon  the  heavenly  manna  ;  but  you  are  not  altogether 
redeemed  by  power  as  yet.  There  are  links  of  the  old  chains  yet  to 
be  snap})cd  from  off  you,  and  there  is  a  bondage  still  about  you  from 
which  von  are  ere  long  to  be  delivered.  You  are  "  waiting  for  the  adoption, 
to  wit,  the  redemption  of  the  body."  You  will  fall  asleep,  rejoicing 
that  you  were  redeemed;  but  you  will  not,  even  when  you  die,  have  re- 
ceived the  lull  redemption.  "Wlicnwill  that  come — the  full  redemption? 
Only  ab  the  second  advent  of  the  Lord  Jesus ;  for  when  the  Lord  shall 


THE  F0X7BF0LD  TBEASUKE.  287 

descend  from  heaven  with  a  shont,  then  the  bodiesof  his  saints,  which  ha?e 
long  been  lying  in  the  prison-house  of  the  sepulchre,  shall  be  redeemed  by 
a  glorious  redemption  from  the  power  of  deatn.  '*  I  know  that  my  redeemer 
liyetb."  The  boaies  of  the  saints  shall  come  again  from  the  land  of  the 
enemy.  Then  their  body,  sonl,  and  spirit — their  entire  manhood,  which 
Christ  hath  bought,  shall  be  altogether  free  from  the  reign  of  the  enemy. 
Then  will  redemption  be  completed.  Remember  the  saints  in  heaven 
without  us  cannot  be  ma4e  perfect,  that  is  to  say,  they  wait  till  we 
arrive  among  them  ;  and  when  all  the  rest  of  the  chosen  ones  shall  be 
gathered  in,  and  the  fulness  of  time  has  come,  then  shall  the  bodies  of 
the  dead  arise ;  and  then,  in  body  and  soul  made  perfect,  the  year  of 
the  redeemed  shall  have  fully  come.  *'  Lift  up  your  heads;  for  your 
redemption  draweth  nigh."  Here,  then,  is  my  joy,  that  Christ  is 
my  redemption.  My  soul  is  free  from  sla?ery,  but  my  poor  trembling 
and  much  suffering  body  feels  the  chains  of  death.  Weakened  by  pain, 
my  body  shall  in  all  probability  bow  before  the  stroke  of  death's  sword. 
Unless  the  Lord  soon  come,  it  must  be  the  portion  of  this  frame  to 
feed  the  worm  and  mingle  with  the  dust;  but,  0  my  body,  thou  art 
redeemed,  and  thou  shalt  rise  in  power  and  incorruption ;  thou  shalt  yet 
adore  the  Lord  without  weariness,  and  without  pain  shalt  thou  serve 
him  day  and  night  in  his  temple.  Even  thou,  0  my  weary  body  ;  even 
thou  shalt  be  made  glorious  like  unto  the  Lord  himself.  Thou  shalt 
rise  and  live  in  the  brightness  of  his  presence. 

All,  then,  that  you  can  possibly  want,  0  Christian,  is  in  Christ.  Yon 
cannot  conceive  a  need  which  Jesus  does  not  supply.  "  Wisdom,  right- 
eonsnesSy  sanctification,  redemption,"  you  have  all  in  him.  Some  gather 
a  flower  here ;  some  gather  another  there  ;  some  will  go  farther,  and 
pluck  another  there;  and  some  will  go  yet  beyond  to  grasp  a  fourth; 
but  when  we  win  Christ  we  have  a  posey ;  we  have  all  sweet  flowers  in 
one. 

*^  All  human  beauties,  all  divine, 
In  my  Beloved  meet  and  shine ; 
Thou  brightest,  sweetest,  fairest  one, 
That  eyes  have  seen  or  angels  known.** 

But  we  cannot  stay  on  this  tempting  subject,  though  even  amid  my 
present  pain  I  would  fain  talk  on  by  the  hour  together ;  and  therefore 
I  must  finish  with  the  last  point ;  and  on  that  only  a  word. 

You  see  then,  brethren,  our  very  existence  as  Christians,  and  all  that 
we  possess  as  Christians,  we  get  from  God  by  Jesus  Christ;  let  all  our 

fhry  then  be  unto  him.  What  insanity  it  is  to  boast  in  any  but  in  our 
lOrd  Jesus  !  How  foolish  are  they  that  are  proud  of  the  beauty  of  their 
flesh — worms'  meat  at  the  best !  How  foolish  are  they  who  are  proud  of 
their  wisdom  !  The  wisdom  of  which  a  man  is  proud,  is  but  folly  in  a 
thin  disguise.  How  foolish  are  they  that  are  vain  of  their  wealth ! 
He  must  be  a  poor  man  who  can  think  much  of  gold.  He  must  be  a 
beggar  indeed  who  counts  a  piece  of  dirt  a  treasure.  They  that  know 
Christ,  always  value  these  things  at  their  right  estimate,  and  that  is 
low  indeed.  If  any  glory — and  I  suppose  it  is  natural  to  us  to  glory, 
there  is  a  boasting  bump  on  all  our  heads — let  us  glory  in  the  Lord; 
and  here  is  a  wide  field  and  ample  sea-room.    Now,  put  out  every 


288  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

stitch  of  canyas,  ran  up  the  topgallants,  seek  as  stiff  a  breeie  as  70a 
will,  there  is  no  fear  of  running  on  a  lee  shore  here,  or  striking  a  rodL 
or  drifting  on  a  quicksand  !  0  men,  0  angels,  0  cherubim,  0  seraphim, 
boast  in  Jesus  Christ !  Wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification,  and  re- 
demption is  he,  therefore  ye  may  boast  and  boast,  and  boast  again !  Yoa 
will  never  exaggerate.  You  cannot  exceed  his  worth,  or  reach  the  tithe 
of  it.  You  can  never  go  beyond  the  truth,  you  do  not  even  reach  beyond 
the  skii*ts  of  his  garments.  So  glorious  is  God  that  all  the  angeb' 
harps  cannot  sound  forth  half  his  glory.  So  blessed  is  Christ  that  the 
orchestra  of  the  countless  multitudes  of  the  redeemed,  though  it  con- 
tinue for  ever  and  for  ever  its  pealing  music,  can  never  reach  to  the 
majesty  of  his  name  or  the  glory  of  his  work.  "  Give  unto  the  Lord,  0 
ye  mighty,  give  unto  the  Lord  glory  and  strength.  Give  unto  the 
Lord  the  glory  due  unto  his  name."  Let  time  and  space  become  greit 
mouths  for  song;  let  the  infinite  roll  up  its  waves;  let  all  creatnra 
lift  up  their  voices  in  praise  of  him  that  liveth  and  was  dead;  bat 
chiefly,  0  my  soul,  since  to  him  thou  owest  in  a  double  sense  thine 
existence,  give  thy  praise  to  him  from  whom  all  blessing  comes.  Oiie 
thou  the  homage  of  thine  intellect  to  him  who  is  thy  wisdom.  Let 
thy  conscience  and  love  of  rectitude  adore  him  who  has  made  thee 
righteous.  Give  the  tribute  of  thy  soul  to  him  who  sanctifies  thee; 
lee  thy  sanctified  nature  consecrate  itself  continually;  and  to  him  that 
hath  redeemed  thee  give  thou  never-ceasing  praise.  I  wish  it  were 
possible  for  me  to  rise  to  the  hei«;ht  of  my  text,  but  my  wings  flag; 
I  cannot  ascend  as  the  eagle,  and  face  the  full  blaze  of  the  sun ;  I  can 
but  mount  a  little  as  the  lark,  and  sing  my  song,  and  then  return  to 
my  nest.  God  grant  you  to  know  the  Lord  J  esus  in  his  fiihiess  in 
your  personal  experience. 

0  you  to  whom  Christ  is  no  wisdom,  how  foolish  are  you !  0  yon  to 
whom  he  is  no  righteousness,  you  are  condemned  sinners  I  0  you  to 
whom  lie  is  no  sanctification,  the  fire  of  God*s  wrath  will  consume  yon! 
0  you  to  whom  he  is  no  redemption,  you  are  slaves  in  hopeless  bon4^;e! 
(Jod  deliver  you !     May  you  be  led  to  put  your  trust  in  Jesus  even  now. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — 1  Corinthians  i. 


^Ir.  Spuroeon  cameatly  requests  the  prayers  of  the  Lord's  people  for  ho 
rostoration  to  heiilth.  He  has  now  been  laid  aside  for  eight  most  painful  weeb, 
uiid  at  present  there  are  rery  feeble  sig^  of  recovery. 


Twentieth  Thousand.     Price  Two  Shillings  and  Sixpence. 

FEATHERS  FOR  ARROWS ; "   Or,  Illustrations  for  Preacto 
and  Teachers,  from  My  Note  Book.    By  C.  H.  SPURGEON. 

"  A  treasury  of  fijnires  and  metaphors— and  plenty  of  them— from  Mr.  Spuneon*!  Note  S^k. 
which  he  has  done  well  to  redut*  to  280  pages  of  type,  for  the  benefit  of  Christian  worirera,  to  «*«• 
the  book  •  ia  now  presented  as  a  sincere  offering  of  hearty  brother-help.' »»— 2»e  Latter  Smm, 


>tr0pKten  i^akniarle 


A  NEW  ORDER  OF  PRIESTS  AND  LEVITES. 


DELIVEBED  BY 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT     THE     METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,     NEWINGTON. 


d  I  will  also  take  of  them  for  priests  and  for  Levites,  saith  the  Lord.*' — 
Ixvi.  21. 

chapter  is  surrounded  with  critical  difficulties,  and  yet  it  is  full 
ritual  instruction.  The  verse  before  us  is  by  some  referred  to 
les,  and  supposed  to  mean  that  the  Lord  promises  that  he  will 
out  of  the  heathen  nations  a  people  whom  he  will  make  into 
3  and  Levites.  Others  would  say  it  points  to  the  Jews,  rejected 
eir  unbelief  and  dispersed  in  judgment  amon<f  all  nations.  When 
>wn  Messiah  came,  it  was  not  with  a  devout  faith,  but  with  a  profane 
jation,  they  said,  "His  blood  be  on  us,  and  on  our  children." 
irse  they  invoked  did  come  upon  them.  The  retribution  they 
nged  has  been  meted  out  to  them  in  full  measure.    To  the  letter 

verified.  Have  you  never  read  how,  when  Titus  was  besieging 
ilem,  five  hundred  Jews  were  sometimes  crucified  in  a  day  ?  Do 
lot  remember  that  Josephus,  speaking  as  an  eye-witness,  said,. 
"$  wanted  room  for  crosses,  and  crosses  for  bodies  "  f  To  this  day 
children  are  scattered  in  all  lands,  and  have  found  no  rest  for 
les  of  their  feet.  But  they  are  to  be  restored  ;  they  are  to  be 
ht  back  to  their  own  land,  and  to  worship  God  in  his  holy 
tain ;  nnd  in  the  latter  days,  when  they  are  restored,  then  will 
ake  of  them  for  priests  and  Levites.    To  me  it  appears  of  very 

consequence  to  which  this  verse  refers,  for  in  Christ  Jesus  there 
ther  Gentile  nor  Jew,  circumcision  nor  uncircumcision ;  and  thi& 
se  seems  to  me  to  stand  good  to  the  whole  human  race  coubidered 

fallen  state.  "  I  will  take  of  them  for  priests  and  for  Levites^ 
the  Lord.**  Under  the  gospel  dispensation  God  will  select  both 
'  Jews  and  Gentiles  a  chosen  people,  who  shall  stand  before  him 
pally  as  the  priests  and  the  Levites  stood  before  him  typically, 
ink  for  a  minute  of  the  compass  of  this  great  promise.  Evidently 
1  honour  is  here  conferred.  The  connection  leads  us  to  see  thsi 
ily  a  great  promise  but  likewise  a  great  privilege  is  herein  implied. 
is  this  privilege  ?  Ic  is  that  we  shall  be  priests  and  Levites.  Now, 
.992. 


290  METllOPOIJTAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

the  priests  or  Levites  were  persons  set  apart  to  be  God's  peculiar  property. 
When  the  firstborn  were  spared  in  Eirypt,  God  claimed  the  firstborn 
to  be  his  own,  and  he  took  the  tribe  of  Levi  to  represent  the  fireUMRi: 
they  were  to  be  the  Lord's.  Though  all  Israel  belonged  to  God,  yet 
the  tribe  of  Levi  was  especially  selected  and  particular]?  appointed  to  do 
the  service  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation ;  and  of  this  tribe  of 
Levi,  chief  among  them  the  house  of  Aaron,  to  minister  in  the  sanctoaiy 
as  priests.  So  now,  glory  be  to  God,  he  takes  out  of  all  nations  a  peopte 
that  are  to  be  peculiarly  his  own — his  own  by  election,  as  he  chose  them 
— his  own  by  redemption,  as  he  bought  them — ^his  own  by  endowment 
through  the  regenerating  and  sanctifying  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
'^  They  shall  be  mine,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  in  that  day  when  I  make 
up  my  jewels ;"  his  own,  therefore,  before  time,  and  after  time  shall  close. 
'*  I  will  take  of  them  for  priest£  and  for  Levites,  saith  the  Lord."  Being 
thus  set  apart  as  the  Lord's  property,  the  priest£  and  Levites  lived  only 
for  divine  service.  While  others  were  engaged  with  their  trade  or  upon 
their  farm,  the  Levites  were  attending  to  the  tabernacle  or  templ^ 
and  the  priests  in  their  courts  were  slaughtering  bullocks  and  lambs; 
and  offermg  them  to  God;  or  they  had  other  duties  of  a  kindred  order, 
by  reason  of  the  charge  given  them  of  all  the  hallowed  things  of  the 
children  of  Israel.  Anyhow,  it  was  in  sacred  things  that  they  were 
occupied ;  so  now,  it  is  Ihe  duty  of  every  man  to  serve  the  Lord;  bot, 
alas!  man  will  not;  and  therefore  God  takes  unto  himself  a  people 
out  of  all  nations,  and  kindreds,  and  tongues,  and  he  ordains  them  to 
stand  before  him  continually,  to  wait  on  his  commands,  and  to  dolus 
bidding.  Thus  he  puts  upon  their  shoulders  his  easy  yoke  and  weights 
them  with  his  light  burden,  and  they  become  his  willing  servants— that 
their  life  may  be  for  his  glory,  and  that  their  desire,  as  well  as  their 
duty,  may  be  to  serve  him  with  heart  and  strength  so  long  as  they  have  I 
any  being.  In  this  sense,  then,  happy  is  the  man  who  is  set  apart  to  the 
divine  service,  a  priest  and  a  Levite  unto  God. 

Further  than  this,  the  priests  and  the  Levites  enjoyed  the  privily 
of  drawing  near  to  God — nearer  than  the  rest  of  the  people  in  that 
typical  dispensation.  While  the  people  stood  without,  the  Levites  are 
busy  inside.  One  of  them,  the  chief  of  the  tribe,  and  the  High  Priest 
before  the  Lord  for  all  the  tribes,  was  permitted  and  commanded  to  go 
into  the  most  holy  place  within  the  veil ;  and  you  know  that  the 
holy  places  made  with  hands  arc  figures  of  the  true,  even  of  heava 
itself.  In  like  manner  there  is  a  people  to  be  found  on  earth  at  Uiia 
day  whom  God  has  chosen  to  draw  near  unto  him.  In  Christ  Jesos, 
they  who  sometimes  were  afar  ott*  arc  made  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ. 
The'  same  precious  blood  that  is  applied  to  their  conscience  is  sprinkled 
on  the  mercy-seat;  therefore  they  have  access  to  the  Father.  Oh! 
happy  they,  who,  like  the  priests  and  Levites,  love  dwelling  in  the 
Lord's  house,  and  praising  him,  who  can  say — 

"  Ilert',  I^rd,  I  find  settled  rest 
While  others  go  and  come  ; 
No  more  a  stranp^er  or  a  guest. 
But  like  a  child  at  home.'' 

Lord,  thou  hast  been  our  dwelling-place  in  all  generations  :  we  are  a 
people  near  unto  thee,  made  nigh  by  affinity  with  the  Son  of  6od| 


A  NEW  ORDEU  OF   PRIESTS  AND  LEVITES.  201 

nigh  by  the  blood,  led  nigh  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  kept  nigh, 
oicing  to  be  nigh — for  herein  is  our  honour  and  comfort, 
iar  unto  God ;  made  priests  and  Levites,  because  claimed  as  God's 
prepared  for  God's  seiTice,  and  admitted  to  a  near  familiarity 
n.  There  are  some  such  to  be  found  in  this  place  to-day,  whom 
J  taken  from  among  the  Gentiles  to  be  priests  and  Levites  unto 
^it  priests  and  Levites  had  two  works  to  do :  something  to  do 
I  God  for  men,  and  something  to  do  towards  men  for  God.  They 
gaged  to  do  something  towards  God  for  men,  and  so  they  offered 
•ifices  that  were  brought  to  the  door  of  the  tabernacle,  whether 
ig  to  the  general  ordinances,  or  to  any  special  vowe.  Spirit- 
ainded,  they  were  much  engaged  in  intercession  for  the  rest 
el.  So  there  is  a  people  to  be  found  this  day  who  offer 
»d  acceptable  prayer  and  praise,  and  in  answer  to  their  prayer, 
)ered  blessings  come  down  upon  the  sons  of  men.  I  trust 
re  some  here  that  have  power  with  God  in  prayer.  Ye  are 
g's  remembrancers ;  ye  make  mention  of  his  name,  and  keep 
nee;  ye  cry  to  God  for  Sodom,  and  yet  more  hopefully  ye 
God  for  Jerusalem:  your  prayer  cease th  not,  and  God's  grace 
our  always  follow  it.  In  this  sense  God  is  constantly  taking 
n  from  amongst  the  vilest  of  the  vile,  a  people  whom  he  makes 
riests  and  Levites  for  men  towards  himself.  Another  part  of 
Ice  consisted  in  speaking  for  God  to  the  people ;  "  For  the  priest's 
)uld  keep  knowledge."  As  for  the  Levites,  they  were  as  ushers 
schools  and  tutors  in  the  families  of  Israel.  Amongst  the 
were  found  those  scribes  who  became  the  instructors  of  the 
the  copyists  of  the  law,  and  the  expounders  of  its  statutes  and 
ces;  ministers  who  opened  up  to  the  people,  as  Ezra  did,  the 
)ointsof  the  old  covenant,  and  expounded  the  word.  So  not  all 
I  the  same  degree,  but  all  of  us  in  a  measure,  are  to  be  teachers 
^8  revealed  truth,  even  as  he  has  taught  us ;  and  he  has  in 
ice,  and  throughout  the  world,  taken  out  a  certain  company 
le  has  made  to  speak  as  his  mouth  to  the  sons  of  men — men 
wn  choosing,  and  his  own  sending,  who  are  as  priests  and  Levites 
name.  They  claim  no  priestly  oflBce  as  though  they  could 
the  sinner :  they  leave  that  with  Christ,  the  firstborn  of  his 
3  house,  and  the  chief  rabbi  of  all  the  Lord's  chosen  seed,  but  as 
J  and  instructors ;  they  are  in  the  midst  of  the  world  the  priests 
ites  of  God.  I  have  thus  shown  what  the  promise  means.  God 
:e  out  of  the  Jews  and  Gentiles  a  people  whom  he  will 
ery  near  to  himself,  and  make  use  of  for  his  own  sacred 
8.  The  great  point  is  this.  It  seems  to  be  mentioned  here 
atter  of  surprise  that  God  should  take  any  of  them — of  the 
here  mentioned — of  the  sinful,  backslidinp:,  transgressing  Jews, 
le  blinded,  dark,  benighted,  heathen  Gentiles — that  he  should 
m,  and  make  them  to  be  priests  and  Levites  before  him.  Now, 
parallel  to  the  fact  that  God  does  take  some  of  the  most 
'  persons,  who  seem  to  be  the  most  unsuitable  of  all,  and  make 
be  his  faithful  and  honoured  servants  among  the  sons  of  men. 
I  shall  first  notice  that  fact ;  then,  the  reason  Jar  it ;  and  then^ 
ns/ram  it. 


lO'2  metropolitan  tabernacle  pulpit. 

J.  First,   I   notice   that   God   does,   to   the  astonishment  of  men, 

TAKE   SOME   WIIOJI   HE  MAKES  TO  BE  PRIESTS  AND  LeVITES  TO  HDISELF. 

This  is  a  fact.  Now,  there  are  priests  and  Lcvites  that  God  nevtf 
took.  Tiiere  have  been  snch  in  all  a<res.  There  were  those  in  the  dayi 
of  Aaron  who  said  :  *'  Ye  take  too  much  upon  you,  ye  sons  of  Levi  ;**  and 
when  thoy  stood  before  the  Lord  with  their  censers, "  the  earth  opened  her 
mouth  and  swallowed  them  up."  There  were  those  in  the  days  of  Eliia. 
When  he  stood  by  the  altar  of  the  Lord,  the  priests  of  Baal,  in  greit 
numbers,  stood  by  their  altar,  offering  prayer  to  Baal.  Ye  know  hot 
God  had  no  regard  to  their  sacrifice.  They  were  the  chnrch  established 
by  law ;  but,  for  all  that,  Elias,  the  Nonconformist,  put  them  to 
the  rout,  nnd  maintained  the  worship  of  the  invisible  God  of  Israel  fira 
and  faithful  to  the  end.  So  in  our  Saviour's  days  there  were  priesti 
and  Jicvitcs — men  taught  and  instructed  in  the  law,  and  these  wen 
tlie  very  men  who  conspired  together  against  him,  who  took  counsel  hov 
they  might  put  him  to  death,  and  who  stirred  up  the  people  to  say,  '*Kot 
this  man,  but  Barabbas."  And  on  down  to  this  present  day  there  an 
those  legitimate  priests  and  Levites— at  least,  those  who  call  themselfei 
so — whom  God  hath  never  taken,  upon  whom  he  hath  never  laid  hit 
hand,  upon  whom  his  Holy  Spirit  hath  never  descended;  who  speak, 
but  he  speaks  not  by  them  ;  and  who  administer  ordinances,  bat  he 
gives  not  grace  to  the  ordinances  by  their  hands.  And  such  there 
always  will  be,  doubtless,  till  Christ  cometh,  but  they  are  not  spoken  of 
in  the  text,  for  the  text  says,  "  /  will  take,"  and  it  is  only  those  what 
God  himself  takes  and  chooses  among  men  that  arc  the  real  priests  aad 
Levites  that  serve  him. 

Observe,  according  to  the  text,  men  have  nothing  to  do  mtii  the 
selection ;  for  here  it  is  said,  "I  will  also  take  of  them  " — not  "thar 
parents  siiall  bring  them  up  to  it ;  "  not  "  those  who  shall  be  looked  out 
as  the  most  fit  and  proper  men  on  account  of  some  natural  bent  ani 
bias,  or  gift  and  talent,  but  I  will  fake"  God's  priesthood  in  fl» 
world  is  a  priesthood  of  his  own  choosing,  of  his  own  setting  apart,  (t\ 
his  own  anointing.  ''He  hath  made  us  kings  and  priests  untoOcd.' 
The  church  is  a  royal  priesthood,  not  of  man,  neither  by  man,  nor  i 
the  will  of  man,  nor  of  blood,  nor  of  birth  :  it  is  of  God's  choosqi^ 
This  sacred  and  consecrated  band  of  priests  and  Levites,  and  all 
serve  God  effectually  and  acceptably,  are  men  whom  he  has  hi 
chosen  to  the  work.  He  himself  hath  done  it,  and  only  his  own  lil 
has  been  consulted  in  the  matter.  In  their  case,  it  appears  from  ' 
text,  that  whatever  was  unfit  in  their  character  has  been  overcome 
divine  grace.  "  I  will  also  take  of  them  for  priests  and  for  Levites, 
the  Lord."  If  God  takes  them  for  Levites,  he  makes  them  LeviteB ; 
he  chooses  them  for  priests,  he  makes  them  priests.  So,  glory  be  to " 
name,  when  he  chose  you,  my  dear  brother,  when  he  chose  yon,  my 
sist<3r,  to  be  his  servants,  to  be  his  priests  and  his  Levites,  he  gave 
the  grace  you  wnnted.  He  found  in  you  no  natural  fitocBS, 
suitability,  but  a  litncss  for  sin,  a  suitability  to  go  astray,  and  to 
come  a  brand  for  the  burning  ;  but  if  there  be  a  fitness  in  you  to 
him  on  earth  and  in  heaven,  it  is  his  grace  that  has  done  it  It  is 
grace  speaking  in  all  its  wondrous  majesty — "I  will  take  of 
for  priests  and  for  Levites  " — which  has  effected   in  you  the 


I 


A  NIIW  ORDER  OF  PRIESTS  AND  LEVITES.  293 

ransformation,  making  in  you  all  things  new,  and  thns  qnalifying  yon  to 
)ecome  the  servants  of  the  Most  High.  In  some  persons  this  natural 
naptiiude  and  unfitness  for  the  Lord's  work  has  been  more  apparent 
han  in  others.  They  have  been  men  of  rough  exterior,  unhallowed  life, 
heir  education  neglected,  their  passions  wild  and  lawless,  their  tastes 
ow  and  grovelling ;  yet,  for  all  that,  God  has  taken  from  amongst  such 
aen  some  who  in  an  especial  manner,  even  beyond  the  rest  of  God's 
lervants,  have  become  as  priests  and  Levites  unto  him.  He  has  some- 
imes  selected  women,  in  whom  there  seemed  to  be  no  suitability  for  his 
[nee,  to  make  them  matrons  in  the  church  ;  and  men,  who  seemed  to  be 
ringleaders  in  the  service  of  Satan,  to  make  them  very  captains  of  the 
[iOrd's  hosts.  They  had  no  inbred  faculty,  no  natural  genius  that 
(oalified  them  to  become  the  instruments  of  righteousness :  as  I  have 
Hid  before,  it  was  the  reverse  of  this.  Their  career  was  not  fore- 
dbadowed  by  any  instinct  with  which  they  were  bom ;  nor  was  it  aided 
\gy  any  training  they  received  in  childhood.  The  God  who  chose  them 
gave  the  grace  they  required  at  their  second  birth,  and  subdued  all  the 
ml  that  was  in  them  by  the  rich  discipline  of  his  spiritual  operations, 
Bi  order  to  qualify  them  for  efficient  service.  I  thank  God,  I  do 
ranember  in  my  soul  some  dear  brethren  who  have  been  made  eminent 
inmisters  of  the  gospel,  of  whom,  if  any  one  had  said  they  would  ever  have 

rehed  the  gospel,  none  would  have  believed  it.    Not  to  mention 
living,  the  men  of  to-day,  go  back  to  the  early  days  of  John 
Xewton,  an  earnest  preacher,  a  famous  evangelist,  not  to  add  a  sweet 

EL  Almost  a  model  for  the  ministry  was  John  Newton,  but  once  a 
spbemer  and  injurious.  Turn  farther  back,  to  John  Bunyan,  on 
,tte  village  green,  with  his  tip-cat  on  the  Sabbath-day,  with  all  a 
[inmkard*s  vices  and  sins,  and  foul-mouthed  in  his  profanity :  yet  John 
.]famyan  becomes  an  eminent  proclaimer  of  the  gospel,  and  the  author 
M  a  matchless  allegory  which  has  served  to  guide  many  a  pilgrim  to 
Wven.  Turn  farther  back,  to  Luther,  most  earnest  as  a  Eomanist  for 
jBl  the  letter  of  the  law,  diligent  in  every  ceremony,  superstitious  to  a 
Ugh  degree,  yet  afterwards  the  bold  proclaimer  of  the  gospel  of  the 
pice  of  God.  Turn  to  Augustine,  in  youth  of  corrupt  and  vicious 
jtopensities,  according  to  his  own  confession,  to  the  grief  of  his 
ther  Monica,  yet  called  by  sovereign  grace  to  be  one  of  the  fathers 
tiie  church,  and  a  notable  exponent  of  sound  doctrine.  Look  yet 
pitiber  back  to  the  apostle  Paul,  breathing  out  threaten ings  and 
■BD^hter  against  the  disciples  of  the  Lord,  like  a  huge  wild  beast, 
Wong  havoc  of  the  church,  but  suddenly  struck  down,  and  almost 
li  suddenly  raised  up  a  new  man,  and  ordained  (not  of  men,  neither  by 
|iniy  but  by  Jesus  Christ  and  God  the  Father)  to  be  a  chosen  vessel 
Christ,  to  bear  his  name  unto  the  Gentiles.  *'  I  will  also  take  of 
I,**  the  most  unlikely  and  unfit,  according  to  human  judgment.  "  I 
II  also  take  of  them  for  priests  and  for  Levites  unto  me."  And 
the  service  has  not  taken  the  form  of  preaching,  we  can  re- 
iber  some  whom  God  hath  made  eminent  in  prayer.  Never  account 
Ijrer  second  to  preaching.  No  doubt  prayer  in  the  Christian  church 
la  precious  as  the  utterance  of  the  gospel.  To  speak  to  God  for 
IS  a  part  of  the  Christian  priesthood  thnt  should  never  be  despised. 
1  have  heard  some  prayers  of  those  whom  none  would  ever  have 


594  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

expecUd  to  yray,  such  as  I  have  not  heard  from  those  who,  from  their 
youth  up,  have  been  accustomed  to  the  language  of  devotion — amoved 
with  energy  and  full  of  fervour,  like  Elijah.  Or,  shall  I  smj  it>  the? 
ha'rC  become  in  spiritual  force  nerved  as  Samson  was  with  physical 
strength.  In  their  })rayers  they  have  seemed  to  take  hold  of  the  pillars 
of  the  temple  of  Satan,  and  pull  it  down  upon  their  enemies;  they  have 
been  so  mighty  as  to  wrestle  with  God  and  prevail.  God  has  takoR  of 
them — that  is,  even  of  the  prayerless,  and  the  careless,  and  the 
blnsphcming — and  he  has  made  these  to  be  priests  and  Levltcs  unto 
him.  And  in  all  other  holy  service  I  think  I  can  recollect  eminent  men 
who  out  of  weakness  were  made  strong,  from  simpletons  they  were 
changed  into  sages,  or,  rescued  from  the  dregs  of  infamy,  they  became 
paragons  of  virtue,  in  their  unregeneracy  as  bitter  frait,  apples  of 
Sodoni,  that  crumbled  into  dust  and  turned  to  ashes,  yet  so  transformed 
by  the  renewing  of  their  minds,  that  they  bore  the  richest  clnsteis  of 
choicest  fruit  to  the  praise  and  glory  of  the  Great  Husbandman.  "I 
Avill  also  take  of  them  for  j)riests  and  for  Levites,  saith  the  Lori*' 
There  is  the  fact.  You  need  not  that  I  enlarge  upon  it  While  a  false 
priesthood  still  lives  (and  always  will),  God  has  his  elect  people,  who 
are  his  royal  priesthood  among  the  sons  of  men,  who  are  discharging 
regal  functions  and  sacred  offices  among  the  sons  of  men  in  his  name, 
and  before  his  face  ;  and  these  he  oftentimes  takes  out  from  the  least 
likely  of  mankind. 

II.  And  now,  secondly,  as  to  the  reason  of  the  fact.  Does  not  liedo 
this  to  display  his  mercy — his  great  and  infinite  mercy?  that  those  who 
have   provoked  him  to  wrath  should  become  the  men  in  whom  he 
should  show  forth  his  lovingkindness — men  to  be  pardoned,  men  to  be 
washed,  to  be  sanctified — and  then  men  to  be  put  in  trust  of  the  gospd 
of  Jesus  Christ — docs  not  this  reveal  and  illustrate  the  high  prerogative 
of  sovereign  grace  ?  "  Unto  me,"  saith  the  apostle,**  who  am  less  tbin  the 
least  of  all  saints,  is  this  grace  given,  that  I  should  preach  among  the 
Gentiles  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ."    It  is  a  great  grace  to  be 
permitted  to  preach  the  gos]X)l.     I  have  sometimes  said  to  you  that  when 
the  prodigal  came  back  to  his  father,  and  was  received  into  his  father's 
house,  no  earthly  parent,  though  he  had  quite  forgiven  him  all  the 
wildnessof  his  son's  adventure,  could  wholly  forget  the  waywardness  of  big 
disposition.    He  might  condone  the  past  without  confiding  in  him  fortlie 
future.    If  it  were  needful  to  send  one  of  the  sons  to  market  with  a  bag  of 
money,  the  good  old  father  would,  in  all  probability,  say  to  himself,  **I  will 
send   the  elder  son  with  it :    he  is   better  to  be  trusted ;  I  would 
hardly  like  to  put  such  a  responsibility  upon  the  young  lad  who  basso 
lately  been  reclaimed."     I  can  fancy,  without  uttering  a  word  to  his 
younger  son,  he  would,  discreetly  (as  you  would  say),  trust  the  otba 
with   any   weighty  concenis.     But  our  heavenly  Father — oh,  how  he 
forgivcsj  us !    He  leaves  no  back  reckonings,  for  though  we  used  to  be  such 
ftinners,  some  of  us,  and  so  injurious,  after  he  forgave  us,  he  committed 
to  our  charjre  not  merely  silver  and  gold,  the  perishable  resources  of  time^ 
but  the  priceless  treasure  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ :  he  allowed  M 
to  go  and  tell  to  others  **  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ."    See  je 
not  the  inijMire  jiiving  lessons  on  chastity,  the  intemperate  teaching 
chiistiiY  ?  and  mark  ye  not  how  he  who  persecuted  the  disciples  in 


A  NEW  ORDER  OF  PRIESTS  AND  LEVITES.  295 

times  past,  now  preacheth  the  faith  he  once  destroyed  ?  Oh,  what  dee]) 
mercy  there  is  in  Jesus  I  What  wonderful  grace  there  is  in  giving  his 
commissions,  that  those  that  cursed  him  themselycs  should  intercede 
with  him  for  others  ;  that  those  that  despised  him  should  be  permitted 
to  honour  him;  that  those  who  broke  his  Sabbaths  should  nevertheless 
be  helpful  to  his  people  in  hallowing  the  Lord's-day;  that  those  who 
despised  his  word,  and  put  it  behind  their  back,  should  be  the  men  to 
open  it,  and  display  the  sweetness  of  it  to  their  fellow  men  i  Is  not  this 
gi*ace?  Metliinks  every  time  Paul  preached  Jesus  Christ  he  would 
say  to  himself:  "  I  used  to  call  him  the  Nazarene ;  I  abhorred  him  and 
used  opprobrious  language,  but  herein  is  great  mercy,  boundless  mercy, 
that  he  should  take  me  to  be  his  servant,  permit  me  to  labour  for  his 
people  and  suffer  for  his  sake." 

Next  to  this,  do  you  not  think  that  the  Lord  loves  to  display  his 
power  ?  Men  who  are  tamers  of  wild  beasts,  will  frequently,  when  they 
have  subdued  a  Iron,  take  a  delight  in  showing  to  the  people  how 
obedient  that  lion  will  be  to  them,  and  how  every  word  that  the 
lion- tamer  chooses  to  say,  it  will  regard  and  pay  attention  to.  Tlius, 
when  the  Lord  takes  a  great  sinner,  after  he  has  tamed  him,  removed  his 
heart  of  stone,  and  given  him  a  heart  of  flesh,  he  desires  to  show  how, 
without  the  use  of  the  whip,  without  a  threatening  look  or  an  angry  word, 
he  causes  his  enemy  to  become  his  diligent  servant,  his  earnest  friend. 
0  brethren,  it  shows  the  power  of  love  on  a  man  when  he  is  so  broken 
down  that  the  things  he  sneered  at  he  now  preaches  with  all  his  might. 
Surely  it  showed  the  power  of  divine  grace  when  Paul  avowed  Christ 
openly,  and  vehemently  preached— exposing:  himself  to  persecution  and 
death — that  same  gospel  which  his  soul  had  previously  nauseated;  yea, 
which  his  zeal,  full  of  bitterness,  had  kindled  to  exterminate.  God 
takes  great  sinners,  and  then  appoints  and  qualifles  them  to  be  priests 
and  Levites,  in  order  that  he  might  show  the  exceeding  greatness  of  his 
power  to  usward  who  believe. 

Again,  does  not  God  do  this  to  show  his  sovereignty  ?  Can  we  ever 
forget  that  attribute  of  the  Almighty  ?  Divine  grace,  while  it  comes 
freely  to  us,  is  dispensed  freely  by  God,  according  to  the  good 
pleasure  of  his  will.  I  should  like  to  hear  tliat  text  thundered 
throughout  Christendom :  "  I  will  have  mercy  on  whom  I  will  have 
mercy,  and  I  will  have  compassion  on  whom  I  will  have  compassion.'* 
No  man  hath  any  right  to  the  mercy  of  God.  We  have  all  sinned  our- 
selves into  outlaw:  all  the  rights  we  have  are  the  right  to  he  condemned, 
and  the  right  to  be  cast  into  hell ;  all  the  rights  of  man  that  he  can 
appeal  to  God  for  in  equity  are  merged  in  the  wrongs  for  which  he  is 
responsible.  If  the  Lord  have  mercy,  it  is  his  own  will  to  do  it:  he 
can  withhold  it  if  it  pleases  him ;  so  he  selects  the  most  degraded, 
those  that  have  gone  farthest  from  him,  and  takes  them  into  his  church; 
nay,  morc,  advances  them  into  eminent  positions  of  service  in  th;it 
church,  that  all  his  people  may  know  that  the  Most  High  ruleth  in  the 
armies  of  heaven  and  amongst  the  inhabitants  of  this  earth,  and  none 
can  stay  his  hand,  or  say  unto  him,  **  What  doest  thou?  "  He  lifteth 
up  the  poor  from  the  dunghill,  and  setteth  him  among  princes,  even 
among  the  princes  of  his  people.  His  mercy,  power,  and  sovereignty 
are  displayed  when  he  takes  of  them  to  be  priests  and  Levites. 


296  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

But  does  he  not  thereby  secure  to  himself  the  most  loving  service  ? 
I  have  sometimes  thought  (I  hope  I  am  not  censorioas)  as  I  have 
observed  with  pain  the  superficiality  of  a  great  deal  of  what  is  called 
ministry  in  these  days — that  kind  of  supei^ciality,  I  mean,  in  which 
little  is  said  about  the  corruption  and  depravity  of  the  heart ;  little 
about  the  experience  of  the  child  of  God  when  under  the  law; 
little,  far  too  little,  about  the  glory  of  that  grace  that  takes  such 
worms  of  the  dust  to  make  them  one  with  Christ.  I  have  often 
thought  that  this  avoidance  of,  not  to  say  this  aversion  to,  deep  plough- 
ing, may  be  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  the  preachers  themselves 
probably  had  not  been  suffered  to  go  very  far  into  outward  sin;  had 
never  had  any  very  deep  law-work  upon  their  souls;  never  had  much 
awakening  of  conscience,  nor  felt  much  of  the  powers  of  the  world  to 
come.  They  got  their  religion  very  easily;  and  so  knowing  little 
of  soul-humbling  sensations  themselves,  they  could  not  go  very  deeply 
into  the  experience  of  the  children  of  God.  When  the  Lord  calls  a 
grievous  sinner,  to  make  a  gracious  example  of  him,  it  is  not  so.  The 
man  who  has  done  business  in  deep  waters  knows  what  sin  means; 
tortured  with  a  sense  of  his  own  crimes,  he  has  been  like  those  wretched 
culprits  who  surrender  themselves  to  justice,  because  their  conscience 
makes  liberty  chafe  them.  He  knows  what  pardon  means,  for  he  has 
found  peace  after  great  bitterness,  and  got  remission  after  the  gnawings 
of  despair ;  he  knows  what  the  conflicts  of  God's  people  are,  for  he  hag 
had  many  fierce  encounters  with  the  lusts  that  beset  him  within,  and 
the  temptations  that  assailed  him  from  without.  And  now,  when  he 
opens  his  mouth,  the  testimony  he  bears  is  from  an  inwrought  experience: 
he  speaks  of  things  which  he  has  tasted  and  handled  of  the  good  Word 
of  God.  John  Newton,  to  whom  I  referred  just  now,  could  not  do 
otherwise  than  livingly  and  lovingly  preach  the  Word  of  God.  You 
could  not  have  brooked  from  him  a  dainty  essay  or  a  flowery  sermon, 
because  nothing  else  would  have  consorted  and  accorded  with  his 
experience,  but  a  faithful  tale  of  the  way  the  Lord  had  led  him,  and 
a  forcible  exposition  of  what  the  Lord  had  taught  him.  He  had  been 
such  a  sinner,  that  it  must  be  grace  which  saved  him  ;  and  he  would 
have  belied  all  his  inward  feelings  if  he  had  not  proclaimed  the  grace 
of  God.  And  so  with  Bunyan:  if  he  had  not  tearfully  wept  over 
sinners  and  preached  Jesus  Christ  in  his  fulness,  as  the  Saviour  of 
Jerusalem  sinners,  he  would  have  been  opposing  all  that  animated 
his  own  breast,  and  all  that  burned  and  glowed  for  utterance.  God, 
therefore,  takes  some  of  these  men  who  have  gone  far  astray,  that  be 
might  have  warm-hearted,  intensely  earnest  men,  who  must  proclaim 
the  gospel,  because  they  have  felt  its  power  ;  who  love  much  because 
they  have  had  much  forgiven:  who  preach  of  grace,  because  they  need 
much  grace,  and  lift  up  high  the  brazen  serpent  amongst  the  sin- bitten 
hosts  of  men,  because  thev  have  been  sin-biiten  themselves  and  doremem- 
ber  it ;  they  have  looked  and  been  cured,  and  they  still  remember  the 
cure,  and  rejoice  in  it. 

Another  reason  why  the  Lord  takes  the  vilest  of  men  to  make  them 
the  saintliest  is,  that  he  might  openly  triumph  over  Satan.  How  the 
devil  must  feel  defeated  when  such  a  man  as  Saul  is  taken  straight 
away  from  persecuting  to   preaching!     Surely,   it  makes  Satan  bite 


A  KEW  ORDEE  OF  PRIESTS  AND  LEVITES.  297 

his  chains  and  gnash  his  teeth  when  he  loses  his  servants  so.  Just 
when  he  has  trained  them  up,  and  got  them  into  fine  condition  for  doing 
mischief,  incomes  the  officer  of  divine  grace,  arrests  them,  and  changes 
their  hearts.  You  know  none  ever  do  the  devil  so  much  mischief  as 
those  who  once  did  him  service.  They  know  the  ins  and  outs  of  his 
castle — where  to  attack  it.  They  understand  so  much  of  his  devices 
and  tactics,  that  they  become  all  the  more  powerful  adversaries  when 
they  are  converted.  All  heaven  rings  with  rapture  when  a  great  sinner 
is  saved;  and  all  hell  howls,  with  dismay  when  one  .of  the  arch  host 
bows  down  to  kiss  the  feet  of  Christ,  and  receive  the  mercy  of  God. 
Glory  be  to  God  when  he  takes  those  that  would  have  been  deepest 
damned,  and  sets  them  highest  among  the  saved  on  earth  to  be  priests 
and  Levites  unto  him.  By  these  means  also  he  secures  another  end :  he 
encourages  poor  penitents;  for  when  a  sinner,  under  a  sense  of  sin,  meets 
with  a  brother  in  Christ,  who  was  like  himself  once,  but  is  now 
living  near  to  God  and  serving  him  acceptably,  he  is  much  encouraged. 
"Why,"  he  thinks  to  himself,  "is  this  how  God  receives  sinners  when 
they  turn  to  him  ?  Perhaps  he  will  receive  me."  And  if  he  gets  into  con- 
versation with  one  of  those  whom  God  has  made  priests  and  Levites,  he 
says,  "  Tell  me  what  the  Lord  has  done  for  thy  soul."  And  the  minister 
being  a  man  of  like  passions,  and  having  had  like  experience,  delights 
to  describe  the  works  and  ways  of  God  with  hardened  sinners  and  old 
offenders ;  and  then  the  man  who  is  seeking  finds  in  the  other  a  guide 
who  is  touched  with  the  feeling  of  his  infirmity,  is  very  helpful  to  him,  and 
mnch  blessed  of  God  to  enter  into  the  secrets  of  his  heart,  and  lead  him 
to  the  cross.  If  there  be  here  some  great  rebel  against  God,  I  think 
he  ought  to  take  encouragement  thence  to  turn  unto  the  Lord  and 
live,  for  surely,  when  God  so  treats  his  most  defiant  enemies  as  to 
make  them  his  most  honoured  ministers,  there  should  be  some  comfort 
for  the  great  sinner  to  seek  the  Lord  while  yet  he  waits  to  be  gracious. 

And  do  not  yon  think  this  is  done  very  mnch  for  the  encouragement 
of  the  church  of  God?  I  know,  as  myself  one  of  its  humble  members, 
I  often  need  to  be  solaced  by  seeing  what  God*s  hand  can  do.  We  ought 
to  walk  by  faith,  and  so  I  trust  we  do ;  but  when  we  see  sinners  converted, 
it  gives  zest  to  our  fellowship  and  zeal  to  our  enterprise.  We  all  of  us 
feel  the  happier  for  it.  I  hardly  expect  to  see  so  many  converts  in  the 
Tabernacle  as  there  nsed  to  be.  We  have  had  so  very  many  brought 
to  God,  that  those  of  you  who  are  left,  I  almost  fear,  have  resisted 
OYerniuch  the  wooings  aud  warnings  of  love  divine.  Indeed,  there  are 
so  few  comparatively  left,  that  we  have  not  the  opportunities  we  once 
had  when  the  mass  of  the  congregation  was  not  converted.  Perad- 
venture  there  are  few  of  jou  whom  God  has  not  blessed.  But  I  do 
long  to  see  a  iresh  ingathering  of  converts :  it  would  make  my  heart 
glad,  and  it  would  make  all  the  church  glad  if  we  heard  of  some  gieat 
sinners  being  saved. 

I  pray  God  sometimes  that  he  would  save  a  great  multitude  of  the 
priests  of  the  church  of  Rome  and  the  church  of  England.  He  did  in 
the  olden  times  bring  a  gieat  multitude  of  the  priests  to  believe  the 
gospel,  Jind  why  should  he  not  yet  apain  ?  If  he  wills  to  call  to  himself 
some  of  the  lowest  of  the  low,  and  the  vilest  of  the  vile,  and  make  thera 
wonders  of  his  grace,  his  omnipotent  fiat  shall  be  instantly  obeyed. 


298  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Why  should  he  not?     Whv  should  he  not?     He  has  done  so:  whv 
Hhould  he  not  again?     He  has  done  so,  I  Bay,  and  the  text  says,  "7 
will  take  of  them  for  priests  and  for  Levites."    Why  should  he  not  go 
on  to  take  from  stranire  quarters  still  a  people  that  shall  serve  him? 
Docs  he  not  say  "  I  will "  ?     Suppose  it  should  ever  come  to  this,  as 
some  say  it  will,  that  the  churches,  many  of  them,  should  desert  the  old 
truths,  and  the  ministers  become  dumb  dogs  that  cannot  bark,  and  one 
by  one  their  testimony  should  be  silent,  and  every  candlestick  Rbonld  be 
taken  out  of  its  place,  and  the  whole  head  should  be  sick,  and  the 
whole  heart  faint,  and  Zion  be  under  a  cloud,  and  there  should  be  none 
to  help  her,  and  none  to  lift  up  the  banner  for  the  truth?    What  then? 
Why,  then  God  would  arise,  and  take  ajrain  from  the  fishermen  in  their 
boats  new  apostles,  and  from  the  lowest  dens  of  iniquity,  and  the 
worst  haunts  of  vice,  from  the  saloons  of  frivolity  where  the  rich 
resort,   and  from   the  chambers  of  commerce  and    the    palaces   of 
merchandise  where  buyers  and  sellers  make  their  contracts,  he  would 
take  a  fresh  staff  of  men.     Out  of  the  roughest  material  he  can  make 
the  finest  fabric,  out  of  the  newest  recruits  he  can  raise  the  noblest 
regiment,  to  show  forth  his  praise,  to  do  his  work,  and  to  secure  victory 
for  his  cause.     If  some  were  unworthy  holders  of  his  vineyard,  and 
brought  him   no  revenue,  he  would  put  aside  these  wicked  men,  and 
send  forth  fresh  labourers,  and  give  his  vineyard  unto  others,  for  he 
will  get  glory  unto  his  name ;  he  **  will  take  of  them  for  priests  and  for 
Levitcs."     Xever  say  it  is  a  dark  day;  never  say  God  has  forgotten  his 
church ;  never  give  way  to  despairing  fits,  and  dream  of  horrible  times 
coming,  that  vet  are  not  to  come.   Verily,  "  all  flesh  shall  see  the  salvation 
of  God,"  and  the  glory  of  God  shall  be  revealed,  and  all  flesh  shall  see  it; 
for  the  mouth  of  the  Lord   hath   spoken  it.    He  shall  arise,   and 
have  mercy  upon  Zion;    he  will  build  up   her  walls,  heal    all  her 
breaches,  and  once  again  shall  she  be  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth.    Take 
heart  and  comfort,  God  can  find  his  servants  anywhere.     Omnipotence 
hath  instruments  where  we  see  them  not.     He  "  will  take  of  them  for 
priests  and  for  Levites.*' 

III.  Lastly,  WHAT  is  the  lesson  from  this?  1  address  myself  to 
those  of  you  especially,  my  dear  brethren  and  sisters,  whom  the  grace  of 
God  has  taken  to  make  priests  and  Levites  unto  God.  You  are  near  to 
him:  you  serve  him.  What  effect  should  this  have  upon  you?  First, 
remember  what  state  you  where  in  before  God*s  grace  took  yon  in  hand. 
Then  consider  what  you  are  called  to  be;  you  are  made  priests  and 
Levites.  Then  ask  yourself  what  you  would  soon  become  if  his  grace 
were  to  depart  from  you  ?  Why,  as  you  were  before,  only  with  this 
difference,  tl^at  the  evil  spirit  in  you  would  take  unto  himself  seven 
other  spirits  more  wicked  than  the  first,  and  enter  in  and  dwell  there, 
and  your  last  state  would  be  worse  than  the  first.  Watch  then,  watch ! 
watch  !  God,  his  grace  enabling  you  to  watch,  will  preserve  you  to  the 
end.  Am  I  a  priest  and  Levite— a  holy  vessel  set  apart  before  God, 
serving  at  his  altar,  bringing  prayers  and  praises  to  him  ?  Ah  !  yes,  I 
may  I'C  a  priest  and  a  Levite,  but  I  should  be  a  devil  if  his  grace  did 
not  prevent.  0  watch,  watch,  watch !  "  What  I  say  unto  you  1  say 
unto  all.  Watch." 

And  oh,   ivhat  humility  this   vocation   of   God    should    produce! 


A  NEW  OEDEB  OF  PBI£STS  AXD  LEYITES.  299 

However  bigh  we  may  be  raised,  we  must  remember  whence  the  honour 
Cometh.  For  this  promotion  cometh  neither  from  the  east  nor  from 
the  west — it  is  God's  gift.  Thou,  a  blasphemer  and  injurious;  thou, 
a  careless,  godless,  Christless  man,  now  raised  to  be  a  servant  of  God, 
to  wait  in  his  courts,  and  honour  his  name,  be  thankful  that  thou  art 
lifted  so  high,  but  wonder,  and  fear  and  tremble,  for  all  the  goodness 
that  God  has  made  to  pasfi  before  thee.  What  am  I,  and  what  is  my 
lather's  house,  that  thou  hast  brought  me  hitherto ;  to  pray  and  my 
prayer  to  be  heard,  yet  not  worthy  to  lift  mine  eyes  to  the  place  where 
thine  honour  dwelleth ;  to  have  thy  -holy  Spirit  dwelling  in  me,  and 
yet  not  worthy  that  thou  shouldst  come  under  my  roof!  Be  humble, 
brother:  it  will  help  you  to  watch.  Watching  is  done  best  in  a  lowly 
manner. 

And  since  he  hath  taken  us  for  priests  and  for  Lerites,  let  us  do 
every  office  heartily  as  unto  the  Lord.  If  others  in  this  world  can  serve 
Gk)d  coldly,  yet,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  you  and  I  cannot  afford  to 
do  60.  We  were  such  sinners,  that  if  we  have  been  forgiven,  we  must 
love  him.  Those  that  had  little  sin  to  be  cleansed  may  not  have  much 
love  to  lavish  on  their  Redeemer.    Not  so  with  me  or  thee : 

**Love  I  most;  Tve  more  forgiven ; 
Tm  a  miracle  of  grace." 

Those  that  had  some  good  principles  instiUed  into  them  by  early 
training  or  some  sort  of  preparation  to  receive  the  gospel,  may  not  feel 
their  deep  indebtedness  to  the  wonderful  working  of  the  Spint;  but 
those  of  us  who  were  steeped  in  sin,  and  hardened  in  heart,  when  we 
are  saved  must  magnify  the  power  of  God,  and  moved  by  that  feeling 
we  must  serve  him  heartily  with  our  whole  spirit^  soul,  and  body.  A 
man  that  feels  what  grace  has  done  for  him  cannot  help  throwing  his 
whole  soul  into  it.  I  used  to  know  a  man  whom  I  often  heard  swear — on 
the  other  side  of  the  river,  in  the  town  where  I  was — and  when  converted 
I  recollect  his  prayers.  They  used  to  trouble  us  rather  :  they  were  so 
loud.  It  was  not  everybody  that  knew  the  reason  why.  He  had  been 
80  accustomed  to  swear  loud  that  he  could  not  help  praying  loud ;  and 
when  a  man  has  been  very  loud  for  the  devil,  he  cannot  help  beini^ 
loud  for  Christ.  Some  of  those  dear  Methodist  brethren  who  cry  out, 
**  Amen  ! "  so  stentoriously,  do  it,  I  hope,  because  they  feel  the  love  of 
God  in  Christ  on  account  of  what  great  things  have  been  done  for 
them.  Let  those  go  the  common  track  of  service  that  have  gone  the 
common  track  of  sin  ;  but  let  those  serve  the  Lord  with  all  their 
heart,  and  mind,  and  strength,  that  have  been  unusual  sinners.  Bring 
jour  alabaster  box,  0  great  sinner,  break  it  on  his  blessed  head  that 
pardoned  you.  Wash  his  feet  with  your  tears,  and  wipe  them  with 
the  hairs  of  your  head,  for  where  extraordinary  love  has  been  experienced, 
extraordinnry  love  ought  to  be  the  outgrowth,  and  extraordinary  service 
Ought  to  be  the  consequence. 

Once  again,  if  the  Lord  has  taken  of  us  to  be  his  priests  and  Levites, 
let  us  serve  him  with  great  thankfulness  and  joy.  If  any  people  should 
be  glad,  I  am  sure  it  is  those  people  that  feel  the  aboundings  of  his 
tncrcy  in  forgiveness,  having  heard  those  glad  tidings,  as  it  were,  from 
the  lips  of  Jesus  himself.    "  Thy  sins  which  are  many  are  all  forgiven 


300  METROPOLITAN  TABEBXAOLE  PULPIT. 

thcc:  go  in  peace."  They  have  something  always  to  stimnlate  their 
<rratitude  ana  rejrale  them  with  sunshine.  "  I  am  very  poor,"  saith  one, 
*'  bat,  never  mind,  poor  as  I  am,  I  am  iiot  a  drunkard  or  a  swearer 
now;  I  feel  weak  and  sickly  in  body,  it  may  be  ;  never  mind  that;  I 
have  not  the  burden  of  sin  upon  my  rouI."  Or,  **  I  am  unknown, 
quite  unknown.  I  have  nobody  to  come  and  see  me.  Never  mind  that ;  I 
am  known  to  God.  I  am  poor  and  neeuy,  yet  the  Lord  thinketh  upon 
me.  My  great  wounds  have  been  healed  in  Jesus'  precious  blood."  Why, 
you  have  always  cauRc  to  be  glad,  my  dear  brother  and  sister,  if  yon  hare 
hadyour  sins  forjrntn:  you  have  a  fountain  opened  in  your  scul  of 
lovp  t^  ChriB^  an '  joy  m  God,  quite  as  surely  as  there  is  a  fountain 
open  for  the  cleansing  of  your  sin  in  the  side  of  Jesus. 

So  let  me  close,  by  saying,  surely  we  ought  to  serve  God  with 
great  confidence  in  him.  If  he  has  made  us  priests  and  Levites 
to  him,  why  then  we  mav  trust  him  to  do  anything.  **  He  that  spared 
not  his  own  Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  all,  1  ow  shall  he  not  with 
him  also  freely  give  us  all  things?*'  He  that  has  done  so  much  for 
us,  as  to  take  us  out  of  the  miry  clay,  and  set  our  feet  upon  a  rock,  and 
put  his  gospel  into  o  ir  hearts,  may  be  trusted  for  the  rest  Suppose  a  man 
owed  you  ten  thousand  pounds  and  a  trifling  sum  besides  for  a  small 
promissory  note  he  had  given  you ;  if  he  paid  you  the  ten  thousand 
pounds,  you  might  trust  him  to  meet  the  little  bill  when  it  fell  due. 
And  when  the  Lord  has  given  us  so  much,  so  infinitely  much,  the  little 
tiiat  remains — tor  it  is  comparatively  little — ought  to  cause  us  no  anxieties 
or  doubts,  no  fears  or  misgivings.  "  Because  thou  hast  been  my  helpi 
therefore  in  the  shadow  of  thy  wings  will  I  rejoice."  He  who  found  me 
a  sinner,  made  me  a  pardoned  sinner,  put  me  among  his  children,  and 
numbered  me  among  his  honoured  servants,  has  not  done  all  this  to 
desert  me  at  last  and  put  me  to  shame.  He  has  not  been  at  this  expense 
with  his  poor  servant  to  fling  him  away  after  all.  No,  glory  be  to  his 
name  :  he  will  continue  his  work  till  he  has  perfected  it.  He  is  the  God 
that  perfomieth  all  things  for  me,  and  in  him  will  I  rest,  and  not  be 
ashamed,  world  without  end.    Amen. 


POBTION   OF   SCRIPTUBE   READ  BEFORE  SeRMON — Isaiah  IxVJ. 


Just  published.     Prico  Two  ShiUings. 

A    COLLECTION     OF    RARE    JEWELS.     From    the    Mines  ot 

AVILLIAM     GURNALL    (1680).     Dug  up  and  deposited  in  a  Caaket,  by 
ARTHUR  AUGUSTUS  KEES  (18.53). 

"Of  all  the  ruritans,  Gumall  is  the  b(st  iidaptrd  for  quoting.  IIo  is  sententious,  and  ^tliil 
Victoriul,  an«l  both  in  a  high  dtgrre.  (hir  beloved  friend  Mr.  Kees  has  made  his  selections  with  » 
•liHCcruing  eye ;  they  are  not  men»  clirpings  ut  random,  but  extracts  choM-n  with  jademcnt  Oar 
p>blihher.s  have  nunle  quite  a  hands-cme  book  of  these  *  Kare  Jewels  and  we  recommend  our  flrien»' 
to  order  it  at  once." — The  Sicord  and  the  Travel. 


TASSMORE  AND  ALABASTER,  Paternoster  Row. 


^ti[0|0iya:n:  SF^kmntb 


THE  NOETHEEN  lEON  AND  THE  STEEL. 


%  pennon 


DELXVEBED  BT 

C.  H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


'*  Shall  iron  break  the  northern  iron  and  the  steel  P** — Jeremiah  xv.  12.  , 

IE  prophet  Jeremiah  was,  as  we  saw  upon  a  former  occasion,*  a  man 
exquisitely  sensitive  character;  not  a  prophet  of  iron,  like  Elijah,  bnt 
arer  akin  to  him  who  was  a  man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  gn^ef. 
5  lived  in  times  which  were  peculiarly  tryinji:  to  him,  and  in  addition 
«  called  to  exercise  an  office  which  involved  him  in  perpetual  sorrow. 
a  loved  the  people  among  whom  he  dwelt,  yet  was  he  commissioned 
God  to  pronounce  judgments  upon  them;  this  in  itself  was  a  hard 
sk  to  such  a  nature  as  his.  As  a  loving  father,  fearful  of  Eli's  doom, 
esthe  rod  upon  his  child,  but  feels  each  stroke  in  his  own  heart  far 
ore  acutely  than  the  child  does  upon  its  back,  so  every  threatening 
>Td  which  the  prophet  uttered  lashed  his  own  soul,  and  cost  his  heart 
e  direst  pangs.  He  went,  however,  to  his  work  with  unstaggering 
•niness;  hopeful,  perhaps,  that  when  his  countrymen  heard  the  divine 
reatening,  they  would  repent  of  their  sin,  seek  mercy,  and  find  it. 
irely  if  anything  can  add  weight  to  the  prophecy  of  the  judgments  of 
od,  it  is  the  trembling  love,  the  anxious  fear  with  which  such  a  mes- 
nger  as  Jeremiah  would  deliver  his  warning.  The  deep  sorrow  of  him 
bo  warned  them  ought  to  have  driven  the  sinful  nation  to  a  speedier 
pentance;  instead  of  which  they  rejected  his  warnings,  they  despised 
8  person,  and  defied  his  God.  As  they  thus  heaped  wrath  upon  them- 
Ives,  they  also  increased  his  sorrow.  He  was  a  delicate,  sensitive  plant, 
id  felt  an  inward  shudder  as  he  marked  the  tempest  gathering  overhead, 
hough  a  most  loyal  servant  of  his  God,  he  was  sometimes  very  trembling, 
adthouph  he  never  ventured,  like  Jonah,  to  flee  unto  Tarshish,  yet  he 
ied  in  the  bitterness  of  his  soul,  "  0  that  I  had  in  the  wilderness  a 
>dging-place  of  wayfaring  men ;  that  I  might  leave  my  people,  and  go 
"om  them  I "  The  Jews  treated  him  so  harshly  and  unjustly,  that  he 
*Ted  they  would  break  his  heart ;  they  smote  him  as  with  an  iron 
^  and  he  felt  like  one  crushed  beneath  their  unkindness.  To  silence 
^fear,  the  Lord  assures  him  that  he  will  renew  his  strength.    **  Behold," 

•  "  Hidden  Manna,"  No.  980. 
Ko.  993. 


302  XETBOFOLITAN  TABERNAGLS  PULPIT. 

saith  he,  ''I  have  made  thee  this  day  a  defenced  cifey^and  an  iron  pillar, 
and  brazen  walls  against  the  whole  land,  against  the  kings  of  Judah^ 
against  the  princes  thereof,  against  the  priests  thereof,  and  against  the 
people  of  the  land.  And  thej  shall  fight  against  thee ;  bat  thej  shall 
not  prevail  against  thee ;  for  I  am  with  thee,  saith  the  Lord,  to  deHvar 
thee."  Thus  the  Lord  promised  to  his  servant  the  divine  support  whicb 
liis  trials  demanded.  He  never  did  and  never  will  place  a  man  in  a 
trying  position  and  then  leave  him  to  perish.  David  dealt  thos 
treacherously  with  Uriah,  but  the  Lord  acts  not  thus  with  his  servanU. 
If  the  rebellious  seed  of  Israel  were  iron,  the  Lord  declared  that  his  pro- 
phet should  be  hardened  by  sustaining  grace  into  northern  iron  and 
steel.  If  they  beat  upon  him  like  hammers  on  an  anvil,  he  should  be  made 
of  such  strong,  enduring  texture,  that  he  should  be  able  to  resist  all  their 
blows.  Iron  in  the  olden  times  amongst  the  Israelites  was  very  coarselj 
manufactured,  but  the  best  was  the  iron  from  the  north.  So  bad  was  their 
iron  generally,  that  an  admixture  of  brass,  which  among  ns  would  be 
thought  rather  to  deteriorate  the  hardness,  was  regarded  as  an  improYe- 
ment;  so  the  Lord  puts  it,  "Shall  iron — the  common  iron — break  the 
most  firm  and  best  prepared  iron  ?"  It  cannot  do  so :  and  if  the  people 
acted  like  iron  ajrainst  Jeremiah,  God  would  make  his  spirit  indomitablj 
firm,  that  they  should  no  more  be  able  to  put  him  down  than  common 
iron  could  break  the  northern  iron  and  the  steel. 

That  being  the  literal  meaning,  we  shall  draw  from  our  text  a  general 
principle.  It  is  a  proverbial  expression,  no  doubt,  and  applicable  to  many 
other  matters  besides  that  of  the  prophet  and  the  Jews;  it  is  clearly  meant 
to  show,  that  in  order  to  achieve  a  puri)08e,  there  must  be  a  sufficient 
force.  The  weaker  cannot  overcome  the  stronger.  In  a  general  clash 
the  firmest  will  win.  There  must  be  sufficient  firmness  in  the  instrument 
or  the  work  cannot  be  done.  You  cannot  cut  granite  with  a  pen-knife, 
nor  drill  a  hole  in  a  rook  with  an  auger  of  silk.  Some  forces  are  inade- 
quate for  the  accomplishment  of  certain  purposes.  If  yon  would  break 
the  best  iron,  you  will  be  foiled  if  you  strike  it  with  a  metal  less  hard. 

L  We  shall  first  of  all  apply  this  proverb  to  the  people  of  God  in- 
dividually.    Shall  any  power  be  able  to  destroy  the  saints? 

We  are  sent  into  the  world,  if  we  are  believers  in  Christ,  like  sheep 
in  the  midst  of  wolves,  defenceless,  and  in  danger  of  being  devoured, 
yet  no  power  on  earth  can  destroy  the  chosen  disciples  of  Christ.    Weak 
as  they  are,  they  will  tread  down  the  strength  of  their  foes.    There  are 
more  sheep  in  the  world  now  than  wolves.    There  are  parts  of  the  world 
where  wolves  once  roamed  in  troops  where  not  a  wolf  can  now  be  found; 
yet  tens  of  thousands  of  sheep  feed  on  the  hillside :   one  would  not  be 
very  bold  to  say  that  the  day  will  come  when  the  wolf  will  only  be 
known  as  an  extinct  animal,  while  as  long  as  the  world  lasts  the  sheep 
will  continue  to  multiply.     In  the  long  run,  the  sheep  has  gained  the 
victory  over  the  wolf.   And  it  is  so  with  Christ's  people.  They  appear  to 
be  weak,  but  there  is  a  force  about  them  which  cannot  be  put  down: 
they  will  overcome  the  ungodly  yet,  for  the  day  will  come  when  mightf 
truth  shall  prevail.     God  hasten  that  blessed  and  long-expected  day. 
Till  then,  when  persecuted  we  are  not  forsaken,  when  cast  down  we  are 
not  destroyed.    Many  Christians  are  placed  in  positions  where  they  ^ 
subject  to  very  great  temptations  and  persecntions ;  they  are  mocked, 


THB  KOttr&llBfJ  lJtO!Sr  AH]>  TH^  Wttt^*-  308 

langbed  at,  ridicnled,  called  by  evil  names^  PerseCfltid  one,  will  jron 
deny  the  faith  ?  Are  yon  going  to  pnt  aside  yonr  colours,  ftfld  relinouish 
the  cross  of  Christ?  *If  so,  I  can  only  tell  yon,  yon  are  not  maae  of 
^e  same  stuff  as  the  tme  disciples  of  Jesus  Christ;  for  when  the  grace 
of  God  is  in  them,  if  the  world  be  iron,  they  are  northern  iron  and  steel ; 
they  can  bear  all  the  blows  which  the  world  may  possibly  choose  to  lay 
upon  them,  and  as  the  anvil  breaks  the  hammers  in  the  lotig  nm,  so  ^ 
will  they,  by  their  patient  endurance  for  Christ's  sake,  break  the  force 
of  all  persecution,  and  triumph  over  it.  Do  I  speak^  to  a  young  ] 
Christian,  who  has  come  up  to  London,  and  finds  himself  placed 
where  he  is  continually  ridicaled?  Will  you  shrink  in  the  day  of 
trial  T  Do  you  mean  to  play  the  coward  ?  Shall  the  iron  break  the 
northern  iron  and  the  steel  7  Let  it  not  be  so.  Be  strong.  Qait  you 
like  men ;  and  in  the  energy  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  endare  as  seeing  him 
that  is  invisible.  There  is  no  need  that  we  should  fear,  for  amid  all 
dangers  the  love  of  God  shall  live  within  us  as  a  fire  unquenchable. 
*' Who  shall  separate  as  from  the  love  of  Christ  ?  shall  tribulation,  or 
distress,  or  perseoubicm,  or  famine,  or  nakedness,  or  peril,  or  sword  ?  " 
*^  Nay,  in  all  these  things  we  are  more  than  conquerors  through  him 
that  loved  us.** 

Besides  persecution,  we  are  called  frequently  to  serte  the  Lord  under 
great  difficulties.  There  are  supreme  difficulties  connected  with  the 
evangelisation  of  this  city.  To  stand  here  and  preach  to  such  a  congre- 
gation as  this,  so  large  and  so  oager  for  the  word,  is  a  pleasure;  but  every 
sphere  of  labour  is  not  equally  cheering.  Some  of  you  who  go  to  the 
lodging-houses  to  speak,  or  who  visit  Uie  alleys,  or  stand  up  in  the  low 
neighbourhoods  to  preach  the  word  of  life,  I  know  foil  well  find  it  any- 
thing but  child's  play  to  serve  your  Lord  under  such  conditions.  Yours 
is  rough  hedging  and  ditching  work,  with  very  little  in  it  of  rose- 
water  and  gentility,  and  very  much  of  annoyance  and  disappointment. 
What,  then,  is  your  resolution  ?  I  trust  it  is  this :  that  as  much  strength 
is  needed,  you  will  wait  more  than  ever  upon  the  strong  One  till  the 
needed  power  is  given  you.  I  trust  you  are  not  of  that  craven  spirit 
which  shrinks  at  difficulty  or  toil.  Will  you  give  way  before  the 
labours  demanded  of  you?  Do  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord  consent  to 
give  London  up  to  Satan's  rule?  Do  they  say  in  despair  that  its 
darkest  parts  cannot  be  enlightened?  Will  the  church  of  God  despair 
of  any  race  or  country  ?  Will  it  say :  "  There  is  no  converting  the 
Bomanist ;  there  is  no  ocmvincing  the  literate  and  crafty  Brahmin  ? " 
Is  the  iron  to  break  the  northern  iron  and  the  steel  ?  Will  we  not  rather 
take  a  firmer  grip  upon  Omnipotence,  and  draw  down  almighty  help 
by  the  blessed  vehemence  of  prayer  ?  What  are  we  at?  What  aileth  us 
that  we  are  so  soon  dispirited  ?  Is  the  Lord's  arm  waxed  short?  The 
apostles  never  thought  of  defeat ;  they  believed  that  the  gospel  could 
break  everything  in  pieces  that  stood  in  its  way :  and  they  went  without 
hesitation  to  the  work  which  the  Lord  sent  them  to  do.  'Twas  theirs 
to  dare  and  die  ;  questions  and  forebodings  were  not  theirs.  Into  the 
bloody  jaws  of  death  those  champions  of  Christendom  rode  on  with 
dauntless  courage,  and  won  the  victory.  And  are  we  to  give  way  under 
difficulties  ?  Are  we  to  be  as  reeds  shaken  of  the  wind  ?  You,  Sunday- 
ichool  teacher,  are  you  going  to  give  up  your  class  because  the  boys  are 


804  aCETBOFOLITAK  TABBRKAOLB  FULPIT. 

unruly  ?  Yon  in  the  Bagged-school,  are  yon  thinking  of  doamg  the 
doors,  because  as  jet  the  children  have  not  come  in  great  nnmbm,  or 
because  the  young  Arabs  are  as  wild  as  unbroken  colts  ?  Yon,  wbo 
i^tood  in  the  corner  of  the  street  the  other  night  to  preacii,  did  yon 
determine  neyer  to  stand  up  and  preach  again,  becanae  of  the  rough 
reception  you  received  ?  0  man,  be  of  different  metal  from  this  I  If 
God  has  called  you  to  do  anything,  do  it,  if  you  die  in  doing  it.  To  a 
man  for  whom  Jesus  died,  no  work  should  seem  hard,  no  sacrifice 
gricYOus.  All  things  are  possible  to  those  who  bum  with  the  love  of 
God.  There  is  nothing  but  what  you  can  make  a  way  through  if  you 
can  find  something  harder  to  bore  it  with.  Look  at  the  Mont  Cenii 
Tnnnel,  made  through  one  of  the  hardest  of  known  rocks ;  with  a  sharo 
tool,  edged  with  diamond,  they  have  pierced  the  heart  of  the  Alps,  ana 
made  a  passage  for  the  commerce  of  nations.  As  St.  Bernard  says: 
'*  Is  thy  work  hard  ?  set  a  harder  resolution  against  it ;  for  there  is 
nothing  so  hard  that  it  cannot  be  cut  by  something  harder  stilL"  Maj 
the  Spirit  of  God  work  in  thee  invincible  resolution  and  onconauer- 
able  perseverance.  Let  not  the  iron  break  the  northern  iron  ana  the 
steel.  Under  persecutions  and  difficulties,  let  God's  people  resolve  on 
victory,  and  by  faith  they  shall  have  it,  for  according  to  our  fEuth  so 
shall  it  be  unto  us. 

One  of  the  greatest  trials  to  which  the  people  of  God  are  subject,  in 
trying  to  serve  their  Master,  is  non- success.  The  seven  lean  kine,  as 
they  eat  up  the  seven  fat  kine,  sorely  try  the  believer^  faith. .  Alas  I  our 
disappointments  seldom  come  alone,  but  like  Job's  messengers,  followclose 
upon  each  other's  heels.  When  a  man  succeeds,  he  continues  to  succeed, 
as  a  rule ;  he  derives  encouragement  from  what  God  nas  already  done 
by  him,  and  goes  from  strength  to  strength.  Probably,  however,  there 
is  more  grace  exhibited  by  the  Christian,  who,  without  present  success^ 
realises  the  things  not  seen  as  yet,  and  continues  still  to  work  on. 
To  labour  is  not  easy,  but  to  labour  and  to  wait  is  harder  far.  It  is  a 
grand  thing  to  continue  patiently  in  well  doing,  confident  that  in  the 
end  the  reward  is  sure.  He  is  a  man  indeed  who  under  long-continued 
disappointment  will  not — 

**  Bate  a  jot 
Of  heart  or  hope,  but  still  bear  up  and  steer 
Right  onward. 

Such  a  man  "  plucks  success  even  from  the  spear-proof  crest  of  rugged 
danger."  The  well-annealed  steel  within  him  ere  long;  breaks  in  shivers 
the  common  iron  which  strikes  him  so  severely.  To  him,  to  overcome 
by  grace  is  glory  indeed. 

Some  of  the  greatest  works  that  were  ever  performed  by  Christian 
people  were  not  immediate  in  their  results.  The  husbandman  has 
waited  long  for  the  precious  fruits  of  the  earth.  The  question  has  been 
asked,  again  and  again,  "  Watchman,  what  of  the  night  7  "  Some,  no 
doubt,  have  had  to  labour  all  their  lives,  and  have  bequeathed  to 
their  heirs  the  promise  whose  fulfilment  they  had  not  personally 
seen.  They  laid  the  underground  courses  of  the  temple,  and  •tbers 
entered  into  their  labours.  You  know  the  story  of  the  removal 
of  old  St.  Paul's  by  Sir  Christopher  Wren.  A  very  massive  piece  of 
masonry  had  to  be  broken  down,   and  the  task,  by  pick  and  shoTel, 


THB  HOBTHXRN  IBOH  AND  THK  STEEL.  Z05 

m 

wonld  have  been  a  very  tedioas  one,  so  the  great  architect  prepared  a  bat- 
tering-ram for  its  removal,  and  a  large  number  of  workmen  were  directed 
to  strike  with  force  against  the  wall  with  the  ram.  After  several  honrs 
of  labonr,  the  wall,  to  all  appearances,  stood  fast  and  firm.  Their  many 
strokes  had  been  apparently  lost,  bnt  the  architect  knew  that  tbe^  were 
gradually  communicating  motion  to  the  wall,  creating  an  agitation 
Siron^hout  the  whole  of  it,  and  that,  by-and-by,  when  they  had  con- 
tinned  long  enough,  the  entire  mass  would  come  down  beneath  a  single 
stroke.  The  workmen,  no  doubt,  attributed  the  result  to  tihe  one 
crowning  concussion,  but  their  master  knew  that  their  previous  strokes 
had  only  culminated  in  that  one  tremendous  blow,  and  tnat  all  the  non- 
resultant  work  had  been  necessary  to  prepare  for  the  stroke  which 
achieved  the  purpose.  0  Christian  people,  do  not  expect  always  to  see 
the  full  outgrowth  of  your  labours  I  Go  on,  serve  your  God,  testify  of 
his  truth,  tell  of  Jesus'  love,  pray  for  sinners,  live  a  godly  life,  serve  God 
with  might  and  main,  and  if  no  harvest  spring  up  to  your  joyous  sickle, 
others  shall  follow  you  and  reap  what  you  have  sown,  and  since  God 
will  be  glorified,  it  shall  be  enough  for  you.  Let  no  amount  of  non- 
success  daunt  you.  Be  uneasy  about  it,  but  do  not  be  discouraged ;  let 
not  even  this  iron  break  the  resolution  of  your  soul ;  let  your  deter- 
mination to  honour  Jesus  be  as  the  northern  iron  and  the  steeL 

I  might  thus  enlarge,  but  I  have  so  many  other  things  to  speak  of, 
that  I  shall  pass  on.  The  pith  of  what  I  want  to  say  is  this:  if  any  dear 
brother  here,  as  a  Christian,  is  put  to  very  severe  trials,  he  may  depend 
upon  it  there  is  nothing  that  happens  to  him  but  what  is  common  to 
men,  and  that  there  is  grace  enough  to  be  had  to  enable  him  to  bear  up 
under  all.  There  is  no  need  for  any  one  soldier  of  God  to  turn  his  back 
in  tlie  day  of  battle.  It  is  not  right  that  any  one  of  us  should  consider 
himself  doomed  to  be  defeated.  The  Holy  Spirit  giveth  power  to  the 
weak,  and  lifts  the  common  warriors  into  the  ranks  of  the  mighties. 
Fulness  of  grace  is  provided  for  us  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  if  we  draw 
from  it  by  faith  we  snail  not  need  to  faiL  Let  us  not  be  slow  to  arm 
ourselves  with  the  divine  might.  Let  us  ask  the  Captain  of  our  salvation 
to  make  us  as  tough  in  the  day  of  battle  as  the  northern  iron  was 
beneath  the  blow  of  the  common  iron  ;  that  having  done  and  suffered 
all,  we  may  still  stand,  and  none  may  be  able  to  rob  us  of  our  crown. 

II.  But  we  shall  now  make  a  second  use  of  this  same  proverb.  It  is 
applicable  to  the  cause  of  God  in  the  world — to  the  church.  I  shall 
speak  but  little  upon  this,  for  time  would  fail  me.  What  power,  however 
like  to  iron,  shall  suffice  to  break  the  kingdom  of  Jesus,  which  is  compar- 
able to  steel  ?  We  eveir  now  and  then  hear  the  babyish  talk  of  persons  who 
say  that  the  gospel  will  die  out  in  England — that  Romanism  will  return 
in  all  its  darkness,  gospel  light  will  be  extinguished,  and  the  candle 
which  Latimer  helped  to  light  will  be  blown  out.  Atrocious  nonsense, 
if  not  partial  blasphemy.  If  this  thing  were  of  men  it  would  come  to 
nought;  but  if  it  be  of  God,  who  shall  overthrow  it  ?  It  has  sometimes 
happened  that  fear  has  been  the  father  of  the  thing  it  feared :  let  it  not 
be  so  in  this  case;  let  us  not  court  defeat  by  anticipating  it.  As  surely 
as  the  Lord  liveth  the  end  of  the  Romish  Antichrist  will  come,  and  the 
long-expected  angel  shall  cry  with  a  loud  voice,  **  Babylon  the  great  is 
fallen,  Ib  fallen,  and  is  become  the  habitation  of  devils,  and  the  hold 


306  MBTBOPOUTAK  TABSRISTAOLB  FULPTT. 

• 

of  every  foul  spirit,  and  a  cage  of  every  nnclean  and  hatefal  bird.* 
**  Rejoice  over  her,  thou  heaven,  and  ye  holy  apostles  and  prophets;  for 
God  hath  avenged  you  on  her."     Rev.  xviii.  2,  20.    Other  desponding 
prophets  foretell  that  infidelity  will  so  spread  through  all  the  cnarches 
and  the  fabric  of  society,   that  at  last  we  shall  see   this  oonntij 
without   a   gospel   ministry,    and    perhaps,  through   the   spread  of 
revolutionary    principles,  bereft  of   all  respect   for  law  and  order. 
We  are  to  go  down  by  way  of  Paris  to  the  foulness  of  Sodom,  and 
thence  into  Pandemonium.      Brethren,  let  those  who  will   believe 
these  evil  tidings,  I  am  not  greatly  moved  thereby ;  for  there  are  eternal 
principles  and  immutable  decrees  which  uphold  my  joy  fill  hopes.    Con- 
sider for  a  moment  what  is  involved  in  these  gloomy  forebodings. 
Then  the  gates  of  hell  are  to  prevail  against  the  church,  are  they? 
Then  Christ  is  to  be  defeated  by  anti-Christ,  is  he  ?    Then  the  pleasure 
of  the  Lord  is  not  to  prosper  in  his  band  ?    Who  said  that  ?    Who 
but  a  lying  spirit  that  would  lay  low  the  faith  and  confidence  of  the 
people  of  God?    It  is  no  more  possible  for  the  truth  of  God  and 
the  church  of  God  to  be  defeated,  than  for  God  himself  to  be  overcome 
in  conflict     Lo  1  Jehovah  girds  his  church  like  a  buckler  on  his  arm: 
this  is  his  battle-axe;    this  his  weapons  of  war;  and  if  you  can 
wrench  from  his  hand  the  weapons  of  his  choice,  then  may  you  lift 
up  the  shout  of  triumph  over  the  Eternal  himself.    But  it  never  can  be, 
for  who  shall  stand  against  the  Lord  and  prosper?     My  brethren,  we 
may  well  fear  the  crafty  machinations  of  the  church  of  Rome,  for  all  the 
subtlety  of  the  old  serpent  is  within  her  ;  but  with  the  wisdom  of  God 
to  meet  it,  there  can  be  no  alarm.    He  taketh  the  wise  in  their  own 
craftiness  :  there  is  no  device  nor  counsel  against  the  Lord.    We  may 
well  be  dismayed  at  the  insidious  attacks  of  scepticism  ;  but  while  there 
remains  a  Holv  Ghost  to  create  and  sustain  faith  in  the  world,  we  need 
not  fear  that  the  faithful  will  utterly  cease  out  of  the  land.    The  thou- 
sands will  still   be  reserved  whose  knees  have  never  bowed  to  Baal. 
Infidelity  and  Socinianism  have  ready  tongues,  but  every  tongue  that 
rises  against  the  church  in  judgment  she  will  condemn.     The  forges  of 
hell  are  busy  in  fashioning  new  weapons  with  which  to  assail  us,  but 
the  Lord  will  break  their  bows  and  cut  their  spears  in  sunder.     They 
may  and  will  defeat  the  dogmas  of  superstition,  but  the  truths  of  re- 
velation and  the  people  who  believe  them  they  can  never  overthrow. 
The  iron  will  never  break  the  northern  iron  and  the  steel.     The  church 
can  bear  the  blows  of  Ritualism  and  Infidelity,  and  survive  them  all,  and 
be  the  better  for  them  too.  See  what  the  cause  of  Christ  is.  It  is  truth: 
therein  is  victory.    Who  knows  not  that  the  truth  must  prevail  ?   There 
is  in  the  church  of  God,  moreover,  life,  and  life  is  a  thing  you  cannot 
overcome.     A  dead  thing  may  be  cut  in  pieces,  and  strewn  to  the  winds 
of  heaven ;   but  the  life  in  Christ's  church  is  that  which  has  defied  and 
overcome  Satan  a  thousand  times  already.     In  the  dark  ages  the 
enemy  thought  he  had  destroyed  the  church,  but  life  ciime  into  the 
monk  in  his  cell,  and  Luther  shook  the  world.    The  church  in  England 
fell  into  a  deadly  slumber  in  the  days  of  Whitfield  and  Wesley;  but  she 
was  not  dead,  and  therefore  a  time  of  awakening  came.     The  flame 
burned  low,  but  the  heavenly  fire  still  lingered  among  the  ashes,  and 
only  needed  the  Holy  Spirit  to  blow  upon  it,  and  cause  a  hallowed 


THE  NOBTHEBN  IRON  JLSJ)  THE  STEEL.  307 

ixmflagration.    Six  young  mea  in  Oxford  were  found  guilty  of  meeting 

to  pray :  their  offence  was  contagious,  and  soon  there  sprang  up  hundreds 

glorying  in  the  same  blessed  crime.    Earnest  servants  of  the  living  God 

were  forthcoming,  and  no  man  knew  whence  they  came  ;  like  the  buds 

and  blossoms  which  come  forth  at  the  bidding  of  spring,  a  people  made 

willing  in  the  day  of  God's  power  came  forward  at  once.    Seeing  that 

there  is  life  in  the  church  of  God,  you  can  never  calculate  what  will 

happen  within  its  bounds  to-morrow,  for  life  is  an  unaccountable  thing, 

and  scorns  the  laws  which  bind  the  formal  and  inanimate.    The  statues 

in  St  Panl's  Cathedral  stand  fixed  on  their  pedestals,  and  the  renowned 

dead  in  Westminster  Abbey  never  raise  a  riot ;  but  who  can  tell  what 

the  living  may  next  conceive  or  attempt?    Men  have  said :  "  We  will 

put  down  the  troublesome  religion  of  these  gospellers.    Build  pri>on8 

enough,  forge  chains  enough,  mSke  racks  enough,  concoct  tortures  infernal 

enough,  slay  enough  victims,  and  stamp  out  the  plague."    But  their 

designs  have  never  been  accomplished.    They  hatched  the  cockatrice's 

egg,  but  that  which  came  of  it  died.    They  burnt  the  gospel   out 

in  Spain,  did  they  not?    And  in  the  Low  Countries  they  erased 

the  memory  thereof    How  is  it  now  ?     Has  not  Spain  achieved  her 

liberty  at  a  blow  ?     Is  not  also  Belgium  free  to  the  preacher  of  the 

word?    Not  even  Italy  or  Eome  itself  is  safe  against  the  obnoxious 

heretic.    Everywhere  the  gospel  penetrates.    Even  the  earth  helps  the 

woman,  and  swallows  up  the  flood  which  the  dragon  casts  out  of  his 

mouth  to  drown  the  man  child :  political  rulers  restrain  the  violence  of 

those  who  otherwise  would  slay  the  saints  in  one  general  massacre.    It 

shall  be  so,  right  on  through  all  the  ages  till  Christ  comes — the  iron 

Khali  not  break  the  northern  iron  and  the  steel.    Glory  be  to  God,  we 

have  confidence  in  this,  and  in   the  name  of  God  we  set  up  our 

banner.    This,  too,  is  a  pleasing  theme;  but  we  must  leave  it  and  pass 

on  to  another. 

III.  We  may  apply  the  principle  to  a  very  different  matter  indeed — 

THl  SELF-RIGHTEOUS  EFFORTS  WHICH  MEN  MAKE  FOR  THEIR  OWN  SALVA- 
TION. We  may  remind  them  that  the  iron  will  never  break  the  northern 
iron  and  the  steel.  The  bonds  of  guilt  are  not  to  be  snapped  by  a 
merely  human  power.  Here  is  a  man  with  the  fetters  of  his  trans- 
greggions  about  him,  but  **  he  will  get  them  off,"  he  says  :  prayer  shall 
be  his  file;  tears  shall  be  the  aquafortis  to  dissolve  the  metal,  and  his 
own  resoluc  ions  shall,  like  a  hammer,  dash  the  links  in  fragments.  But 
it  cannot  be:  the  iron  shall  never  break  this  northern  iron  and  the  steel. 
Habits  of  sin  yield  not  to  raspings  of  the  unregenerate  resolves.  You  are 
,  condenmed,  and  only  Christ  the  Son  of  God  can  set  you  free  from  the 
fetters  which  hold  you  in  the  condemned  cell.  All  your  efforts  apart 
from  Jesus  are  utterly  useless.  He  must  bring  liberty — you  cannot 
WBiancipate  yourselves.  You  say  that  you  will  break  off  the  chains  of 
«'il  habit.  There  are  some  you  can  break  off,  but  can  you  alter  your 
^nre?  *'  Can  the  Ethiopian  change  his  skin,  or  the  leopard  his  spots?** 
That  were  an  easy  task  compared  with  a  man  renewing  his  own  heart. 
The  imaginations  of  the  thoughts  of  your  heart  are  evil,  only  evil,  and 
tliat  continually,  and  do  what  you  will  they  will  remain  so.  The  dead 
J>iinot  give  themselves  life :  it  needs  superior  power  to  hew  off  the 
^rn  which   hold   you  prisoner   in  the  sepulchre  of  your  natural 


I 


308  METBOFOLITAN  TABERNACiLE  PULPIT. 

death.  Tour  iron  can  never  break  the  northern  iron  and  the  steel  whidi 
bind  jou  to  the  slavery  of  hell.  Do  you  think  to  force  your  waj 
to  heaven  by  ceremony  7  Do  you  imagine  that  baptism  can  wash  ava? 
your  sin,  that  confirmation  can  convey  to  you  ^rnce,  that  ontwaid 
ceremonies  of  man*s  devising,  or  of  God's  instituting  can  delitcr 
you  from  wrath?  Believe  no  such  thing;  there  is  no  potency  in  tD 
these  to  deliver  you  from  the  bonds  which  hold  you.  The  iron  cannot 
break  the  northern  iron  and  the  steel  Come,  sinner,  with  thy  fetteru, 
and  lay  thy  wrist  here  at  the  cross-foot,  where  Christ  can  break  the  iioa 
at  once.  Come,  bring  thyself,  chained  as  thou  art,  to  him,  or  if  tboa 
canst  nut  stir  an  inch,  cry  out  to  him  !  Ask  him  to  deliver  thee !  He 
can  do  it.  Trust  in  him,  for  trust  in  his  precious  blood  and  reliamt 
upon  his  perfect  sacrifice  will  make  thee  a  free  man  in  a  moment,  nevar 
to  be  a  bondslave  again.  But,  oh,  let  not  thy  puny  strength  be  wasted 
on  so  futile  an  effort  as  that  which  aims  at  self-salvation ;  how  shill 
weakness  achieve  the  labour  of  omnipotence,  or  death  accomplish  the 
sublimest  miracle  of  the  Immortal  ?  Remember  the  work  of  salvation; 
think  how  great  it  is,  how  worthy  of  a  God ;  and  then  cease  utterly 
from  all  self-reliance,  for  it  is  madness  and  blasphemy.  Where  were  i}k 
need  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  if  you  could  regenerate  yourself?  Where 
would  there  be  room  for  a  display  of  the  power  (»f  sovereign  grace,  if 
man's  will  and  effort  could  accomplish  all  ?  But  I  leave  that  topics 
also,  and  pass  on  to  another  consideration. 

IV.  This  same  text  is  api)licable  to  the  case  of  any  persons  who  are 
making  self-reliant  efforts  for  the  good  of  others.  How  painfully 
are  we  made  to  feel,  my  brethren,  after  every  series  of  our  special  services 
at  this  Tabernacle,  that  we  of  ourselves  can  do  nothing!  How  are  we 
driven  to  the  conclusion  that  it  is  not  by  might  nor  by  power,  but  by  the 
Spirit  of  God,  and  by  the  Spirit  of  God  alone  I  Man's  heart  is  veiy 
hard  ;  it  is  like  the  northern  iron  and  the  steel.  Our  preaching — we  try 
to  make  it  forcible,  but  how  i)OwerKss  is  it  of  itself!  .  The  preacher 
seeks  goodly  words  and  illustraticns;  he  brinj:s  forth  the  law  of  God, 
he  gives  forth  thrcatenings  in  God's  name  ;  he  reas(»n8  concerning 
judgment  to  come,  and  flinches  not  from  declaring  the  eternal  punish- 
ment of  sin  ;  he  preaches  the  love  of  God,  and  the  infinite  mercy  of 
Christ  Jesus,  and  he  blends  all  this  with  an  affection  which  lon^s  for 
conversion,  and  he  prays  for  God's  blessing;  but  in  many  many  hearts 
there  is  no  change,  the  northern  iron  and  the  steel  remain  unmovable. 
We  call  spirits  from  the  vasty  deep  of  their  lost  estate,  but  thev  come  not 
at  our  bidding.  We  plead  with  sinners  to  be  reconciled  to  God, 
and  we  beseech  them  as  though  God  himself  besought  them  by  ns; 
but  they  remain  unreconciled;  they  are  even  the  more  obdurate  in 
iniquity.  The  cries  and  tears  of  a  Whitfield  would  not  avail.  Though 
all  the  apostles  reasoned  with  them  they  would  turn  to  them  a 
deaf  ear.  Herein  the  best  adapted  means  cannot  break  the  northern 
iron  and  the  steel.  With  seme  of  you  an  instrumentality  has  been 
used  which  ought  to  have  been  more  prolific  of  results.  A  mother's 
tears,  to  your  knowledge,  have  been  shed  for  you.  How  affec- 
tionately has  she  spoken  to  you  of  the  Saviour,  whom  she  loves: 
but  powerful  as  your  mother's  pleadings  would  be  on  any  other  pointy 
yon  reject  them  in  the  matter  of  your  soul.    How  would  it  make  jon 


'TBJi  NORTHBBK  IBOH  AKD  THE  BTEBL.  309 

^y-headed  man,  your  father,  rejoice  if  be  might  see  jon  saved !    In 
other  matters  this  also  would  haye  weight  with  yon,  but  it  has  none  in 
this.    You  have  had  the  gospel,  too,  some  of  you,  put  to  you  very,  very 
tenderly  by  those  whom  you  love  best,  but  you  are  unsaved  still.    There 
eonld  be  no  better  means  than  human  love  sanctified  and  strengthened 
by  indwelling  grace ;  it  has  been   strong  as  iron,  and  would  have 
broken  any  ordinary  heart,  but  it  has  not  crushed  yours,  for  it  is  hard 
as  the  northern  iron  and  the  steel.    Ay,  and  you  have  been  sick ;  yon 
have  been  stretched  upon  the  bed  with  fever,  within  a  hair's  breadth 
of  hell ;  or  you  have  been  at  sea,  and  escaped  as  with  the  skin  of  your 
teeth  from  shipwreck;  bnt  even  the  judgments  of  God  have  not  aroused 
you.    The  iron  has  not  broken  the  northern  iron  and  the  steel.    This 
month,  to  some  of  you,  there  have  been  addresses  delivered  pointedly, 
plaintively,  which  should  have  moved  a  rock.   I  have  been  present  at  some 
of  the  meetings,  when  I  have  heard  certain  of  our  brethren  speak  in  a 
way  that  made  me  inwardly  say,  "  Surely  these  careless  ones  will  yield 
to  that."    There  has  been  mnch  sighing  and  crying  for  your  souls ;  and 
70U  have  been  spoken  with  personally,  many  of  you;  a  kind  hand  has 
been  put  upon  your  wrist,  and  with  tearful  eye,  brother  and  sister  have 
looked  into  your  face,  and  told  you  of  your  danger  and  of  your  remedy. 
Oh  I  if  this  does  not  save  you,  what  will  ?  "  What  shall  I  do  unto  thee?  *' 
**  0  Ephraim,  what  shall  I  do  unto  thee  ?  "  What  other  instrumentality 
Can  be  employed?    The  iron  will  not  break  the  northern  iron  and  the 
steel.     Children  of  God,  you  are  driven  to  this,  that  here  is  a  case  in 
irhich  you  are  powerless.    You  might  as  well  reverse  the  wind,  or  move 
a  Btar,  or  create  a  world,  as  soften  these  hardened  hearts.    What  are 
fon  then  to  do  ?    Certainly,  you  are  to  continue  the  effort ;   nothing 
must  tempt  you  to  relinquish  it,  or  even  to  relax  your  zeal.    If  you  (can- 
not break  the  heart,  truly  it  is  no  business  of  yours  to  do  so  ;  commit 
that  work  to  him  who  is  fully  equal  to  the  miracle,  keep  to  your  work, 
ind  fear  not  that  the  Lord  will  work  with  you.    God  bids  you  continue 
prayer,  warning,  instruction,  and  invitation.    If  you  knew  that  every 
Boul  you  preached  to  or  talked  with  would  be  lost,  it  were  no  less  your 
duty  to  preach  the  gospel ;  for  the  duty  to  tell  out  the  gospel  is  not 
influenced  by  oar  success,  but  is  based  upon  the  commission  of  Christ : 
**  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature."     It 
is  not  Ezekiel's  duty  to  make  the  dry  bones  live ;  but  whether  they  live 
or  not,  it  is  his  duty  to  prophesy  upon  them.    Noah  was  none  the  less  a 
preacher  of  righteousness  because  none,  save  his  own  family,  listened  to 
his  appeals  and  sought  shelter  with  him  in  the  ark.     Go  on  with  your 
work ;  but  let  a  sense  of  your  personal  inability  make  you  fall  back  upon 
your  God.    Let  it  keep  you  from  one  self-reliant  prayer  or  word,  much 
more  from  one  self-confident  sermon  or  address.    Every  time  we  try  to 
do  good  in  our  own  strength,  the  effort  bears  the  certainty  of  defeat  in 
its  own  bowels.    You  shoot  pointless  darts;  you  wield  a  blunted  sword 
then  you  go  to  work  for  God  without  God.     It  is  only  when  we  ^o 
in  God's  power  that  we  can  save  souls.    "  Except  the  Lord  build  the 
koose,  they  labour  in  vain  that  build  it :  except  the  Lord  keep  the  city, 
fte  watchman   waketh  but  in  vain."     Lo,  spiritual  children   are   a 
heritage  of  the  Lord,  and  the  fruit  of  our  soul's  womb  is  his  reward, 
^ed  your   weakness,  my  brethren,  and  then  you  shall  know  your 


810  KETBOFOLITAN  TABEBNACLS  PULPIT. 

fitrenp^th.    Go  to  the  sinner  in  God's  strenfi^th,  and  then  shall  yon  uf 
the  divine  operation ;  bnt  certainly  not  till  then.    What  a  blessing  it  his 
been  to  some  of  ns  at  times  to  be  made  to  lie  Tery  low  in  the  diut, 
and  see  what  unworthy  creatures  we  are  !    I  have  often  noticed  that 
when  God  intends  to  give  a  great  blessing  upon  my  ministry,  and 
to  let  me  know  it,  he  usually  makes  me  feel  as  if  I  had  rather  die 
than  live,  because  I  feel  myself  so  utterly  unworthy  to  preach  his  word, 
and  am  made  to  bemoan  my  wretched  unfitness  to  be  used  at  all  by  mr 
gracious  Master.    Let  the  stone  lie  in  the  brook,  and  let  it  be  roundej, 
and  made  smooth  by  trituration  of  the  water — it  will  do  nothing  of 
itself;  but  when  it  has  been  worn  away  enough  by  the  brook,  and 
David  slings  it,  and  smites  the  giant's  brow,  the  stone  cannot  say,"! 
slew  the  giant  by  my  own  force  ; "  but  all  men  will  give  glory  to  the 
champion  who  hurled  it  at  the  giant's  forehead.    Yes,  God  will  hate 
the  glory,  and  he  will  take  means  to  prevent  us  from  usurping  it 
He  will  make  us  feel  that  the  iron  cannot  break  the  northern  iron  and 
the  steel,  and  then  he  will  send  us  forth  to  victory.     Truly  my  inmost 
heart  confesses   that  if  one  heart  has  been  won  for  my  Lord  Jesu 
by  me,  I  am  less  than  nothing  in  it,  and  he  is  all  in  all.    Mj  booI 
dares  not  touch  the  glor^,  but  loathes  every  thought  of  self-praiat 
He  hath  done  it,  and  to  him  be  everlasting  senses. 

V.  But  now  I  must  close — time  warns  me  to  do  so— by  remarking  that 
this  text  has  A  very  solemn  application  to  all  those  who  aei 
REBEi^  AGAINST  GoD.  Men  somctimcs  think  themselves  of  very  great 
consequence.  I  spoke  with  one  some  years  ago  who  had  professed  to  be 
a  Christian,  who  addressed  me  very  indignantly  after  some  little  argument, 
and  said  tliat  ere  long  he  intended  to  produce  a  pamphlet  which  woald 
extinguish  Oliristianity.  I  remember  making  the  remark,  that  I  dared 
to  say  that  the  world  would  hear  as  much  about  it  as  when  a  fly  fell  into 
a  pail  of  water  and  was  drowned,  and  not  much  more.  And  then  he 
was  more  indignant  still ;  but  I  told  him  I  had  seen  many  a  moth  dash 
against  my  gas-burner  in  the  evening,  but  1  had  never  seen  the  light 
put  out,  thougli  I  had  seen  the  wretched  insect  fall  with  singed  winga 
upon  my  table,  to  suffer  for  its  fatal  folly ;  and  I  feared  that  such  a  faie 
would  hapj)eu  to  him.  So  rest  assured  it  will  be  to  you,  0  blasphemer 
of  God,  or  hater  of  his  Christ.  Fight  against  God,  would  you  ?  Measare 
your  adversary,  I  charge  you.  The  wax  is  about  to  wrestle  with  the  flame: 
the  tow  is  about  to  contend  with  the  Are.  It  is  too  unequal  a  warfare. 
If  you  are  wise,  you  will  select  another  adversary,  and  not  attempt  to  go 
to  war  with  the  omni^wtent  King,  with  such  a  puny  force  as  yonrSi 
"  Hast  tliou  an  arm  like  God  ?  or  canst  thou  thunder  with  a  voice  like 
him  ?"  You  may  be  like  iron :  go  and  break  the  potsherds  of  the  earth; 
they  are  fair  game  for  you;  but  do  not  contend  against  the  northern 
iron  and  the  steel,  for  these  will  break  you.  You  will  not  be  able  to 
deprive  Christ  of  a  single  atom  of  his  glory.  You  may  blaspheme, 
but  even  that  shall,  somehow  or  other  by  a  holy  alchemy,  be  turned 
to  his  glorv.  You  cannot  thwart  his  decrees.  The  great  wheels 
of  his  pruvidenco  grind  on,  and  woe  to  him  who  throws  himself  in 
their  track  ;  they  will  surely  grind  him  to  powder.  The  huge  Matte^ 
horn  lilts  its  colossal  head  above  the  clouds.  Who  will  may  speak 
against  it;  but  it  bows  not  its  giant  form ;  and  no  matter  what  of  snov 


THE  NOBTHEBH  IBOH  AND  THE  STEEL.  311 

and  sleet  may  dash  against  its  ramparts,  there  it  stands,  still  the  same; 
emblem  herein  of  the  great  throne  of  the  Eternal,  firm  and  immutable, 
though  all  the  universe  storm  a,t  its  foot.  To  resist  God  is  to  strike 
with  naked  feet  against  a  goad.  '*  It  is  hard  for  thee  to  kick  against 
the  pricks."  You  will  hart  yourself ;  you  cannot  injure  Ijim,  nor  change 
his  purposes  by  so  much  as  the  turning  of  a  hair.  God  will  have  his  way : 
none  shall  resist  his  will.  Everlasting  and  eternal  are  his  decrees ;  and 
fast  and  fixed  they  evemnnst  remain,  though  all  earth  and  hell  should 
unite  in  one  great  conspiracy.  He  thrusts  a  bit  into  the  tempest*s 
mouth,  and  rides  upon  the  wings  of  the  wind.  Confusion  there  is  none 
to  him.  Adversaries,  what  are  they?  They  are  utterly  consumed  as 
the  stubble.  But  take  ye  heed  that  God  come  not  out  against  you,  ye 
vrho  are  rebels ;  for  if  he  once  put  on  the  war-harness,  and  fight  against 
you,  woe  unto  you  I  Have  you  not  heard  ?  Hath  no  one  told  you  of 
the  arrows  of  his  quiver  ?  They  are  sharp,  heart-piercing,  infallible. 
Sickness  can  shake  you  till  every  nerve  shall  become  a  road  for  pain  to 
carry  on  its  dreadful  trafiic.  Foverty  can  come  upon  you,  ana  want, 
like  an  armed  man.  Death  shall  strike  down  all  your  lovers,  and  your 
acQuaintances  shall  sink  into  the  abyss.  Let  God  but  come  forth  in 
juagment  against  a  man,  or  a  people,  and  what  can  he  not  do  ?  Look 
at  the  nation  across  the  Channel,  and  see  how  God  hath  dealt  with  it. 
Turn  to  any  other  nation  against  whom  his  fiat  has  gone  forth,  and  read 
the  story  of  its  overthrow.  What  can  emperors  do,  and  what  their 
imperial  guards,  and  what  their  novel  instruments  of  war,  and  what 
their  death-dealing  machines,  that  were  to  mow  down  thousands  in  an 
hour  7  He  that  sitteth  in  the  heavens  doth  laugh  ;  the  Lord  doth  have 
them  in  derision.  He  hath  broken  the  bow  and  cut  the  spear  in  sunder ; 
he  hath  burned  the  chariot  in  the  fire.  Contend  no  more  against  the 
Almighty :  put  back  thy  sword  into  the  scabbard,  and  submit  thyself 
to  the  inevitable;  for  remember,  ere  long,  0  rebel  against  God,  he  will 
deal  with  thee  in  another  fashion  than  he  doth  now.  Let  that  breath 
which  is  in  thy  nostrils  go  forth  from  thee,  and  where  art  thou  then  ? 
I  will  quote  one  passage  of  Scripture  and  leave  it  to  your  thoughts. 
**  Beware,  ye  thsit  forget  God  " — that  is,  the  very  mildest  form  of  rebellion 
— "  Beware,  ye  that  forget  God,  lest  I  tear  you  in  pieces,  and  there  be 
none  to  deliver."  0  may  you  never  know  what  that  means  !  Cast 
down  your  weapons.  Come  now,  and  ask  for  reconciliation.  The 
ambassador  of  peace  invites  you.  I  point  you  no  longer  to  his  burning 
throne,  but  to  yonder  cross.  See  there  God  in  human  flesh— bleeding, 
suffering,  dying.  Those  wounds  are  fountains  of  mercy.  Look  to  them, 
and  you  shall  live.  Wrath  is  appeased  by  the  death  of  Jesus.  Fury 
is  no  more  in  Jehovah  I  Trust  in  Jesus,  the  crucified,  and  your  trans- 
gression shall  be  'forgiven  you.  That  precious  blood  shall  make 
reconciliation :  there  shall  be  peace  between  you  and  God  ;  but  0  resist 
no  longer,  for  the  iron  cannot  break  the  northern  iron  and  the  steel. 
The  Lord  bless  you  for  Jesus'  sake.    Amen. 


POBnON  OF  SCRIFTURS  READ  BEFORE  SeBMON— ISAIAH  zl.  9—81. 


LETTER. 

Clapham,  JUHE5tL 
To  MY  Friends  everywhere, 

I  HAVE  n('W  endured,  ten  silent  Sabbaths,  and  as  I  know 
that  many  of  yoa  are  anxious  to  have  accurate  information  as  to  my  state 
of  health,  and  as  I  have  now  something  cheerful  to  communicate,! 
feel  bound  to  add  the  present  note  to  this  week's  sermon.  The  pain 
of  my  disease,  which  has  been  intense,  has  now  ceased  for  a  week  or 
more.  I  have  had  a  succession  of  good  nights,  in  which  sweet  sleep 
has  so  refreshed  me  that  I  felt  each  morning  to  be  far  in  advance  of 
the  previous  day.  I  am  now  very  weak — weak  as  a  little  child— buf 
by  the  same  mercy  which  allayed  the  pain  strength  will  be  restored, 
and  I  shall  have  the  pleasure  of  being  again  at  my  delightful  laboor. 
Please  pray  for  me  that  I  may  be  speedily  and  lastingly  restored  to 
health,  if  it  be  the  Lord's  will.  Ask  also  that  the  furnace  heat  which 
I  have  suffered  may  produce  its  full  effect  upon  me  in  my  own  soul  and 
in  my  ministry.  My  heart's  inmost  desire,  as  the  Lord  knoweth,  is  the 
salvation  of  sinners  and  the  building  up  of  his  people  in  their  most 
holy  faith,  to  the  glory  of  the  Lord  Jesus :  hence  it  has  been  veij 
grievous  to  me  to  have  been  debarred  my  pulpit  and  shut  out  from 
other  means  of  usefulness.  Nevertheless,  no  work  has  flagged  at  the 
Tabernacle  because  of  my  illness ;  pecuniary  help  has  been  famished 
just  when  it  was  needed,  and  spiritual  help  has  been  given  by  the  Lord 
of  Hosts.  We  desire  to  accomplish  more  and  to  receive  more  blessing 
when  our  health  is  restored  to  us.  Surely  the  Master  has  some  great 
design  to  be  answered  by  laying  his  servants  aside :  we  trust  it  will 
prove  to  be  so.  Let  our  prayers  be  more  fen-ent,  our  zeal  more  ardent, 
and  our  labours  for  the  spread  of  the  truth  more  abundant,  and  "  God 
will  bless  us,  and  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  shall  fear  him." 

I  have  one  great  favour  to  ask  of  all  readers  of  the  sermons,  and  that 
is,  that  they  will  try  to  spread  them  abroad,  and  increase  the  number 
of  regular  subscribers.  What  has  been  good  to  you  will  be  good  for 
others  if  the  Lord  blcBS  it.  If  you  cannot  preach  yourself,  yon  can 
distribute  the  word  spoken  by  others. 

I  hope  to  be  able  to  occupy  the  pulpit  again  by  June  25th,  if  the 
Lord  will ;  but  all  things  are  uncertain  to  us,  especially  when  one  ia 
slowly  recovering  from  severe  affliction. 

Tours  to  serve  till  death, 


^>^T? 


Keti[0j0iyan:  Sfalremad^ 


THE  PBATEE  OP  JABEZ. 


%  ^ermon 


DELITEBEO  BT 

C.  H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNAGLEy  NEWINGTON. 


**  Oh  that  thou  wouldest  bless  me  indeed!" — 1  Chron.  iy.  10, 

3  know  yerj  little  about  Jabez,  except  that  be  was  more  honourable 
n  his  brethren,  and  that  he  was  called  Jabez  becaase  his  mother 
e  him  with  sorrow.  It  will  sometimes  happen  that  where  there  is 
I  most  sorrow  in  the  antecedents,  there  will  be  the  most  pleasure  in 
sequel.  As  the  furious  storm  gives  place  to  the  clear  sunshine,  so 
night  of  weeping  precedes  the  morning  of  joy.  Sorrow  the 
binger ;  gladness  the  prince  it  ushers  in.    Cowper  says : — 

"  The  path  of  sorrow,  and  that  path  alone, 
Leads  to  the  place  where  sorrow  is  unknown.** 

a  great  extent  we  find  that  we  must  sow  in  tears  before  we  can  reap 
joy.  Many  of  our  works  for  Christ  have  cost  us  tears.  Difficulties 
I  disappointments  have  wrung  our  soul  with  anguish.  Yet  those 
jeets  that  have  cost  us  more  than  ordinary  sorrow,  have  often  turned 

to  be  the  most  honourable  of  our  undertakings.  While  our  grief 
led  the  offspring  of  desire  "  Benoni,"  the  son  of  my  sorrow,  our  faith 
1  been  afterwards  able  to  give  it  a  name  of  delight,  **  Benjamin,"  the 

of  my  rij^ht  hand.  You  may  expect  a  blessing  in  serving  God  if 
I  are  enabled  to  persevere  under  many  discouragements.  The  ship 
>ften  long  coming  home,  because  detained  on  the  road  by  excess  of 
go.  Expect  her  freight  to  be  the  better  when  she  reaches  the  port. 
>re  honourable  than  his  brethren  was  the  child  whom  his  mother 
•e  with  sorrow.    As  for  this  Jabez,  whose  aim  was  so  well  pointed, 

fame  so  far  sounded,  his  name  so  lastingly  embalmed — he  was  a  man 
prayer.  The  honour  he  enjoyed  would  not  have  been  worth  having 
it  had  not  been  vigorously  contested  and  equitably  won.  His 
rotion  was  the  key  to  his  promotion.  Those  are  the  best  honours 
i  come  from  God,  the  award  of  grace  with  the  acknowledgment  of 
Jo.  994. 


314  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Eenrice.  When  Jacob  was  snrnamed  Israel^  he  received  his  princedom 
after  a  memorable  night  of  prayer.  Surely  it  was  far  more  honoorable 
to  him  than  if  it  had  been  bestowed  upon  him  as  a  flattering  destinction 
by  some  earthly  emperor.  The  best  honour  is  that  which  a  man  gains 
in  communion  with  the  Most  High.  Jabez,  we  are  told,  was  more 
hononral)]e  than  his  brethren,  and  his  prayer  is  forthwith  recorded,  as  if 
to  intimate  that  he  was  also  more  prayerful  than  his  brethren.  We  are 
told  of  what  petitions  his  prayer  consisted.  All  through  it  was  very 
significant  and  instructive.  We  have  only  time  to  take  one  clanse 
of  it — indeed,  that  one  clause  may  be  said  to  comprehend  the  rest :  "  Oh 
that  thou  wouldest  bless  me  indeed  ! "  I  commend  it  as  a  prayer  lor 
yourselves,  dear  brethren  and  sisters ;  one  which  will  be  available  at  all 
seasons ;  a  prayer  to  begin  Christian  life  with,  a  prayer  to  end  it  with, 
a  prayer  which  would  never  be  unseasonable  in  your  joys  or  in  your 
sorrows. 

Oh  that  thou,  the  God  of  Israel,  the  covenant  Ood,  would  bless  me 
indeed !  The  very  pith  of  the  prayer  seems  to  lie  in  that  word, 
**  indeed."  There  are  many  varieties  of  blessing.  Some  are  blessings 
only  in  name :  they  gratify  our  wishes  for  a  moment,  but  permanently 
disappoint  our  expectations.  They  charm  the  eye,  but  pall  on  the  taste. 
Others  are  mere  temporary  blessings:  they  perish  with  the  using. 
Though  for  awhile  they  regale  the  senses,  they  cannot  satisfy  the  higher 
cravings  of  the  soul.  But,  "  Oh  that  thou  wouldest  bless  me  indeed!" 
I  wot  whom  God  blesseth  shall  be  blessed.  The  thing  good  in  itself  is 
bestowed  with  the  good-will  of  the  giver,  and  shall  be  productive  of  so 
much  good  fortune  to  the  recipient  that  it  may  well  be  esteemed  as  a 
blessing  "  indeed,"  for  there  is  nothing  comparable  to  it.  Let  the  grace 
of  God  prompt  it,  let  the  choice  of  God  appoint  it,  let  the  bounty  of 
God  confer  it,  and  then  the  endowment  shall  be  something  godlike 
indeed ;  something  worthy  of  the  lips  that  pronounce  the  benediction, 
and  verily  to  be  craved  by  every  one  who  seeks  honour  that  is  substantial 
and  enduring.  **  Oh  that  thou  wouldest  bless  me  indeed  I "  Think  it 
over,  and  you  will  see  that  there  is  a  depth  of  meaning  in  the  ex- 
pression. 

We  may  set  this  in  contrast  with  human  blessings  :  **  Oh  that  thou 
wouldest  bless  mc  indeed ! "  It  is  very  delightful  to  be  ble^ed 
by  our  parents,  and  those  venerable  friends  whose  benedictions  come 
from  their  hearts,  and  are  backed  up  by  their  prayers.  Many  a  poor  man 
has  had  no  other  legacy  to  leave  his  children  except  his  blessing,  but 
the  blessing  of  an  honest,  holy.  Christian  father  is  a  rich  treasure  to 
his  son.  One  might  well  feel  it  were  a  thing  to  be  deplored  through  life 
if  he  had  lost  a  parent's  blessing..  We  like  to  have  it.  The  blessing 
of  our  spiritual  parents  is  consolatory.  Though  we  believe  in  no 
priestcraft,  we  like  to  live  in  the  affections  of  those  who  were  the  meaas 
of  bringing  us  to  Christ,  and  from  whose  lips  we  were  instructed  in 
the  things  of  God.  And  how  very  precious  is  the  blessing  of  the  poor! 
I  do  not  wonder  that  Job  treasured  that  up  as  a  sweet  thing.  "  When 
the  ear  heard  me,  then  it  blessed  me."  If  you  have  relieved  the  widow 
and  the  fatherless,  and  their  thanks  are  returned  to  you  in  benediction, 
it  is  no  mean  reward.  But,  dear  friends,  after  all — all  that  parents, 
relatives,  saints,  and  grateful  persons  can  do  in  the  way  of  blefittng) 


THE  PBATSB  OF  JABEZ.  816 

Tails  very  far  short  of  what  we  desire  to  have.  0  Lord,  we  would 
liave  the  blessings  of  oar  fellow-creatnres,  the  blessings  that  come 
from  their  hearts;  but,  "Oh  that  Thou  wouldest  bless  me  indeed!*' 
for  thou  canst  bless  with  authority.  Their  blessings  may  be  but 
words,  but  thine  are  eflTectual.  They  may  often  wish  what  they 
oannot  do,  and  desire  to  give  what  they  have  not  at  their  own 
desposal,  but  thy  will  is  omnipotent.  Thou  didst  create  the  world 
witn  but  a  word.  0  that  such  omnipotence  would  now  bespeak 
me  thy  blessing!  Other  blessings  may  bring  us  some  tiny  cheer, 
but  in  thy  favour  is  life.  Other  blessings  are  mere  tittles  in  com- 
parison with  thy  blessing;  for  thy  blessing  is  the  title  "to  an 
mheritance  incorruptible"  and  unfading,  to  "a  kingdom  which 
cannot  be  moved."  Well  therefore  might  David  pray  in  another  place, 
**  With  thy  blessing  let  the  house  of  thy  servant  be  blessed  for  ever." 
Perhaps  in  this  place,  Jabez  may  have  put  the  blessing  of  Ood  in  contrast 
with  tne  blessings  of  men.  Men  will  bless  thee  when  thou  doest  well 
for  thyself.  They  will  praise  the  man  who  is  successful  in  business, 
tfothing  succeeds  like  success.  Nothing  has  so  much  the  approval  of 
;he  general  public  as  a  man's  prosperity.  Alas !  they  do  not  weigh 
nen's  actions  in  the  balances  of  the  sanctuary,  but  in  quite  other  scales. 
fou  will  find  those  about  you  who  will  commend  you  if  you  are 
jrosperous  ;  or  like  Job's  comforters,  condemn  you  if  you  suffer 
idversity.  Perhaps  there  may  be  some  feature  about  their  blessings 
;hat  may  please  you,  because  you  feel  you  deserve  them.  They  commend 
rou  for  your  patriotism:  you  have  been  a  patriot.  They  commendyou 
'or  your  generosity :  you  know  you  have  been  self-sacrificing.  Well, 
but  after  all,  what  is  there  in  the  verdict  of  man  ?  At  a  trial,  the 
rerdict  of  the  policeman  who  stands  in  the  court,  or  of  the  spectators 
who  sit  in  the  court-house,  amounts  to  just  nothing.  The  man  who 
18  being  tried  feels  that  the  only  thing  that  is  of  importance  at  all  will 
t)e  the  verdict  of  the  jury,  and  the  sentence  of  the  judge.  So  it  will 
little  avail  us  whatever  we  may  do,  how  others  commend  or  censure, 
rheir  blessings  are  not  of  any  great  value.  But,  "  Oh  that  thou  wouldest 
bless  me,"  that  thou  wouldest  say,  "Well  done,  good  and  faithful 
servant."  Commend  thou  the  feeble  service  that  through  thy  grace 
Biy  heart  has  rendered.    That  will  be  to  bless  me  indeed. 

Men  are  sometimes  blessed  in  a  very  fulsome  sense  by  flattery.  There 
ire  always  those  who,  like  the  fox  in  the  fable,  hope  to  gain  the  cheese 
by  praising  the  crow.  They  never  saw  such  plumage,  and  no  voice  could 
be  so  sweet  as  yours.  The  whole  of  their  mind  is  set,  not  on  you,  but 
)n  what  they  are  to  gain  by  you.  The  race  of  flatterers  is  never  extinct, 
though  the  flattered  usually  flatter  themselves  it  is  so.  They  may 
Mmceive  that  men  flatter  others,  but  all  is  so  palpable  and  transparent 
irhen  heaped  upon  themselves,  that  they  accept  it  with  a  great  deal  of 
!elf-complacency,  as  being  perhaps  a  little  exaggerated,  but  after  all 
exceedingly  near  the  truth.  We  are  not  very  apt  to  take  a  large 
liscount  oflf  the  praises  that  others  offer  us;  yet,  were  we  wise,  we 
ihould  press  to  our  bosom  those  who  censure  us ;  and  we  should 
ilways  Keep  at  arm's  length  those  who  praise  us,  for  those  who 
ensure  us  to  our  face  cannot  possibly  be  making  a  market  of  us ;  but 
rith  regard  to  those  who  extol  us,  rising  early,  and  using  loud  sentences 


316  METnOFOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

of  praise,  we  may  suspect,  and  we  shall  very  seldom  be  nnjast  in  the 
suspicion,  that  there  is  some  other  motive  in  the  praise  which  they 
render  to  us  than  that  which  appears  on  the  snr&ce.  Yonne:  man,  art 
tliou  placed  in  a  position  where  God  honours  thee  ?  Beware  of 
flatterers.  Or  hast  thou  come  into  a  large  estate?  Hast  thoa 
abundance  ?  There  are  always  flies  where  there  is  honey.  Beware  of 
flattery.  Young  woman,  art  thou  fair  to  look  upon?  There  will  be 
those  about  thee  that  will  have  their  designs,  perhaps  their  eril 
designs,  in  lauding  thy  beauty.  Beware  of  flatterers.  Turn  thou  aside 
from  all  these  who  have  honey  on  their  tongue,  becanse  of  the  poison 
of  asps  that  is  under  it.  Bethink  thee  of  Solomon's  caution,  "  meddle 
not  with  him  that  flattereth  with  his  lips."  Cry  to  God,  "  Deliver  thon 
me  from  all  this  vain  adulation,  whicn  nauseates  my  soul."  So  shalt 
thou  pray  to  him  the  more  fervently,  "  Oh  that  thou  wouldest  bless  me 
indeed  !"  Let  me  have  thy  benediction,  which  never  says  more  than  it 
means  ;  which  never  gives  less  than  it  promises.  If  you  take  then  the 
prayer  of  Jabez  as  being  put  in  contrast  with  the  benedictions  which 
come  from  men,  you  see  much  force  in  it. 

But  we  may  put  it  in  another  light,  and  compare  the  blessing  Jabez 
craved  with  those  blessings  that  are  temporal  and  transient.  There  are 
many  bounties  given  to  us  mercifully  by  God  for  which  we  are  bound  to 
be  very  grateful ;  but  we  must  not  set  too  much  store  by  them.  We 
may  accept  them  with  gratitude,  but  we  must  not  make  them  our  idok 
When  we  have  them  we  have  great  need  to  cry,  "  Oh  that  thou  wouldest 
bless  me  indeed,  and  make  these  inferior  blessings  real  blessings;'' 
and  if  we  have  them  not,  we  should  with  greater  vehemence  cry,  "  Oh 
that  we  may  be  rich  in  faith,  and  if  not  blessed  with  these  external 
favours,  may  we  be  blessed  spiritually,  and  then  we  shall  be  blessed 
indeed." 

Let  us  review  some  of  these  mercies,  and  just  say  a  word  or  two 
about  them. 

One  of  the  flrst  cravings  of  men's  hearts  is  wealth.  So  universal  the 
desire  to  gain  it,  that  we  might  almost  say  it  is  a  natural  instinct.  How 
many  have  thought  if  they  once  possessed  it  they  should  be  blessed 
indeed  !  but  there  are  ten  thousand  proofs  that  happiness  consists  not 
in  the  abundance  which  a  man  possesseth.  So  many  instances  are  well 
known  to  you  all,  that  I  need  not  quote  any  to  show  that  riches  are  not 
a  blessing  indeed.  They  are  rather  apparently  than  really  so.  Hence, 
it  has  been  well  said,  that  when  we  see  how  much  a  man  has  we  envy 
him ;  but  could  we  see  how  little  he  enjoys  we  should  pity  him.  Some 
that  have  had  the  most  easy  circumstances  have  had  the  most  uneasy 
minds.  Those  who  have  acquired  all  they  could  wish,  had  their  wishes 
been  at  all  sane,  have  been  led  by  the  possession  of  what  they  had  to 
be  discontented  because  they  had  not  more. 

'*  Thus  the  base  miser  starves  amidst  his  store. 
Broods  o'er  bifi  gold,  and  griping  still  at  more, 
iSits  sadly  pining,  and  believes  he's  poor.'* 

Nothing  is  more  clear  to  any  one  who  chooses  to  observe  it,  than  that 
riches  are  not  the  chief  good  at  whose  advent  sorrow  flies,  and  in  whose 
presence  joy  perennial  springs.    Full  often  wealth  cozens  the  owner. 


THE  PRATER  OF  JABEZ.  317 

Dainties  are  spread  on  his  table,  bnt  his  appetite  fails ;  minstrels  wait 
bis  biddlDg,  but  his  ears  are  deaf  to  all  the  strains  of  mnsic  ;  holidays 
he  may  have  as  many  as  he  pleases,  but  for  him  recreation  has  lost  all 
its  charms :  or  he  is  young,  fortune  has  come  to  him  by  inheritance, 
and  he  makes  pleasure  his  pursuit  till  sport  becomes  more  irksome  than 
work,  and  dissipation  worse  than  drudgery.    Ye  know  how  riches  make 
themselves  wings ;  like  the  bird  that  roosted  on  the  tree,  they  fly  away. 
In  sickness  and  despondency  these  ample  means  that  once  seemed  to 
whisper,  *•  Soul,  take  thine  ease,"  prove  themselves  to  be  poor  com- 
forters.   In  death  they  even  tend  to  make  the  pang  of  separation  more 
acute,  because  there  is  the  more  to  leave,  the  more  to  lose.    We  may 
well  say,  if  we  have  wealth,  *'  My  God,  put  me  not  oflT  with  these  husks ; 
let  me  never  make  a  god  of  the  silver  and  the  gold,  the  goods  and  the 
chattels,  the  estates  and  investments,  which  in  thy  providence  thou  hast 
given  me.      I  beseech  thee,  bless  me  indeed.     As  for  these  worldly 
possessions,   they  will  be  mv  bane  unless  I  have  thy  grace  with  them." 
And  if  you  have  not  wealth,  and  perhaps  the  most  of  you  will  never 
have  it,  say,  '*  My  Father,  thou  hast  denied  me  this  outward  and  seeming 
good,  enrich  me  with  thy  love,  give  me  the  gold  of  thy  favour,  bless  me 
indeed;  then  allot  to  others  whatever  thou  wilt,  thou  shalt  divide  my 

r^rtion,  my  soul  shall  wait  thy  daily  will ;  do  thou  bless  me  indeed,  and 
shall  be  content." 

Another  transient  blessing  which  our  poor  humanity  fondly  covets 
and  eagerly  pursues  is  fame.  In  this  respect  we  would  fain  be 
more  honouraole  than  our  brethren,  and  outstrip  all  our  competitors. 
It  seems  natural  to  us  all  to  wish  to  make  a  name,  and  gain  some 
note  in  the  circle  we  move  in  at  any  rate,  and  we  wish  to  make  that 
circle  wider  if  we  can.  But  here,  as  of  riches,  it  is  indisputable  that 
the  greatest  fame  does  not  bring  with  it  any  equal  measure  of  gratifi- 
cation. Men,  in  seeking  after  notoriety  or  honour,  have  a  degree  of 
pleasure  in  the  search  which  they  do  not  always  possess  when  they  have 
gained  their  object.  Some  of  the  most  famous  men  have  also  been  the 
most  wretched  of  the  human  race.  If  thou  hast  honour  and  fnme,  accept 
it ;  but  let  this  prayer  go  up,  "My  God,  bless  thou  me  indeed,  for  what 
profit  were  it,  if  my  name  were  in  a  thousand  mouths,  if  thou  shouldest 
spue  it  out  of  thy  mouth  ?  What  matter,  though  my  name  were  written 
on  marble,  if  it  were  not  written  in  the  Lamb's  Book  of  Life  ?  These 
blessings  are  only  apparently  blessings,  windy  blessings,  blessings  that 
mock  me.  Give  me  thy  blessing  :  then  the  honour  which  comes  of  thee 
will  make  me  blessed  indeed."  If  you  happen  to  have  lived  in  obscurity, 
and  have  never  entered  the  lists  for  honours  among  your  fellow-men,  be 
content  to  run  well  your  own  course  and  fulfil  truly  your  own  vocation. 
To  lack  fame  is  not  the  most  grievous  of  ills ;  it  is  worse  to  have  it  like 
the  snow,  that  whitens  the  ground  in  the  morning,  and  disappears  in 
the  heat  of  the  day.  What  matters  it  to  a  dead  man  that  men  are 
talking  of  him  ?    Get  thou  the  blessing  indeed. 

There  is  another  temporal  blessing  which  wise  men  desire,  and 
legitimately  may  wish  for  rather  than  the  other  two — the  blessing  of 
health.  Can  we  ever  prize  it  sufficiently  ?  To  trifle  with  such  a  boon 
is  the  madness  of  folly.  The  highest  eulogiums  that  can  be  passed  on 
health  would  not  be  extravagant.      He  that  has  a  healthy  body  is 


818  METROPOLITAN  TABEBNACLE  PULPIT. 

infinitely  more  blessed  than  he  who  is  sickly,  whatever  his  estates 
may  be.  Yet  if  I  liave  health,  my  bones  well  set,  and  my  mnscleB 
well  strung,  if  I  scarcely  know  an  ache  or  pain,  but  can  rise  in  the 
morninfr,  and  with  elastic  step  go  forth  to  labour,  and  cast  myself  upon 
my  couch  at  night,  and  sleep  the  sleep  of  the  happy,  yet,  oh  let  me  not 
glory  in  my  strength  I  In  a  moment  it  may  fail  me.  *A  few  short  weeks 
may  reduce  the  strong  man  to  a  skeleton.  Consumption  may  set  in,  the 
cheek  may  p»le  with  the  shadow  of  death.  Let  not  the  strong  man 
glory  in  his  strength.  The  Lord  "  delighteth  not  in  the  strength  of  the 
horse :  he  taketh  not  pleasure  in  the  legs  of  a  man."  And  let  us  not 
make  our  boast  concerning  these  things.  Say,  thou  that  are  in  good 
health,  **  My  God,  bless  me  indeed.  Give  me  the  healthy  soul.  Hnl 
mc  of  my  spiritual  diseases.  Jehovah  Rophi  come,  and  pnrge  out  the 
leprosy  tliat  is  in  my  heart  by  nature :  make  me  healthy  in  the  heavenly 
sense,  that  I  may  not  be  put  aside  among  the  unclean,  but  allowed  to 
stand  amongst  the  congregation  of  thy  saints.  Bless  my  bodily  health 
to  me  that  I  may  use  it  rightly,  spending  the  strength  I  have  in  tbj 
service  and  to  thy  glory ;  otherwise,  though  blessed  with  health,  I  may 
not  be  blessed  indeed.**  Some  of  yon,  dear  friends,  do  not  posseu 
the  great  treasure  of  health.  Wearisome  days  and  nights  are  appointed 
you.  Yoar  bones  are  become  an  almanac,  in  which  you  note  the  changes 
of  the  weather.  There  is  much  about  you  that  is  fitted  to  excite  pity. 
But  I  pray  that  you  mav  have  the  blessing  indeed,  and  I  know  what 
that  is.  I  can  heartily  sympa-thise  with  a  sister  iiiat  said  to  me  the 
other  day,  "  I  had  such  nearness  to  God  when  I  was  sick,  snch  fiill 
assurance,  and  such  joy  in  the  Lord,  and  I  regret  to  say  I  have  lost  it 
now ;  that  I  conld  almost  wish  to  be  ill  again,  if  thereby  I  might  have 
a  renewal  of  communion  with  God.**  I  have  oflentimes  look^  grate- 
fully back  to  my  sick  chamber.  I  am  certain  that  I  never  did  grow 
in  grace  one  half  so  much  anywhere  as  I  have  upon  the  bed  of  pain.  It 
ought  not  to  be  so.  Our  joyous  mercies  ought  to  be  great  fertilizen 
to  our  spirit ;  but  not  unfrequently  our  griefs  are  more  salutary  than 
our  joys.  The  pruning  knife  is  best  for  some  of  us.  Well,  after  all, 
whatever  you  have  to  suffer,  of  weakness,  of  debility,  of  pain,  and 
anguish,  may  it  be  so  attended  with  the  divine  presence,  that  this 
light  attiiction  may  work  out  for  you  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal 
weight  of  glory,  and  so  you  may  be  blessed  indeed. 

1  will  only  dwell  upon  one  more  temporal  mercy,  which  is  veiy 
precious — I  mean  the  blessing  of  home.  I  do  not  think  any  one  can 
ever  prize  it  too  highly,  or  speak  too  well  of  it  What  a  blessing  it  is 
to  have  the  fireside,  and  the  dear  relationships  that  gather  ronnd  the 
word  "  Home,*'  wife,  children,  father,  brother,  sister !  Why,  there  ire 
no  songs  in  any  language  that  are  more  full  of  music  than  thoae 
dedicated  to  *•*'  Mother.**  We  hear  a  great  deal  about  the  German 
"  Fatherland  ** — we  like  the  sound.  But  the  word,  "  Father,"  is  the 
whole  of  it.  The  "  land  *'  .is  nothing :  the  **  Father "  is  key  to  the 
music.  There  are  many  of  us,  I  hope,  blessed  with  a  great  many  <tf 
these  relationships.  Do  not  let  us  be  content  to  solace  our  sonls  with 
ties  that  must  ere  long  be  sundered.  Let  us  ask  that  over  and  abore 
them  may  come  the  blessing  indeed.  I  thank  thee,  my  God,  for  mv 
earthly  father ;  but  oh,  be  thou  my  Father,  then  am  I  blessed  indeed. 


THE  PBATEB  OF  JABEZ.  819 

^hank  thee,  my  God,  for  a  mother's  love  ;  but  comfort  thou  my  soul 
ODe  whom  a  mother  comfortBth,  then  am  I  blessed  indeed.  I  thank 
ee,  Saviour,  for  the  marriage  bond ;  but  be  thou  the  bridegroom  of 
7  soul.  I  thank  thee  for  the  tie  of  brotherhood  ;  but  be  thou  my 
other  born  for  adversit}',  bone  of  my  bone,  and  flesh  of  my  flesh, 
le  home  thou  hast  given  me  I  prize,  and  thank  thee  for  it;  but  I 
mid  dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  for  ever,  and  be  a  child  that  never 
inders,  wherever  my  feet  may  travel,  from  my  Father's  house  with 
( many  mansions.  You  can  thus  be  blessed  indeed.  If  not  domiciled 
ider  the  paternal  care  of  the  Almighty,  even  the  blessing  of  home, 
th  all  its  sweet  familiar  comforts,  does  not  reach  to  the  benediction 
lich  Jabez  desired  for  himself.  But  do  I  speak  to  any  here  that  are 
parated  from  kith  and  kin  ?  I  know  some  of  you  have  left  behind 
u  in  the  bivouac  of  life  graves  where  parts  of  your  heart  are  buried, 
d  that  which  remains  is  bleeding  with  jiist  so  many  wounds.  Ah, 
dl !  the  Lord  bless  you  indeed !  Widow,  thy  maker  is  thy  husband, 
itherless  one,  he  hath  said,  "  I  will  not  leave  you  comfortless :  I  will 
me  to  you."  Oh,  to  find  all  your  relationships  made  up  in  him,  then 
Q  will  be  blessed  indeed  !  I  have  perhaps  taken  too  long  a  time  in 
BDtioning  these  temporary  blessings,  so  let  me  set  the  text  in  another 
^ht.  I  trust  we  have  had  human  blessings  and  temporary  blessings, 
fill  our  hearts  with  gladness,  but  not  to  foul  our  hearts  with  world- 
less,  or  to  distract  our  attention  from  the  things  that  belong  to  our 
erlasting  welfare. 

Let  us  proceed,  thirdly,  to  speak  of  imaginary  blessings.  There  are 
ch  in  the  world.  From  them  may  God  deliver  us.  **  Oh  that  thou 
)nlde8t  bless  me  indeed  !"  Take  the  Pharisee.  He  stood  in  the  Lord's 
tnse,  and  he  thought  he  had  the  Lord's  blessing,  and  it  made  him 
ry  bold,  and  he  spoke  with  unctuous  self-complacency,  "  God,  I  thank 
ee,  that  I  am  not  as  other  men  ai*e,"  and  so  on.  He  had  the  blessing, 
id  well  indeed  he  supposed  himself  to  have  merited  it.  He  had  fasted 
rice  in  the  week,  paid  tithes  of  all  that  he  possessed,  even  to  the  odd 
rthing  on  the  mint,  and  the  extra  halfpenny  on  the  cummin  he  had 
«d.  He  felt  he  had  done  everything.  His  the  blessing  o^  a  quiet 
a  quiescent  conscience ;  good,  easy  man.  He  was  a  pattern  to  the 
Irish.  It  was  a  pity  everybody  did  not  live  as  he  did;  if  they  had, 
ley  would  not  have  wanted  any  police.  Pilate  might  have  dismissed 
is  guards,  and  Herod  his  soldiers.  He  was  just  one  of  the  most 
cceUent  persons  that  ever  breathed.  He  adored  the  city  of  which  he 
tts  a  burgess!  Ay;  but  he  was  not  blessed  indeed.  This  was  all 
is  own  overweening  conceit.  He  was  a  mere  wind-bag,  nothing  more, 
Dd  the  blessing  which  he  fancied  had  fallen  upon  him,  had  never  come, 
^he  poor  publican  whom  he  thought  accursed,  went  to  his  home 
QsUfied  rather  than  he.  The  blessing  had  not  fallen  on  the  man  who 
bought  he  had  it.  Oh,  let  every  one  of  us  here  feel  the  sting  of  this 
"^mke,  and  pray:  **  Great  God,  save  us  from  imputing  to  ourselves  a 
righteousness  which  we  do  not  possess.  Save  us  from  wrapping  ourselves 
QD  in  our  own  rags,  and  fancying  we  have  put  on  the  wedding  garments. 
ScM  me  indeed.  Let  me  have  the  true  righteousness.  Let  me  have 
^tme  worthiness  which  thou  canst  accept,  even  that  which  is  of  faith 
in  JesQs  Christ." 


818  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

infinitely  more  blessed  than  he  who  is  sickly,  whatever  his  estates 
may  be.  Yet  if  I  have  health,  my  bones  well  set,  and  my  muscleB 
well  strung,  if  I  scarcely  know  an  ache  or  pain,  bnt  can  rise  in  the 
morning,  and  with  elastic  step  go  forth  to  labour,  and  cast  myself  upon 
my  couch  at  night,  and  sleep  the  sleep  of  the  happy,  yet,  oh  let  me  not 
glory  in  my  strength  1  In  a  moment  it  may  fail  me.  A  few  short  weeks 
may  reduce  the  strong  man  to  a  skeleton.  Consumption  may  set  in,  the 
check  may  pole  with  the  shadow  of  death.  Let  not  the  strong  nuin 
glory  in  his  strength.  The  Lord  '*  delighteth  not  in  the  strength  of  the 
horse :  he  taketh  not  pleasure  in  the  legs  of  a  man."  And  let  as  not 
make  our  boast  concerning  these  things.  Say,  thou  that  are  in  good 
health,  *'  My  God,  bless  me  indeed.  Give  me  the  healthy  soul.  Hnl 
me  of  my  spiritual  diseases.  Jehovah  Rophi  come,  and  pai^  out  the 
leprosy  that  is  in  my  heart  by  nature  :  make  mo  healthy  in  the  heavenly 
sense,  that  I  may  not  be  put  aside  among  the  unclean,  but  allowed  to 
stand  amongst  the  congregation  of  thy  saints.  Bless  my  bodily  health 
to  me  that  I  may  use  it  rightly,  spending  the  strength  I  have  in  thj 
service  and  to  thy  glory ;  otherwise,  though  blessed  with  health,  I  maj 
not  be  blessed  indeed.**  Some  of  you,  dear  friends,  do  not  posseu 
the  great  treasure  of  health.  Wearisome  days  and  nights  are  appointed 
you.  Your  bones  are  become  an  almanac,  in  which  you  note  the  changee 
of  the  weather.  There  is  much  about  you  that  is  fitted  to  excite  pity. 
But  I  pray  that  you  mav  have  the  blessing  indeed,  and  I  know  what 
that  is.  I  can  heartily  symp&thise  with  a  sister  iiiat  said  to  me  the 
other  day,  '^  I  had  such  nearness  to  God  when  I  was  sick,  such  fnll 
assurance,  and  such  joy  in  the  Lord,  and  I  regret  to  say  I  have  lost  it 
now ;  that  I  could  almost  wish  to  be  ill  again,  if  thereby  I  might  have 
a  renewal  of  communion  with  God.**  I  have  oftentimes  look^  grate- 
fully back  to  my  sick  chamber.  I  am  certain  that  I  never  did  grow 
in  grace  one  half  so  much  anywhere  as  I  have  upon  the  bed  of  pain.  It 
ought  not  to  be  so.  Our  joyous  mercies  ought  to  be  great  fertilizers 
to  our  spirit ;  but  not  unfrequently  our  griefs  are  more  salutary  than 
our  joys.  The  pruning  knife  is  best  for  some  of  us.  Well,  after  all, 
whatever  you  have  to  suffer,  of  weakness,  of  debility,  of  pain,  and 
anguish,  may  it  be  so  attended  with  the  divine  presence,  that  this 
light  affliction  may  work  out  for  you  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal 
weight  of  glory,  and  so  you  may  be  blessed  indeed. 

I  will  only  dwell  upon  one  more  temporal  mercy,  which  is  veiy 
precious — I  mean  the  hlessmg  of  home,  I  do  not  think  any  one  can 
ever  prize  it  too  highly,  or  speak  too  well  of  it.  What  a  blessing  it  is 
to  have  the  fireside,  and  the  dear  relationships  that  gather  round  the 
word  "  Home,"  wife,  children,  father,  brother,  sister !  Why,  there  are 
710  songs  in  any  language  that  are  more  full  of  music  than  those 
dedicated  to  ''  Mother.**  We  hear  a  great  deal  about  the  German 
"  Fatherland  *' — we  like  the  sound.  But  the  word,  "  Father,**  is  the 
whole  of  it.  The  "  land  **  tis  nothing :  the  **  Father  **  is  key  to  the 
music.  There  are  many  of  us,  I  hope,  blessed  with  a  great  many  of 
these  relationships.  Do  not  let  us  be  content  to  solace  our  souls  with 
ties  that  must  ere  long  be  sundered.  Let  us  ask  that  over  and  aboTe 
them  may  come  the  blessing  indeed.  I  thank  thee,  my  God,  for  mv 
earthly  father ;  but  oh,  be  thou  my  Father,  then  am  I  blessed  indeed. 


THE  PRATEB  OF  JA6EZ.  819 

I  thank  thee,  my  God,  for  a  mother's  love  ;  but  comfort  thou  my  soul 

as  one  whom  a  mother  comforteth,  then  am  I  blessed  indeed.     I  thank 

thee,  Saviour,  for  the  marriage  bond ;  but  be  thou  the  bridegroom  of 

mv  soul.     I  thank  thee  for  the  tie  of  brotherhood  ;  but  be  thou  my 

brother  born  for  adversity,  bone  of  my  bone,  and  flesh  of  my  flesh. 

The  home  thou  hast  given  me  I  prize,  and  thank  thee  for  it;  but  I 

would  dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  for  ever,  and  be  a  child  that  never 

wanders,  wherever  my  feet  may  travel,  from  my  Father's  house  with 

its  many  mansions.    You  can  thus  be  blessed  indeed.     If  not  domiciled 

under  the  paternal  care  of  the  Almighty,  even  the  blessing  of  home, 

with  all  its  sweet  familiar  comforts,  does  not  reach  to  the  benediction 

which  Jabez  desired  for  himself.     But  do  I  speak  to  any  here  that  are 

separated  from  kith  and  kin  ?    I  know  some  of  you  have  left  behind 

jou  in  the  bivouac  of  life  graves  where  parts  of  your  heart  are  buried, 

and  that  which  remains  is  bleeding  with  jiist  so  many  wounds.    Ah, 

'Well !  the  Lord  bless  you  indeed !     Widow,  thy  maker  is  thy  husband. 

Fatherless  one,  he  hath  said,  "  I  will  not  leave  you  comfortless :  I  will 

come  to  you."     Oh,  to  find  all  your  relationships  made  up  in  him,  then 

5011  will  be  blessed  indeed  !    I  have  perhaps  taken  too  long  a  time  in 

mentioning  these  temporary  blessings,  so  let  me  set  the  text  in  another 

light.     I  trust  we  have  had  human  blessings  and  temporary  blessings, 

to  fill  our  hearts  with  gladness,  but  not  to  foul  our  hearts  with  world- 

liness,  or  to  distract  our  attention  from  the  things  that  belong  to  our 

ev^laating  welfare. 

Let  UB  proceed,  thirdly,  to  speak  of  imaginary  blessings.    There  are 

such  in  the  world.    From  them  may  God  deliver  us.    *'  Oh  that  thou 

wonldest  bless  me  indeed  !"  Take  the  Pharisee.   He  stood  in  the  Lord's 

honse,  and  he  thought  he  had  the  Lord's  blessing,  and  it  made  him 

very  bold,  and  he  spoke  with  unctuous  self-complacency,  "  God,  I  thank 

thee,  that  I  am  not  as  other  men  are,"  and  so  on.    He  had  the  blessing, 

and  well  indeed  he  supposed  himself  to  have  merited  it.    He  had  fasted 

twice  in  the  week,  paid  tithes  of  all  that  he  possessed,  even  to  the  odd 

farthing  on  the  mint,  and  the  extra  halfpenny  on  the  cummin  he  had 

used.     He  felt  he  had  done  everything.    His  the  blessing  of  a  quiet 

or  a  quiescent  conscience ;  good,  easy  man.    He  was  a  pattern  to  the 

parish.    It  was  a  pity  everybody  did  not  live  as  he  did;  if  they  had, 

they  would  not  have  wanted  any  police.     Pilate  might  have  dismissed 

his  guards,  and  Herod  his  soldiers.     He  was  just  one  of  the  most 

exceUent  persons  that  ever  breathed.    He  adored  the  city  of  which  he 

▼as  a  burgess !    Ay ;  but  he  was  not  blessed  indeed.     This  was  all 

his  own  overweening  conceit.    He  w^as  a  mere  wind-bag,  nothing  more, 

and  the  blessing  which  he  fancied  had  fallen  upon  him,  had  never  come. 

The  poor  publican  whom  he  thought  accursed,  went  to  his  home 

justified  rather  than  he.   The  blessing  had  not  fallen  on  the  man  who 

thought  he  had  it.     Oh,  let  every  one  of  us  here  feel  the  sting  of  this 

rebuke,  and  pray:  **  Great  God,  save  us  from  imputing  to  ourselves  a 

righteousness  which  we  do  not  possess.    Save  us  from  wrapping  ourselves 

^P  in  our  own  rags,  and  fancying  we  have  put  on  the  wedding  garments. 

BlcM  me  indeed.    Let  me  have  the  true  righteousness.    Let  me  have 

the  true  worthiness  which  thou  canst  accept,  even  that  which  is  of  faith 

m  Jesus  Christ." 


320  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Another  form  of  this  imaginary  blessing  is  found  in  persons  who 
would  scorn  to  be  thought  self-righteons.  Their  delusion,  however,  ii 
near  akin.     I  hear  them  singing — 

"  I  do  believe,  I  will  believe, 
That  Jesus  died  for  me ; 
And  on  his  cross  he  shed  his  blood. 
From  sin  to  set  me  free." 

You  believe  it,  you  say.  Well,  but  how  do  you  know?  Upon  whit 
authority  do  you  make  so  sure?  Who  told  you  ?  "  Oh,  I  believe  it" 
Yes,  but  we  must  mind  what  we  believe.  Have  you  any  clear  evidence 
of  a  si>ecial  interest  in  the  blood  of  Jesus  ?  Can  you  give  any  gpiritail 
reasons  for  believing  that  Christ  has  set  you  free  from  sin?  I  am 
afraid  that  some  have  got  a  hope  that  has  not  got  any  ground,  like  an 
anchor  without  any  fluke — nothing  to  grasp,  nothing  to  lay  hold  upon. 
They  say  they  are  saved,  and  they  stick  to  it  they  are,  and  think  it 
wicked  to  doubt  it;  but  yet  they  have  no  reason  to  warrant  their 
confidence.  AVhen  the  sons  of  Kohath  carried  the  ark,  and  toudied 
it  with  their  hands,  they  did  rightly ;  but  when  XJzzah  touched  it 
he  died.  There  are  those  who  are  ready  to  be  fully  assured;  there 
are  others  to  whom  it  will  be  death  to  talk  of  it.  There  is  a  gnA 
difference  between  presumption  aud  full  assurance.  Full  assurance 
is  reasonable :  it  is  based  on  solid  ground.  Presumption  takes  for 
granted,  and  with  brazen  face  pronounces  that  to  be  its  own  to  whid 
it  has  no  right  whatever.  Beware,  I  pray  thee,  of  presuming  that  tbon 
art  saved.  If  with  thy  heart  thou  dost  trust  in  Jesus,  then  art  thon 
saved  ;  but  if  thou  merely  sayest,  "  I  trust  in  Jesus,"  it  doth  not  save 
thee.  If  thy  heart  be  renewed,  if  thou  shalt  hate  the  things  that  thou 
didst  once  love,  and  love  the  things  that  thou  didst  once  hate;  if 
thou  hast  really  repented  ;  if  there  be  a  thorough  change  of  mind  in 
thee ;  if  thou  be  born  again,  then  hast  thou  reason  to  rejoice :  but  if 
there  be  no  vital  change,  no  inward  godliness;  if  there  be  no  love  to 
God,  no  prayer,  no  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  then  thy  saying,  "  I  am 
saved,"  is  but  thine  own  assertion,  and  it  may  delude,  but  it  will  not 
deliver  thee.  Our  prayer  ought  to  be, "  Oh  that  thou  wouldest  bless  me 
indeed,  with  real  faith,  with  real  salvation,  with  the  trust  in  Jesus  that 
is  the  essential  of  faith ;  not  with  the  conceit  that  begets  credulity. 
God  preserve  us  from  imaginary  blessings  !"  I  have  met  with  persons 
who  said,  **  I  believe  I  am  saved,  because  I  dreamt  it."  Or,  "  Because 
I  had  a  text  of  Scripture  that  applied  to  my  own  case.  Such  and  such  a 
good  man  said  so  and  so  in  his  sermon."  Or,  "  Because  I  took  to 
weeping  and  was  excited,  and  felt  as  I  never  felt  before.**  Ah  !  bnt 
nothing  will  stand  the  trial  but  this,  "Dost  thou  abjure  all  confidence 
in  everything  but  the  finished  work  of  Jesus,  and  dost  thou  come  to 
Ciii  ist  to  be  reconciled  in  him  to  God?  **  If  thou  dost  not,  thy  dreanu^ 
and  visions,  and  fancies,  are  but  dreams,  and  visions,  and  fancies,  and 
will  not  serve  thy  turn  when  most  thou  needest  them.  Pray  the  Lord 
to  bless  thee  indeed,  for  of  that  sterling  verity  in  all  thy  walk  and 
talk  there  is  a  great  scarcity. 

Too  much  I  am  afraid,  that  even  those  who  are  saved — saved  for 
time  and  eternity— n(>ed  this  caution,  and  have  good  cause  to  pray  this 
])raycr  that  they  may  leara  to  make  a  distinction  between  some  things 


THE  PBATEB  OF  JABEZ.  321 

rhicb  tbej  think  to  be  spiritaal  blessings,  and  others  \^hich  are  blessings 
adeed.  Let  me  show  you  what  I  mean.  Is  it  certainly  a  blessing  to  get 
A  answer  to  yonr  prayer  after  yonr  own  mind?  I  always  like  to 
raalify  my  most  earnest  prayer  with,  "Not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt" 
Sot  only  ought  I  to  do  it,  but  I  would  like  to  do  it,  because  otherwise  I 
night  ask  for  something  which  it  would  be  dangerous  for  me  to  receive. 
3od  might  give  it  me  in  anger,  and  I  might  find  little  sweetness  in 
cbe  grant,  but  much  soreness  in  the  grief  it  caused  me.  You  re- 
oiMnber  how  Israel  of  old  asked  for  flesh,  and  God  gave  them  quails; 
bat  while  the  meat  was  yet  .*u  their  mouths  the  wrath  of  God 
eame  upon  them.  Ask  for  the  meat,  if  you  like,  but  always  put  in 
Bus :  "  Lord,  if  this  is  not  a  real  blessing,  do  not  give  it  me."  "  Bless 
xpe  indeed."  1  hardly  like  to  repeat  the  old  story  of  the  good  woman 
¥hose  son  was  ill — a  little  child  near  death's  door — and  she  begged  the 
minister,  a  Puritan,  to  pray  for  its  life.  He  did  pray  very  earnestly, 
Imt  he  put  in,  "  If  it  be  thy  will,  save  this  child."  The  woman  said, 
**I  cannot  bear  that:  I  must  have  you  pray  that  the  child  shall  live. 
Do  not  put  in  any  ifs  or  huUy  "Woman,"  said  the  minister,  "it 
flay  be  you  will  live  to  rue  the  day  that  ever  you  wished  to  set  your 
inll  up  against  God's  will."  Twenty  years  afterwards,  she  was  carried 
iway  in  a  fainting  fit  from  under  Tyburn  gallows-tree,  where  that  son 
^as  put  to  death  as  a  felon.  Although  she  had  lived  to  see  her  child 
Tow  up  to  be  a  man,  it  would  have  been  infinitely  better  for  her  had 
he  child  died,  and  infinitely  wiser  had  she  left  it  to  God*s  will.  Do 
lot  be  quite  so  sure  that  what  you  think  an  answer  to  prayer  is  any 
*roof  of  divine  love.  It  may  leave  much  room  for  thee  to  seek  unto 
he  Lord,  saying,  "  Oh  that  thou  wouldest  blessed  me  indeed ! "  So 
ometimcs  great  exhilaration  of  spirit,  liveliness  of  heart,  even  though 
;  be  religious  joy,  may  not  always  be  a  blessing.  We  delight  in  it, 
od  oh,  sometimes  when  we  have  had  gatherinirs  for  prayer  here,  the 
ire  has  burned,  and  our  souls  have  glowed  !  We  felt  at  the  time  how 
e  could  sing — 

"  My  willing  soul  would  stay 

In  such  a  frame  as  this, 
And  sit  and  sing  herself  away 
To  everlasting  bliss." 

k)  far  as  that  was  a  blessing  we  are  thankful  for  it ;  but  I  should  not 
ike  to  set  such  seasons  up,  as  if  my  enjoyments  were  the  main  token  of 
Jod's  favour  ;  or  as  if  they  were  the  chief  signs  of  his  blessing.  Per- 
uipa  it  would  be  a  greater  blessing  to  me  to  be  broken  in  spirit,  and 
aid  low  before  the  Lord  at  the  present  time.  When  you  ask  for  the 
iigbest  joy,  and  pray  to  be  on  tlie  mountain  with  Chnst,  remember  it 
may  be  as  much  a  blessing  ;  yea,  a  blessing  indeed  to  be  brought  into 
the  Valley  of  Humiliation,  to  be  laid  very  low,  and  constrained  to  cry 
mfc  in  angnish,  **  Lord,  save,  or  I  perish ! " 

^  If  to-day  he  deigns  to  bless  us 
With  a  sense  of  pardon'd  sin, 
He  to-morrow  may  distress  us, 
Make  us  feel  the  plague  within, 

All  to  make  us 
Sick  of  self,  and  fond  of  him.'* 


322  HETBOFOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

These  variable  experiences  of  ours  may  be  blessings  indeed  to  ns,  when, 
had  we  been  always  rejoicing,  we  might  have  been  like  Moab,  settled 
on  our  lees,  and  not  emptied  from  vessel  to  vessel.     It  fares  ill  with 
those  who  have  no  changes  ;  they  fear  not  God.    Have  we  not,  dev 
friends,  sometimes  envied  those  persons  that  are  always  calm  and  un- 
ruffled, and  are  never  pertnrbed  in  mind  ?    Well,  there  are  Christians 
whose  evenness  of  temper  deserves  to  be  emulated.    And  as  for  that 
cahn  repose,  that  unwavering  assurance  which  comes  from  the  Spirit  of 
God,  it  is  a  very  delightful  attainment ;  but  I  am  not  sure  that  we 
ought  to  envy  anybody's  lot  because  it  is  more  tranquil  or  less  exposed 
to  storm  and  tempest  than  our  own     There  is  a  danger  of  saying, 
**  Peace,  ]>eacc,"  where  there  is  no  peace,  and  there  is  a  calmness  whid 
arises  from  callousness.     Dupes  there  are  who  deceive  their  own  sonls. 
"  Thev  have  no  doubts,"  thev  sav,  but  it  is  because  thev  have  little  heart 
search  ing.  They  have  no  anxieties,  because  they  have  not  much  enterprne 
or  many  pursuits  to  stir  them  up.     Or  it  may  be  they  have  no  pains, 
because  they  have  no  life.    Iktter  go  to  heaven,  halt  and  maimed,  than 
go  marching  on  in  confidence  down  to  hell.     "  Oh  that  thou  wouldest 
bless  me  indeed!"    My  God,  I  will  envy  no  one  of  his  gifts  orhb 
graces,  much  less  of  his  inward  mood  or  his  outward  circumstances,  if 
onlv  thou  wilt  "  bless  me  indeed."    I  would  not  be  comforted  unless 
thou  comfortest  me,  nor  have  any  peace  but  Christ  my  peace,  noranj 
rest  but  the  rest  which  coraeth  from  the  sweet  savour  of  the  sacrifice 
of  Christ.    Christ  shall  be  all  in  all,  and  none  shall  be  anything  to 
me  save  himself.    0  that  we  might  always  feel  that  we  are  not  to 
judge  as  to  the  manner  of  the  blessing,  but  must  leave  it  with  God  to 
give  us  what  we  would  have,  not  the  imaginary  blessing,  the  super- 
ficial and  apparent  blessing,  but  the  blessing  indeed  ! 

Plnually  too  with  regard  to  our  work  and  service,  I  think  our  prayer 
should  ahvavs  be,  "  Oh  that  thou  wouldest  bless  me  indexed ! "  It  is 
lamentable  to  see  the  work  of  some  good  men,  though  it  is  not  ours  to 
judge  them,  how  very  pretentions,  but  how  very  unreal  it  is.  It  is  really 
shocking  to  think  how  some  men  ])retend  to  build  up  a  church  in  the 
course  of  two  or  three  evenings.  They  will  report,  in  the  corner  of  the 
newspa|)ers,  that  there  were  forty-three  i)ersons  convinced  of  sin,  and 
forty-six  justified,  and  sometimes  thirty-eight  sanctified;  I  do  not  know 
what  besides  of  wonderful  statistics  they  give  as  to  all  that  is  ac- 
complished. I  have  observed  congregations  that  have  been  speedily 
gathered  together,  and  great  additions  have  been  made  to  the  church 
all  of  a  sudden.  And  what  has  become  of  them?  Where  are 
those  churches  at  the  present  moment?  The  dreariest  deserts  in 
Christendom  are  those  places  that  were  fertilised  by  the  patent  manures 
of  certain  revivalists.  The  whole  church  seemed  to  have  spent  its 
strength  in  one  rush  and  effort  after  something,  and  it  ended  in 
nothing  at  all.  They  built  their  wooden  house,  and  piled  up  the 
Juiy,  and  made  a  stubble  spire  that  seemed  to  reach  the  heavens, 
and  there  fell  one  spark,  and  all  went  away  in  smoke;  and  he  that 
came  to  labour  next  time — the  successor  of  the  great  builder— had 
to  get  the  iisht'S  swept  awny  before  he  could  do  any  good.  The  prayer 
of  every  one  that  serves  God  should  be,  "  Oh  that  thou  wouldest  bless 
me  indeed."    Plod  on,  plod  on.    If  I  only  build  one  piece  of  masomT 


THE  PRAYER  OF  JABEZ.  828 

my  life,  and  nothing  more,  if  it  be  gold,  silver,  or  precious  stones,  it 
i  good  deal  for  a  man  to  do ;  of  sach  precious  stuff  as  that,  to  build 
n  one  little  comer  which  will  not  show,  is  a  worthy  service.  It  will 
;  be  much  talked  of,  but  it  will  last.  There  is  the  point :  it  will  last. 
iBtablish  thou  the  work  of  our  hands  upon  us  ;  yea,  the  work  of  our 
ids  establish  thou  it.*'  If  we  are  not  builders  in  an  established 
urch,  it  is  of  little  use  to  try  at  all.  What  God  establishes  will  stand, 
t  what  men  build  without  his  establishment  will  certainly  come  to 
ijs:ht  ''Oh  that  thou  wouldest  bless  me  indeed!"  Sunday-school 
cher,  be  this  your  prayer.  Tract  distributer,  local  preacher,  what- 
T  you  may  be,  dear  brother  or  sister,  whatever  your  form  of  service, 
ask  the  Lord  that  you  may  not  be  one  of  those  plaster  builders  using 
un  compo  that  only  requires  a  certain  amount  of  frost  and  weather 
make  it  crumble  to  pieces.  Be  it  yours,  if  you  cannot  build  a 
fiedral,  to  build  at  least  one  part  of  the  marvellous  temple  that 
d  IB  piling  for  eternity,  which  will  outlast  the  stars. 
[  have  one  thing  more  to  mention  before  I  bring  this  sermon  to  a 
se.  The  blessings  of  God's  grace  are  blessitigs  indeed,  which  in  right 
nest  we  ought  to  seek  after.  By  these  marks  shall  ye  know  them. 
sssings  indeed,  are  such  blessings  as  come  from  the  pierced  hand ; 
ssings  that  cojne  from  Calvaiys  bloody  tree,  streaming  from  the 
rionr's  wounded  side — thy  pardon,  thine  acceptance,  thy  spiritual 
i :  the  bread  that  is  meat  indeed,  the  blood  that  is  drink  indeed — thy 
mess  to  Christ,  and  all  that  comes  of  it — these  are  blessings  indeed, 
y  blessing  that  comes  as  the  result  of  the  Spirit's  work  in  thy  soul 
a  blessing  indeed  ;  though  it  humble  thee,  though  it  strip  thee, 
mgh  it  kill  thee,  it  is  a  blessing  indeed.  Though  the  harrow  go  over 
1  over  thy  soul,  and  the  deep  plough  cut  into  thy  very  heart ;  though 
\xk  be  maimed  and  wounded,  and  left  for  dead,  yet  if  the  Spirit  of 
d  do  it,  it  is  a  blessing  indeed.  If  he  convinceth  thee  of  sin,  of 
hteousness,  and  of  judgment,  even  though  thou  hast  not  hitherto  been 
>a^ht  to  Christ,  it  is  a  blessing  indeed.  Anything  that  he  does,  accept 
do  not  be  dubious  of  it;  but  pray  that  he  may  continue  his  blessed 
orations  in  thy  soul.  Whatsoever  leads  thee  to  God  is  in  like  manner 
fleasing  indeed.  Riches  may  not  do  it.  There  may  be  a  golden  wall 
ween  thee  and  God.  Health  will  not  do  it :  even  the  strength  and 
rrow  of  thy  bones  may  keep  thee  at  a  distance  from  thy  God.  But 
Fthing  that  draws  thee  nearer  to  him  is  a  blessing  indeed.  What 
•ugh  it  be  a  cross  that  raiseth  thee?  yet  if  it  raise  thee  to  God  it 
ill  be  a  blessing  indeed.  Anything  that  reaches  into  eternity,  with  a 
paration  for  the  world  to  come,  anything  that  we  can  carry  across  the 
er,  the  holy  joy  that  is  to  blossom  in  those  fields  beyond  the  swelling 
)d,  the  pure  cloudless  love  of  the  brotherhood  which  is  to  be  the  atraos- 
»rc  of  truth  for  ever — anything  of  this  kind  that  has  the  eternal  broad 
ow  on  it — the  immutable  mark — is  a  blessing  indeed.  And  anything: 
ich  helps  me  to  glorify  God  is  a  blessing  indeed.  If  I  be  siuk,  and 
it  helps  me  to  praise  him,  it  is  a  blessing  indeed.  If  I  be  poor,  and  I 
I  serve  him  better  in  poverty  than  in  wealth,  it  is  a  blessing  indeed. 
I  be  in  contempt,  I  will  rejoice  in  that  day  and  leap  for  joy,  if  it  be 
'  Christ's  sake — it  is  a  blessing  indeed.  Yea,  my  faith  shakes  off  the 
if^aise,  snatches  the  vizor  from  the  fair  forehead  of  the  blessing,  and 


1 


824  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLB  PULPIT. 

counts  it  all  joy  to  fall  into  divers  trials  for  the  sake  of  Jesofi  and  the 
recompense  of  reward  that  he  has  promised.  *'  Oh  that  we  may  be 
blessea  indeed !" 

Now,  I  send  you  away  with  these  three  words :  "  Search."  See 
whether  the  blessings  are  blessings  indeed,  and  be  not  satisfied  anless 
you  know  that  they  are  of  God,  tokens  of  his  grace,  and  earnests  of  his 
saving  purpose.  "  Weigh  " — that  shall  be  the  next  word.  Whatever 
thou  hast,  weigh  it  in  the  scale,  and  ascertain  if  it  be  a  blessing  indeed, 
conferring  such  grace  upon  you  as  causeth  yon  to  abound  in  love,  and 
to  abound  in  every  good  word  and  work.  And  lastly,  "  Pray.**  So 
pray  that  this  prayer  may  mingle  with  all  thy  prayers,  that  whateoerer 
God  grants  or  whatever  he  withholds  thou  mayest  be  blessed  indeed. 
Is  it  a  joy-time  with  thee  ?  0  that  Christ  may  mellow  thy  joy,  and 
prevent  the  intoxication  of  earthly  blessedness  from  leading  thee  aside 
irom  close  walking  with  him !  In  the  night  of  sorrow,  pray  that  he  will 
bless  thee  indeed,  lest  the  wormwood  also  intoxicate  thee  and  make 
thee  drunk,  lest  thy  afflictions  should  make  thee  think  hardly  of  him. 
Pray  for  the  blessing,  which  having,  thou  art  rich  to  all  the  intents  of 
bliss,  or  which  lacking,  thou  art  poor  and  destitute,  though  plenty  fill 
thy  store.  "  If  thy  presence  go  not  with  me,  carry  us  not  up  hoice.' 
But  "  Oh  that  thou  wouldest  bless  me  indeed  l" 


Letter  from  Mr.  Spiirgeotij  read  at  the  Tabernacle  on  Lorctg-da^^ 
June  11//*; — 

Beloved  FBiEBms, — Whom  I  have  in  constant  and  a0ectionate  remembranoe, 
I  am  obliged  again  to  take  up  the  note  of  mourning,  for  I  have  been  all  the 
week  suffering,  and  the  most  of  it  confined  to  my  bed.  The  severe  weather 
has  driven  me  back,  and  caused  a  repetition  of  all  my  pains. 

Nevertheless,  the  Lord's  will  be  done.  Let  him  have  his  way  with  me,  for  be 
is  Love.  I  have  been  wearying  to  preat^h  again,  but  it  may  be  my  dumb 
Sabbaths  are  appointed  for  my  chastisement,  and  their  number  is  not  yet 
fulfilled.  AVe  must  work  for  God  while  we  can,  for  not  one  of  us  knows  how 
soon  he  may  be  unable  to  take  a  share  in  the  service.  At  the  same  time,  bow 
uninipurtant  we  are  !  God's  work  goes  on  without  us.  We  all  need  him,  but  he 
needs  no  one  of  us. 

Beloved,  hitherto  I  have  had  much  solace  in  hearing  that  the  Lord's  work 
among  you  goes  on.  I  pray  you  moke  earnest  intercession  that  this  maj 
continue.  I  hope  week-night  services  will  not  droop.  If  you  stay  away,  let  it 
be  when  I  am  there,  but  not  now.  May  the  Deacons  and  Elders  find  them- 
selves  at  every  meeting  for  worship  surrounded  by  an  untiring  band  of  helpers. 

^lav  abundance  of  grace  rest  on  you  all,  especially  on  the  sick,  the  poor, 
and  the  bereaved.  Priy  for  me,  I  entreat  you.  Perhaps  if  the  church  met  for 
prayer  I  should  be  speedily  restored.  1  know  thousands  do  pray,  but  should 
not  the  church  do  so  as  a  church  f  I  fear  I  must  give  up  all  hope  of  preaching 
on  the  2oth ;  but  I  trust  the  Lord  will  be  merciful  to  me,  and  send  me  asDODg 
you  on  the  first  Sabbath  of  July. 

Next  Suntlay  there  should  be  a  collection  for  the  Association,  an  object  voy 
dear  to  me.     With  deep  Christian  love. 

Your  sufiering  PiauBtor, 

C.  £L  SPUBGBON 


Jlilctrj)|nltta«  ilJabmatle  §ul0. 


THE  SHEEP   AND   THEIR  SHEPHERD. 


DELIVERED  BY 

C.  H.  SPUIIGEON, 

AT     THE     KETBOPOLITAN     TABERNACLE,     NEWIKQTON. 


"  My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  I  know  them,  and  they  follow  me."— John  x.  27. 

Christians  are  here  compared  to  sheep.  Not  a  very  flattering  com- 
parison you  may  say;  but  then  we  do  not  wish  to  be  flattered,  nor 
would  our  Lord  deem  it  good  to  flatter  us.  While  far  from  flattering, 
it  is,  however,  eminently  consoling,  for  of  all  creatures  there  are  not 
any  more  compassed  about  with  infirmity  than  sheep.  In  this  frailty 
of  their  nature  they  are  a  fit  emblem  of  ourselves ;  at  least,  of  so  many 
of  us  as  have  believed  in  Jesus  and  become  his  disciples.  Let  otliers 
boast  how  strong  they  are;  yet  if  there  be  strong  ones  anywhere, 
certainly  we  are  weak.  AVe  have  proved  our  weakness,  and  day  by 
day  we  lament  it.  We  do  confess  our  weakness;  yet  may  we  not 
repine  at  it,  for,  as  Paul  said,  so  we  find,  when  we  are  weak  then  arc  we 
strong.  Sheep  have  many  wants,  yet  they  are  veiy  helpless,  and  quite 
unable  to  provide  for  themselves.  But  for  the  shepherd's  care  they 
would  soon  periak.  This,  too,  is  our  case.  Our  spiritual  needs  are 
numerous  and  pressing,  yet  we  cannot  supply  any  of  them.  We  are 
travellers  through  a  wilderness  that  yields  us  neither  food  nor  water. 
Unless  our  bread  drop  down  from  heaven,  and  our  water  flow  out  cf 
the  living  rock,  we  must  die.  Our  weakness  and  our  want  wc  keenly 
feel :  still  we  have  no  cause  to  murmur,  since  the  Lord  knows  our  poor 
estate,  and  succours  us  with  the  tenderest  care.  Sheep,  too,  are  silly 
creacures,  and  in  this  respect  likewise  we  are  very  sheepish.  AVe  meekly 
own  it  to  him  who  is  reaay  to  guide  us.  We  say,  as  David  said,  •*  0 
God,  thou  knowest  my  foolishness;'*  and  he  says  to  us  as  he  said  to 
David,  "  I  will  instruct  thee  and  teach  thee  in  the  way  which  thou 
sbalt  go."  If  Christ  were  not  our  wisdom,  we  should  soon  fall  a  prey 
to  the  destroyer.  Every  grain  of  true  wisdom  that  we  possess  wc  have 
derived  from  him  ;  of  ourselves  we  are  dull  and  giddy  ;  folly  is  bound 
up  in  our  heart.  The  more  conscious  you  arc,  dear  brethren,  of  your 
own  deficiencies,  your  lack  of  stamina,  discretion,  sagacity,  and  all  the 
instincts  of  self-preservation,  the  more  delighted  you  will  be  to  see 
that  the  Lord  accepts  you  under  these  conditions,  and  calls  Vou 
So.  995. 


326  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

the  people  of  bis  pasture  and  the  sheep  of  his  hand.  He  discerns  yon 
as  you  are,  claims  you  as  his  own,  foresees  all  the  ills  to  which  yon 
are  exposed,  yet  tends  you  as  his  flock,  sets  store  by  every  lamb  of  t^e 
fold,  and  so  feeds  you  according  to  the  integrity  of  his  heart,  and  guides 
you  by  the  skilfulness  of  his  hands.  "  /  will  feed  my/lock^  and  I  wUl 
cause  fhem  to  lie  dawn,  saiih  the  Lord  God,''  Oh,  what  sweet  music  there 
is  to  us  in  the  name  which  is  given  to  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  of  "  the 
good  Shepherd"!  It  not  only  describes  the  office  he  holds,  but  it  sets 
forth  the  sympathy  he  feels,  the  aptness  he  shows,  and  the  responsibility 
he  bears  to  promote  our  well-being.  What  if  the  sheep  be  weak,  yet 
is  the  shepherd  strong  to  guard  his  flock  from  the  prowling  wolf  or 
the  roaring  lion.  If  the  sheep  suffer  privation  because  the  soil  is 
barren,  yet  is  the  shepherd  able  to  lead  them  into  pasturage  suitable 
for  them.  If  they  be  foolish,  yet  he  goes  before  them,  cheers  them 
with  his  voice,  and  rules  them  with  the  rod  of  his  command.  There 
cannot  be  a  flock  without  a  shepherd ;  neither  is  there  a  shepherd  tmlj 
without  a  flock.  The  two  must  go  together.  They  are  the  fulness  of 
each  other.  As  the  church  is  the  fulness  of  him  that  filleth  all  in  all, 
so  we  rejoice  to  remember  that "  of  his  fulness  have  all  we  received,  and 

frace  for  grace.**  That  I  am  like  a  sheep  is  a  sorry  reflection;  but  that 
have  a  shepherd  charms  away  the  sorrow  and  creates  a  new  joy. 
It  even  becomes  a  gladsome  thing  to  be  weak,  that  I  may  rely  on  his 
strength ;  to  be  full  of  wants,  that  I  may  draw  from  his  fulness  ;  to  be 
shallow  and  often  at  my  wit*s  end,  that  I  may  be  always  regnlated  by 
his  wisdom.  Even  so  doth  my  shame  redound  to  his  praise.  Not  to 
you,  ye  great  and  mighty,  who  lift  your  heads  high,  and  claim  for 
yourselves  honour :  not  for  you  is  peace,  not  to  you  is  rest ;  but  onto 
you,  ye  lowly  ones,  who  delight  in  the  valley  of  humiliation,  and  feel 
yourselves  to  be  taken  down  in  your  own  esteem — to  you  it  is  that  the 
Shepherd  becomes  dear;  and  to  you  will  he  give  to  lie  down  in  green 
pastures  beside  the  still  waters. 

In  a  very  simple  way,  we  shall  speak  about  the  proprietor  of  the 
sheep.  "  My  sheep,*'  says  Christ.  Then,  we  shall  have  a  little  to  say 
about  the  marks  of  the  sheep.  After  that  I  propose  to  talk  awhile 
about  the  privileges  of  the  sheep.  "  I  know  my  sheep : "  they  are 
privileged  to  be  known  of  Christ.    "  My  sheep  hear  my  voice." 

I.  Who  is  the  proprietor  of  the  sheep?  They  are  all  Christ's. 
"  My  sheep  hear  my  voice."    How  came  the  saints  to  be  Christ's  ? 

They  are  his,  first  of  all,  because  he  chose  them.  Ere  the  worlds  were 
made,  out  of  all  the  rest  of  mankind  he  selected  them.  He  knew  the 
race  would  fall,  and  become  unworthy  of  the  faculties  with  which  he 
endowed  them,  and  the  inheritance  he  had  assigned  them.  To  him 
belonged  the  sovereign  prerogative  that  he  might  have  mercy  on  whom 
he  would  have  mercy;  and  he,  out  of  his  own  absolute  will,  and 
according  to  the  counsel  of  his  own  good  pleasure,  made  choice  severally 
and  individually  of  certain  persons,  and  he  said,  **  These  are  mine.'* 
Their  names  were  written  in  his  book:  they  became  his  portion 
and  his  heritage.  Having  chosen  them  of  old  so  many  ages  ago,  rest 
assured  he  will  not  lose  them  now.  Men  prize  that  which  they  have 
long  had.  If  there  is  a  thing  that  was  mine  but  yesterday,  and  it  is  lost 
to-daj,  I  might  not  fret  about  it ;  but  if  I  have  long  possessed  it,  and 


THB  8HBSP  AND  THEIR  SHEPHEBD.  327 

called  it  my  patrimony,  I  would  npt  willingly  part  with  it.    Sheep  of 

Christ,  ye  shall  be  his  for  erer,  because  ye  have  been  his  from  ever. 

They  are  Christ's  sheep,  because  his  Father  gave  them  to  him.    They 

were  the  gift  of  the  Father  to  Christ.     He  often  speaks  of  them  in 

this  way.    "  As  many  as  thou  hast  given  me :  *'  **Thou  hast  given  them 

me,"  saith  he,  over  and  over  again.    Of  old,  the  Father  gave  his  people 

to  Christ     Separating  them  from  among  men,  he  presented  them  to 

him  as  a  gift,  committed  them  into  his  hand  as  a  trust,  and  ordained 

them  for  him  as  the  lot  of  his  inheritance.    Thus  they  become  a  token 

of  the  Father's  love  to  his  only  begotten  Son,  a  proof  of  the  confidence 

he  reposed  in  him,  and  a  pledge  of  the  honour  that  shall  be  done  unto 

him.    Now,  I  suppose  we  most  of  us  know  how  to  value  a  gift  for  the 

donor's  sake.     If  presented  to  us  by  one  whom  we  love,  we  set  great 

store  by  it.    If  it  has  been  designed  to  be  a  love-token,  it  awakens  in 

our  minds  many  sweet  memories.    Though  the  intrinsic  worth  may  be 

of  small  account,  the  associations  make  it  exceedingly  precious.     We 

might  be  content  to  lose  something  of  far  greater  value  in  itself  rather 

than  that  which  is  the  gift  of  a  friend,  the  offering  of  his  love.    I  like 

the  delicate  sentiment  of  the  poet,  as  it  is  expressed  in  that  pretty 

Terse — 

**  I  never  cast  a  flower  away, 
The  gift  of  one  who  cared  for  me ; 
A  little  flower— a  faded  flower, 
But  it  was  done  reluctantly."  * 

Yet,  oh,  bow  weak  the  words  of  human  passion  !  but,  oh,  how  strong 
the  expressions  of  divine  ardour,  when  Jesus  speaks  to  the  Father  of 
"  the  men  whom  thou  gavest  me  out  of  the  world  "I  "  Thine  they  were," 
he  says,  *^  and  thou  gavest  them  me ;  and  those  that  thou  gavest  me  1 
have  kept."  Ye  sheep  of  Christ,  rest  safely ;  let  not  your  soul  be 
disturbed  with  fear.  The  Father  gave  you  to  his  Son,  and  he  will  not 
lightly  lose  what  God  himself  has  given  him.  The  infernal  lions  shall 
not  rend  the  meanest  lamb  that  is  a  love-token  from  the  Father  to 
his  best  Beloved.     While  Christ  stands  defending  his  own,  he  will 

Erotect  them  from  the  lion  and  the  bear,  that  would  take  the  lambs  of 
is  flock ;  he  will  not  suiter  the  least  of  them  to  perish. 
"  My  8?i;eepj"  says  Christ.  They  are  his,  furthermore,  because,  in 
addition  to  his  choice  and  to  the  gift,  he  has  bought  them  with  a  ^rice. 
They  had  sold  themselves  for  nought;  but  he  has  redeemed  them,  not 
with  corruptible  things  as  with  silver  and  gold,  but  with  his  precious 
blood.  A  man  always  esteems  that  to  be  exceedingly  valuable  which 
he  procured  with  risk — with  risk  of  life  and  limb.  David  felt  he 
coQld  not  drink  the  water  that  the  brave  warriors  who  broke  through 
the  host  of  the  Philistines  brought  to  him  from  the  well  at  Bethlehem, 
because  it  seemed  to  him  as  though  it  were  the  blood  of  the  men  that 
went  in  jeopardy  of  their  lives ;  and  he  poured  it  out  before  the  Lord. 
It  was  too  precious  a  draught  for  him,  when  men's  lives  had  been 
hazarded  for  it.  But  the  good  Shepherd  not  only  hazarded  his  life, 
tat  even  laid  it  down  for  his  sheep.  Jacob  exceedingly  valued  one 
part  of  his  possessions,  and  he  gave  it  to  Joseph  :  he  gave  him  one 

Krtion  above  his  brethren.    Now,  you  may  be  sure  he  would  give 
Beph  that  which  he  thought  most  precious.    But  why  did  he  give  him 


cnei 


328  METROPOUTAN  TABERNACLB  PULPTT. 

that  particular  portion  ?    Because,  be  says,  **  I  took  it  ont  of  the  hand 
of  the  Amorite  with  my  sword  and  with  my  bow."    Now,  our  blessed 
Shepherd  esteems  his  sheep  because  they  cost  him  his  blood.    They  cost 
him  his  blood — I  may  say,  he  took  them  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Amorite 
with  his  sword  and  with  his  bow  in  bloody  conflict,  where  he  was 
victor,  but  yet  was  slain.     There  is  not  one  sheep  of  all  his  flock  bnt 
what  he  can  see  the  mark  of  his  blood  on  him.    In  the  face  of  every 
saint  the  Saviour  sees,  as  in  a  glass,  the  memorial  of  his  bloody  sweat  in 
Gethseraane,  and  his  agonies  at  Golgotha.  "  Ye  are  not  your  own,  for  ye 
are  bought  Avith  a  price."    That  stands  as  a  call  to  duty,  but  it  is  at  toe 
same  time  a  consolation,  for  if  he  has  bought  me,  he  will  have  me. 
Bought  with  such  a  price,  he  will  not  like  to  lose  me,  nor  suffer  any 
foe  to  take  me  out  of  his  hand.     Think  not  that  Christ  will  suffer  those 
to  perish  for  whom  he  died.    To  me  the  very  suggestion  seems  to  draw 
near  to  the  verge  of  blasphemy.     If  he  has  bought  me  with  his  blood, 
I  cannot  conceive  he  cares  nothing  for  me,  will  take  no  further  concern 
about  me,  or  will  suffer  my  soul  to  be  cast  into  the  pit.     If  he  has 
suffered  in  my  stead,  where  is  justice  gone  that  the  substitute  should 
bear  my  guilt,  and  I  should  bear  it  too  ?  and  where  is  mercy  fled,  that 
God  should  execute  twice  the  punishment  for  one  offence?     Nay, 
beloved,  those  whom  he  hath  bought  with  blood  are  his,  and  he  will 
keep  them. 

"  My  sheep,''  says  Christ.    They  are  his,  or  in  due  time  they  shall 
become  so,  through  his  capturing  them  by  sacred  power.    As  well  by 
power  are  we  redeemed  as  by  price,  for  the  blood-bought  sheep  had 
gone  astray  even  as  others.    **  All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray; 
we  have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way  ; "  but,  my  brethren,  tie 
good  shepherd  has  brought  many  of  us  back  with  infinite  condes- 
cension :  Avith  boundless  mercy  he  followed  us  when  we  went  astray. 
Oh,  what  blind  slaves  we  were  when  we  sported  with  death !    We 
did  not  know  then  what  his  love  had  ordained  for  us:    it  never 
entered  our  poor,  silly  heads  that  there  was  a  crown  for  us ;  we  did 
not  know  that  the  Father's  love  had  settled  itself  on  us,  or  ever  the 
day-star  knew  its  place.    "We  knoAV  it  now,  and  it  is  he  that  has  taught 
us  ;  for  he  followed  us  over  mountains  of  vanity,  through  bogs  and 
miry  places  of  foul  transgi'ession ;  tracked  our  devious  footsteps  on  and 
on,  through  youth  and  manhood,  till  at  last,  with  mighty  grace,  he 
grasped  us  in  his  arms  and  laid  us  on  his  shoulder,  and  is  this  day 
carrying  us  home  to  the  great  fold  above,  rejoicing  as  he  bears  all  oar 
weight  and  finds  us  in  all  we  need.     Oh,  that  bless^  work  of  effectual 
grace  !     He  has  made  us  his  own,  he  has  defeated  the  enemy,  the  pr^ 
has  been  taken  from  the  mighty,  and  the  lawful  captive  has  been  de- 
livered.   **  He  hath  broken  the  gates  of  brass,  and  cut  the  bars  of  iron 
asunder,"  to  set  his  people  free.     "  0  that  men  would  praise  the  Lord 
for  his  goodness,  and  for  his  wonderful  works  to  the  children  of  men!" 

**  My  sheep,"  saith  Christ,  as  he  stands  in  the  midst  of  his  disciples. 
**  My  Shepherd,"  let  us  one  and  all  reply.  All  the  sheep  of  Christ  who 
have  been  redeemed  by  his  power,  become  his  by  their  own  willing  and 
cheerful  surrender  of  themselves  to  him.  We  would  not  belong  to 
ther  if  we  might ;  nor  would  we  wish  to  belong  to  ourselves  if  we  could; 

',  I  trust,  do  we  want  any  part  of  ourselves  to  be  our  own  property. 


THE  SHEEP  AND  THEIR  SHEPHERD.  329 

ge  ye  whether  this  be  true  of  you  or  not.  In  that  day  when  I  8nr- 
lered  my  soul  to  my  Saviour,  I  gave  him  my  body,  my  soul,  my  spirit ; 
.ve  him  all  I  had,  and  all  I  shall  have  for  time  and  for  eternity.  I 
i  him  all  my  talents,  my  powers,  my  faculties,  my  eyes,  my  ears,  my 
)8,  my  emotions,  my  judgment,  my  whole  manhood,  and  all  that  could 
e  of  it,  whatever  fresh  capacity  or  new  capability  I  may  be  en- 
ed  with.  Were  I  at  this  good  hour  to  change  the  note  of  gladness 
one  of  sadness,  it  should  be  to  wail  out  my  penitent  confession  of 
times  and  circumstances  in  which  I  have  failed  to  observe  the  strict 
unwaveriug  allegiance  I  owe  to  my  Lord.  So  far  from  regretting, 
3uld  fain  renew  my  vows  and  make  them  over  again.  In  this  I 
k  every  Christian-  would  join. 

**  'Tis  done !  the  great  transaction's  done  : 
I  am  my  Lord's,  and  he  is  mine  : 
He  drew  me,  and  I  followed  on, 
Charm'd  to  confess  the  voice  divine. 

Now  rest,  my  long-divided  heart ; 
Fix'd  on  this  blissful  centre,  rest : 
With  ashes  who  would  grudge  to  part, 
When  caird  on  angels'  bread  to  feast  ? 

High  heaven,  that  heard  the  solemn  vow, 
That  vow  renew'd  shall  daily  hear : 
Till  in  Iife*s  latest  hour  I  bow. 
And  bless  in  death  a  bond  so  dear.** 

I  yet,  brethren,  though  our  hearts  may  now  be  all  in  a  glow,  lest  they 
old  presently  grow  cold,  or  the  bleak  atmosphere  of  uiis  evil  world 
cdd  chill  our  devotion,  let  us  never  cease  to  think  of  the  good  Shepherd 
hat  great,  good  act,  which  most  of  all  showed  his  love  when  he  laid 
m  his  life  for  the  sheep.  You  have  heard  the  story  told  by  Francis 
Sales.  He  saw  a  girl  carrying  a  pail  of  water  on  her  head,  in  the 
Ist  of  which  she  had  placed  a  piece  of  wood.  On  asking  her  why 
did  this,  she  told  him  it  was  to  prevent  the  motion  of  the  water,  for 
*  it  might  be  spilt.  And  so,  said  he,  let  us  place  the  cross  of  Christ 
he  midst  of  our  hearts  to  check  the  movement  of  our  afiections,  that 
y  may  not  be  spilt  in  restless  cares  or  grievous  troubles. 
'  Jdij  sheep"  says  Christ, and  thus  he  describes  his  people.  They  are 
•ist' 8,  his  own,  a  peculiar  property.  May  I  hope  that  this  truth  will  be 
ceforth  treasured  up  in  your  soul  I  It  is  a  common  truth,  certainly; 
when  it  is  laid  home  by  the  Holy  Spirit  it  shines,  it  beams,  not  merely 
i  lamp  in  a  dark  chamber,  but  as  the  day-star  rising  in  your  hearts, 
nember  this  is  no  more  om*  shame  that  we  are  sheep,  but  it  is  our 
lOur  that  we  are  Christ's  sheep.  To  belong  to  a  king  carries  some 
isure  of  distinction.  We  are  the  sheep  of  the  imperial  pastures. 
8  is  our  safety :  he  will  not  suffer  the  enemy  to  destroy  his  sheep. 
8  is  our  sanctity:  we  are  separated,  the  sheep  of  the  pasture  of  the 
•d's  Christ.  This  is  sanctification  in  one  aspect  of  it:  for  it  is  the 
dng  of  us  holy,  by  setting  us  apart  to  be  the  Lord's  own  portion  for 
•.  And  this  is  the  key  to  our  auty :  we  are  his  sheep :  then  let  us 
to  him,  and  consecrate  ourselves  to  him  who  loved  us  and  gave  him- 
for  us.  Christ  is  the  proprietor  of  the  sheep;  and  we  are  the 
D^y  of  the  good  Shepherd. 


330  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

IL  Now,  let  us  commune  together  awhile  upon  the  marks  of  the 
fcheep.  When  there  are  so  many  flocks  of  sheep,  it  is  necessary  to  mark 
them.  Our  Saviour  marks  us.  It  has  been  v^ry  properly  observed,  that 
there  are  two  marks  on  Christ's  sheep.  One  is  on  their  ear,  the  other 
is  on  their  foot.  These  are  two  marks  of  Christ's  sheep  not  to  be 
found  on  any  other;  but  they  are  to  be  found  on  all  his  own — the  mark 
on  the  car:  "My  sheep  hear  my  voice" — the  mark  on  the  foot:  "I 
know  them,  and  they  follow  me." 

Think  of  this  mark  on  their  ear.  "  My  sheep  hear  my  voice."  They 
hear  s])iritually.  A  great  many  people  in  Christ's  day  heard  his 
voice  who  did  not  hear  it  in  the  way  and  with  the  perception  that  is 
here  intended.  They  would  not  hear ;  that  is  to  say,  they  would  not 
hearken  or  give  heed,  neither  would  they  obey  his  call  or  come  unto  him 
that  they  might  have  life.  These  were  not  always  the  worst  sort  of 
people :  there  were  some  of  the  best  that  would  not  hear  Christ,  of 
whom  he  said,  according  to  the  original,  as  translated  by  some,  "Ye 
search  the  Scriptures ;  for  in  them  ye  think  ye  have  eternal  life :  and 
they  are  they  which  testify  of  me.  And  ye  will  not  come  to  me,  that 
ye  might  have  life."  They  would  get  as  far  as  curiosity  or  criticism 
might  allure  them ;  but  they  would  not  go  any  farther:  they  would  not 
believe  in  Jesus.  Now,  the  spiritual  ear  listens  to  God.  The  opening 
of  it  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  this  is  a  mark  of  Christ's  chosen 
blood-bought  people,  that  they  hear  not  only  the  hollow  sound,  bnt 
the  hidden  sense ;  not  the  bare  letter,  but  the  spiritual  lesson ;  and  that 
too  not  merely  with  the  outward  organ,  but  with  the  inward  heart 
The  chief  point  is  that  they  hear  his  voice.  Oh,  if  all  that  heard 
my  voice  heard  Christ's  voice,  how  Avould  I  wander  down  every  street 
in  this  city  to  proclaim  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ ;  but,  alas !  the 
voice  of  the  minister  is  utterly  iuelFectual  to  save  a  soul,  unless 
the  voice  of  Christ  reach  the  conscience  and  rouse  its  dormant  powers. 
**  My  sheep  hear  my  voice  ; "  the  voice  of  Jesus,  his  counsel,  his  com- 
mand, clothed  with  the  authority  of  his  own  sacred  sovereign  utterance. 
When  the  gospel  comes  to  you  as  Christ's  gospel,  with  demonstration 
of  the  Spirit,  the  invitation  is  addressed  to  you  by  him.  You  can  look 
upon  it  in  no  other  light ;  so  you  must  accept  and  receive  it  When 
his  princely  power  comes  with  it — being  mighty  to  save,  he  puts  saving 
power  into  the  word — then  you  hear  Ciirist's  voice  as  a  fiat  that  most 
be  obeyed,  as  a  summons  that  must  be  attended  to,  as  a  call  to  which 
there  must  be  a  quick  response.  0  beloved,  do  not  ever  rest  satisfied 
with  hearing  the  voice  of  the  preacher.  We  are  only  Christ's  speaking- 
trumpets  :  there  is  nothing  in  us :  it  is  only  his  speaking  through  n« 
that  can  do  any  good.  0  children  of  God,  some  of  you  do  not 
always  listen  to  Christ's  voice  in  the  preaching.  While  we  comment 
on  the  word,  you  make  your  comments  on  us.  Our  style,  or  our  tone, 
or  even  our  gesture,  is  enough  to  absorb — I  might  rather  say,  to  distract 
— your  thoughts.  "  Why  look  ye  so  earnestly  on  us  ?"  I  beseech  yoo, 
give  less  heed  to  the  livery  of  the  servant,  and  give  more  care  to  the 
message  of  the  Master.  Listen  warily,  if  you  please ;  but  judge  wisely, 
if  you  can.  See  how  much  pure  grain,  and  how  much  of  Christ,  there 
is  in  the  sermon.  Use  your  sieve;  put  away  all  the  chaff;  take  only 
the  good  wheat ;    hear  Christ's  voice.      Well  were  it  if  we  could 


THE  SHEEP  AND  THEIR  SHEPHERD.  331 

3nre  ourselves  that  we  might  manifest  him.  I  could  wish  so  to 
ach  that  you  could  not  see  even  my  little  finger ;  might  I  but  so 
ach  that  you  could  get  a  full  view  of  Jesus  only.  0  that  you  could  hear 
voice  drowning  ours !  This  is  the  mark,  the  peculiar  mark  of  those 
)  are  Christ's  peculiar  people :  they  hear  his  voice.  Sometimes,  truly, 
ounds  in  the  ministry;  sometimes  it  thrills  forth  from  that  book  of 
ks,  which  is  often  grossly  neglected ;  sometimes  it  comes  in  the  night- 
^hes.  His  voice  may  speak  to  us  in  the  street.  Silent  as  to  vocal 
trance,  but  like  familiar  tones  that  sometimes  greet  us  in  our  dreams, 
voice  of  Christ  is  distinctly  audible  to  the  soul.  It  will  come  to  you 
jweet  or  in  bitter  providences ;  yea,  there  is  such  a  thing  as  hearing 
ist's  voice  in  the  rustling  of  every  leaf  upon  the  tree,  in  the  moaning 
every  wind,  in  the  rippling  of  every  wave.  And  there  be  those  that 
e  learned  to  lean  on  Christ's  bosom,  till  thev  have  looked  for  all  the 
•Id  as  though  they  were  a  shell  that  lay  in  the  ocean  of  Christ's 
e,  listening  for  ever  to  the  sonorous  cadence  of  that  deep,  un- 
lomed,  all-mysterious  main.  The  billows  of  his  love  never  cease  to 
U.  The  billowy  anthem  still  peals  on  with  solemn  grandeur  in  the 
of  the  Christian.  0  may  we  hear  Christ's  voice  each  one  of  us  for 
selves  !  I  find  that  language  fails  me,  and  metaphors  are  weak  to 
3ribe  its  potent  spell. 

►ne  point  is  worth  noticing,  however.  I  think  our  Lord  meant 
3  that  his  sheep,  when  they  hear  his  voice,  know  it  so  well  that  they 
tell  it^t  once  from  the  voice  of  strangers.  The  true  child  of  God 
ws  the  gospel  from  the  law.  It  is  not  by  learning  catechisms, 
liug  theological  books,  or  listening  to  endless  controversies,  that 
finds  this  out.  There  is  an  instinct  of  his  regenerate  nature 
more  trustworthy  than  any  lessons  he  has  been  taught.  The  voice 
esus !  Whv,  there  is  no  music  like  it.  If  you  have  once  heard  it, 
cannot  mistake  it  for  another,  or  another  for  it.  Some  are  babes 
;race :  others  are  of  full  age,  and  by  reason  of  use,  have  their  senses 
•cised ;  but  one  sense  is  quickly  brought  out — the  sense  of  hearing. 
$  so  easy  to  tell  the  joy-bells  of  the  gospel  from  the  death-knell  of 
law ;  for  the  letter  Jcilleth,  but  the  Spirit  giveth  life.  *'Do,  or  die," 
J  Moses.  "  Believe,  and  live,"  says  Ciirist :  you  must  know  which  is 
ch.  Yes ;  and  I  think  they  are  equally  shrewd  and  quick  to  dis- 
linate  between  the  flesh  and  the  Spirit.  Let  some  of  the  very  feeblest 
lod's  people  sit  down  under  a  fluent  ministry,  with  all  the  beauties 
hetoric,  and  let  the  minister  preach  up  the  dignity  of  human  nature, 
the  sufficiency  of  man's  reason  to  find  out  the  way  of  righteousness, 
you  will  hear  them  say :  **  It  is  very  clever ;  but  there  is  no  food  for 
in  it."  Bring,  however,  the  best  and  most  instructed,  and  most 
ned  Christian  man,  and  set  him  down  under  a  ministry  that  is  very 
ty  as  to  the  gift  of  utterance,  and  incorrect  even  in  grammar;  bub 
J  is  full  of  Jesus  Christ,  I  know  what  he  will  say :  "  Ah !  never 
d  the  man,  and  never  mind  the  platter  on  which  he  brought  the 
t ;  it  was  food  to  my  sonl  that  I  fed  upon  with  a  hearty  relish ;  it 
marrow  and  fatness,  for  I  could  hear  Christ's  voice  in  it."  I  am 
going  t©  follow  out  these  tests;  but  certain  it  is,  that  the  sheep 
w  Christ's  voice,  and  can  easily  difetinguish  it.  I  saw  hundreds  of 
bs  the  other  day  together,  and  there   were  also  their  mothers; 


o32  METROPOUTAN  TABERNACLE  PULTIT. 

and  I  am  sure  if  I  had  had  the  task  of  allotting  the  proper  lamb  to 
eacli,  or  to  any  of  them,  it  would  have  kept  me  till  now  to  baye  done 
it.  But  somehow  the  lambs  knew  the  mothers,  and  the  motherg 
knew  the  lambs;  and  thej  were  all  happy  enough  in  each  othert 
company. 

Every  saint  here,  mixed  up  as  he  may  be  at  times  with  parties 
and  i)rofessors  of  all  sorts,  knows  Christ,  and  Christ  knows  him,  and 
he  is  therefore  bound  to  his  owner.  That  is  the  mark  on  the  ear. 
You  have  seen  sometimes  in  the  country  two  flocks  together  on  the 
road,  and  you  say:  "  I  wonder  how  the  shepherds  will  manage  to  keq) 
them  distinct  ?  They  will  get  mixed  up.**  They  do  not;  they  go  this 
way  and  that  way ;  and  after  a  little  commingling  tliey  separate,  for  ther 
know  their  master's  voice;  "and  a*stranger  will  they  not  follow."  Ton 
will  go  to-mcrrow,  many  of  you,  out  into  the  world,  so  ire  to  the  Ex- 
change, others  to  the  market,  and  others  again  into  the  factory :  yon 
are  all  mixed.  Yes ;  but  the  seeming  confusion  of  your  company  is 
temporary,  not  real  and  permanent.  You  will  come  right  again,  and 
you  will  go  to  your  own  home  and  your  own  fellowship.  And  at  the 
last,  when  we  shall  have  ended  our  pilgrimage,  the  one  shall  wend  his 
way  to  the  glory  land,  and  the  other  to  the  abyss  of  woe.  There  will 
be  no  mistake.  Y"ou  will  hear  the  Master's  call,  and  obey.  •There  is  a 
mark  on  the  ear  which  identifies  every  saint. 

Christ's  sheep  hear  his  voice  obediently.  This  is  an  important  proof 
of  disciplcship.  Indeed,  it  may  serve  as  a  reproof  to  many.  Oh,  1  wonld 
that  you  were  more  careful  about  this!  **He  that  hath  my  com- 
manuments,  and  kecpeth  them,"  said  Jesus,  *'he  it  is  that  loYethme." 
"  He  that  loveth  me  not  keepeth  not  my  sayings."  How  comes  it  to  pass, 
then,  that  there  are  certain  commands  of  Christ  which  some  Christians 
will  suffer  to  lie  in  abeyance?  They  Avill  say,  "The  Lord  commands 
this,  but  it  is  not  essential.*'  Oh,  nnloving  spirit,  that  can  think  any- 
thing unessential  that  thy  Bridegroom  bids  thee  do  !  They  that  love, 
think  little  things  of  great  moment,  especially  when  they  are  looked 
upon  as  tokens  of  the  strength  or  the  tenderness  of  one's  regard.  It 
may  not  be  essential,  in  order  to  prove  the  relation  in  which  a  wife 
stands  to  her  husband,  that  she  should  study  his  tastes,  consult  his 
wishes,  or  attend  to  his  comfort.  But  will  she  the  less  strive  to  please, 
because  love,  not  fear,  constrains  her  ?  I  trow  not.  And  can  it  be 
that  any  of  you,  my  brethren,  would  harbour  such  a  thought  as  yonr 
negligence  implies  ?  Do  you  really  suppose  that  after  the  choice  of 
Christ  has  been  fixed  on  you,  and  the  love  of  Christ  has  been  plighted 
to  you,  you  may  now  be  as  remiss  or  careless  as  you  like?  Nay,  lathcr, 
might  we  not  expect  that  a  sacred  passion,  an  ardent  zeal,  a  touch  of 
inspiration  would  stir  you  up,  put  you  on  the  alert,  make  you  wake  at 
the  faintest  sound  of  his  voice,  or  keep  you  listening  to  do  his  will?  Be 


THE  SHEEP  Aia>  THEIB  SHEPHERD.  333 

t  OUTS,  then,  to  act  out  with  fidelity  that  verse  we  have  often  snng  with 
nthasiasm  ':— 

'^  In  all  my  Lord*s  appointed  ways 
My  journey  1*11  pursue." 

lowever  little  the  precept  may  appear  in  the  eyes  of  others  ;  however 
asignificant  as  compared  with  our  salvation,  yet — doth  the  Lord  com- 
aand  it? — then  his  sheep  hear  his  voice,  and  they  follow  him. 

Christ  has  marked  his  sheep  on  their  feet  as  well  as  their  ears. 
Phey  follow  him:  they  are  gently  led,  not  harshly  driven.  They 
bllow  him  as  the  Captain  of  their  salvation;  they  trust  in  the  power  of 
lis  arm  to  clear  the  way  for  them.  All  their  trust  on  him  is  stayed;  all 
heir  hope  on  him  they  lean.  They  follow  him  as  their  teacher ;  they 
»11  no  man  **  Rabbi  '*  under  heaven,  but  Christ  alone.  He  is  the 
nfallible  source  of  their  creeds ;  neither  will  they  allow  their  minds  to 
)e  ruled  by  conclaves,  councils,  nor  decrees.  Hath  Christ  said  it  ?  It  is 
aiough.  If  not,  it  is  no  more  for  me  than  the  whistling  of  the  wind, 
rhey  follow  Christ  as  their  teacher. 

And  the  sheep  of  Christ  follow  him  as  their  example  ;  they  desire  to 
De  in  this  world  as  he  was.  It  is  one  of  their  marks,  that  to  a  greater 
)r  less  degree  they  have  a  Christ-like  spirit ;  and  if  they  could  they 
vould  be  altogether  like  their  Lord. 

They  follow  him,  too,  as  their  Commander,  and  Lawgiver,  and  Prince. 
*  Whatsoever  he  saith  unto  you,  do  it,"  was  his  mother's  wise  speech ; 
ind  it  is  the  children's  wise  rule :  "  Whatsoever  he  saith  unto  you,  do 
t."  Oh,  blessed  shall  they  be  above  many  of  whom  it  shall  be  said, 
'  These  are  they  that  have  not  defiled  their  garments."  **  These  arc  they 
rhich  follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  he  goeth."  Some  of  his  followers  are 
ot  very  scrupulous.  They  love  him.  It  is  not  for  us  to  judge  them. 
father  we  place  ourselves  among  them  and  share  in  the  censure.  But 
appiest  of  all  the  happy  are  they  who  see  the  footprint — the  print  of 
hat  foot  that  once  was  pierced  with  the  nail — and  put  their  foot  down 
'here  he  placed  it,  and  then  again,  in  the  selfsame  mark,  follow  where  he 
rod,  till  they  climb  at  last  to  the  throne.  Keep  close  to  Christ;  take  care 
f  his  little  precepts  unto  the  end.  Remember,  "  Whosoever  shall 
Teak  one  of  these  least  commandments,  and  shall  teach  men  so,  he  shall 
•e  called  the  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  Do  not  peril  being 
east  in  the  heavenly  kingdom,  though  it  is  better  to  be  that  than  to  be 
[reatest  in  the  kingdom  of  darkness.  0  seek  to  be  very  near  him,  to 
)e  a  choice  sheep  in  his  chosen  flock,  and  to  have  the  mark  distinctly 
ipon  your  foot! 

I  will  not  stay  to  apply  these  truths,  but  leave  each  one  of  you  to 
nake  such  self-searching  enquiries  as  the  text  suggests.  Have  I  the 
eir  mark  ?  Have  I  the  foot  mark  ?  **  My  sheep  hear  my  voice,"  "  and 
fchey  follow  me."    I  hope  that  I  am  among  the  number. 


834  METROPOLITAN  TABKRKACLE  PULPIT. 

III.  The  last  i)oint,  with  which  we  now  proceed  to  cleee,  u 
pRrv^iLEGE  OF  Chrlst's  SHEEP.  It  docs  not  look  very  large,  but  if  we 
open  it  wc  shall  see  an  amazing  degree  of  blessedness  in  it.  ''  I  know 
them,"  "  I  know  them."    What  does  it  mean? 

1  have  not  time  now  to  tell  you  all  it  means.     "  /  knoto  thexC 
"What  is  the  rxiverse  of  this  but  one  of  the  most  dreadfal  things  that 
is  reserved  for  the  day  of  jadgmcnt?     There  will  be  some  who  will  say, 
"Lord,  Lord,  liave  we  not  prophesied  in  thy  name,  and  in  thy  name 
cast  out  devils?"    And  he  shall  say,  "  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  yon, 
I  never  knew  yon;  dcpai't  from  me,  ye  cursed."    Now  measure  the 
height  of  that  privilege  by  the  depth  of  this  misery.     **  I  never  knew 
you."    AVhat  a  volume  of  scorn  it  implies !     Wliat  a  stigma  of  infamy 
it  conveys !    Change  the  picture.    The  Redeemer  says,  **I  know  them," 
**  I  know  them."     IIow  his  eyes  flash  with  kindness ;  how  their  cheeks 
l)uni  witli  gratitude,  as  he  says,  "  1  know  them  "I    Why,  if  a  man  had  a 
friend  and  ac(piaintance  that  he  used  to  know,  and  some  years  after 
he   found  him   a  disreputable,  abandoned,   wicked,   guilty  criminal, 
I  feel  pretty  sure  he  would  not  say  much  about  having  known  such 
a  fellow,  though  he  might  be  driven  to  confess  that  he  had  some  years 
ago  a  passing  acquaintance  with  him.    But  our  Lord  Jesus  ChriEt, 
though  he  knows  what  poor,  unwortliy  ones  we  are,  yet  when  we  shall 
bo  brought  up  before  the  Lord,  before  the  great  white  throne,  he  will 
confess  he  knew  us.     He  does  know  us,  we  are  old  acquaintances  of  his, 
and  he  luis  known  us  from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  "  For 
whom  he  did  foreknow,  he  also  did  predestinate  to  be  conformed  to  the 
image  of  his  Son,  that  he  might  be  the  firstborn  among  many  brethren. 
Moreover  whom  he  did  predestinate,  them  he  also  called."    There 
are  richvs  of  grace  in  this ;  but  Ave  Avill  consider  it  in  another  way.   Our 
Saviour  knows  us,  our  Shepherd  knows  us.    Beloved,  he  knows  your 
person  and  all  about  you.     You,  with  that  sick  body,  that  aching  head, 
he  knows  you  and  he  knows  your  soul  with  all  its  sensitiveuess ;  that 
timidity,  that  anxiety,  that  constitutional  depression— he  knows  it  all. 
A  physician  may  come  to  see  you,  and  be  unable  to  detect  what  the  disease 
is  that  pains  or  prostrates  you,  but  Christ  knows  you  through  and 
through;    all  the    parts  of  your  nature  he  understands.     "I  know 
them,"  saith  he ;  lie  can  therefore  proscribe  for  you.     He  knows  your 
sins.     Do  not  let  that  dismay  you,  because  he  has  blotted  them  all  out; 
and  he  only  knows  them  to  forgive  them,  to  cover  them  with  ])is 
righteousness.     He  knows  your  corruptions ;  he  will  help  you  to  over- 
come them ;  he  will  deal  with  you  in  providence  and  in  grace,  so  that 
they  shall  be  rooted  up.     He  knows  your  temptations.     Perhaps  yoa 
are  living  away  from  your  parents  and  Christian  friends,  and  you  hare 
had  an  extraordinary  temptation,  and  you  wish  you  could  go  home  ana 
tell  vour  mother.   Oh,  he  knows  it,  he  knows  it;  he  can  help  you  better 


THE  SHEEP  AND  THEIR  SHEPHERD.  335 

than  your  mother  can.  You  say  :  "  I  wish  the  minister  knew  the  tempta- 
tioQ  I  have  passed  through."  Do  not  tell  it;  God  knows  it.  As 
Daniel  did  not  want  Nebuchadnezzar  to  tell  him  the  nature  of  his 
dieam,  but  gaye  him  the  dream  and  the  interpretation  at  the  same  time, 
BO  God  can  send  you  comfort.  There  will  be  a  word  as  plainly  suited 
to  your  case  as  though  it  were  all  printed  and  the  preacher  had  known 
it  all.  It  must  be  so.  Depend  upon  it,  the  Lord  knows  your  temptation, 
nd  watches  your  trial ;  or  be  it  a  sick  child,  or  be  it  a  bad  matter  of 
insiness  that  has  lately  occurred ;  or  be  it  a  slander  that  has  wounded 
'onr  heart,  there  is  not  a  pang  you  feel  but  God  as  surely  sees  it  as  the 
reaver  sees  the  shuttle  which  he  throws  with  his  own  hand.  He  knows 
'our  trial,  and  he  knows  the  meaning  of  your  groans :  he  can  read  the 
ecret  desire  of  your  heart.  You  need  not  write  it  nor  speak  it :  he  has 
mderstood  it  all.  You  were  saying :  "  0  that  my  child  were  converted  I 
>  that  I  grew  in  grace  !"  He  knows  it :  he  knows  it  every  whit.  There 
B  not  a  word  on  your  tongue,  nor  a  wish  in  your  heart,  but  he 
moweth  it  altogether.  0  dear  heart,  he  knows  your  sincerity ! 
?crhaps  you  want  to  join  the  church,  and  your  proposal  has  been  de- 
tlined,  because  you  could  not  give  satisfactory  testimony.  If  you  are 
ijncere,  he  knows  it ;  he  knows,  moreover,  what  your  anxiety  is.  You 
annot  tell  another  what  it  is  that  is  bitter  to  you — the  heart  knoweth 
ts  own  bitterness — he  knows  it.  As  his  secret  is  with  you,  so  your 
lecret  is  with  him.  He  knows  you :  he  knows  what  you  have  been 
ryingto  do.  That  secret  gift — that  oflfering  dropped  so  quietly  where 
lone  could  see  it— he  knows  it.  And  he  knows  that  you  love  him. 
'Yes,"  you  are  saying  in  your  soul,  "  if  ever  I  loved  thee,  ray  Jesus, 
(as  now."  No,  you  cannot  tell  him,  nor  tell  others ;  but  he  knows 
tall. 

So,  now,  in  closing,  let  us  say  that  in  the  text  there  is  mutual 
□lowledge.  **  I  know  them,  but  they  also  know  me,  because  they  hear 
ny  voice,  and  recognise  it."  Here  is  mutual  confession.  Christ  speaks, 
die  there  would  be  no  voice :  they  hear,  else  were  the  voice  not  useful. 
•*!  know  them;"  that  is  his  thoughts  go  towards  them.  "They 
Wlow  me;"  that  is,  their  thoughts  go  towards  him.  He  leads  the 
way,  else  they  could  not  follow.  They  follow,  however,  when  he  leads 
the  way.  Being  the  counterpart  of  each  other,  what  the  one  does 
the  other  returns  through  grace;  and  what  grace  puts  into  the 
ikeep  the  shepherd  recognises,  and  makes  a  return  to  them.  Christ 
Bid  his  church  become  an  echo  of  each  other :  his  the  voice,  theirs  is 
but  a  faint  echo  of  it ;  still  it  is  a  true  echo,  and  you  shall  know  who 
«re  Christ's  by  this.  Do  they  echo  what  Christ  saith?  Oh,  how  I  wish 
^«were  all  sheep  I  How  my  soul  longs  that  we  may  many  of  us  who 
we  not  of  his  fold  be  brought  in.  The  Lord  bring  you  in,  my  dear 
^^fXKn,    The  Lord  give  you  his  grace,  and  make  you  his  own,  comfort 


336  METROPOLITAN  TABEHNACLii  PULPIT. 

you,  and  make  you  to  follow  him.  And  if  you  are  his,  show  it  Theae, 
dear  brethren  and  sisters,  here  at  this  time,  desire  to  confess  Christ  in 
your  presence.  If  they  are  doing  right,  and  you  are  not  doing  as  they 
do,  then  you  are  doing  wrong.  If  it  is  the  duty  of  one,  it  is  the  duty 
of  all ;  and  if  one  Christian  may  neglect  making  a  profession,  all  may 
do  so,  and  then  there  will  be  no  visible  church  whatever,  and  the  visible 
ordinances  must  die  out.  If  you  know  him,  own  him,  for  he  hath  said: 
**  AVhosocvcr  therefore  shall  confess  me  before  men,  him  will  I  confesg 
also  before  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven.  But  whosoever  shall  deny 
me  before  men,  him  will  I  also  deny  before  my  Father  which  is  inhearen." 
God  bless  you,  for  Christ's  sake.    Amen, 


iMter  from  Mr.   Spurgcon,   read  at  the    Tabernacle   on  Lords-day^  Jm 

ISM;— 

My  Beloved  Friends, — 

As  soon  as  the  church  had  resolved  to  meet  for  special  prarw  fcr 
mc,  I  bo^n  i-apidly  to  recover.  It  ])leu«Mi  God  to  turn  the  wind  at  the  bej>iiuii8g 
of  this  week,  and  the  change  in  the  tenii)eiiiture  has  worked  wonders.  Wo  my 
truthfully  say  of  the  WodntJ^day  meeting  f<»r  pmyer,  that  the  Lord  fulfilled  loi 
word  :  "  Before  they  call,  I  will  answer  ;  and  while  they  are  yet  speakinf^,  I  will 
hoar."  For  all  this  great  goodness  I  pray  you  to  unite  with,  me  in  sincere  aad 
intense  gratitude  to  the  Lord  our  God. 

I  feel  bound  publicly  to  express  my  happiness  of  heart.  This  week  has  foniiM 
me  with  the  liveliest  proofs  of  your  true  love.  I  have  been  deeply  touched  with  th« 
various  ways  in  wliich  tho  affection  of  so  many  of  you  has  sought  to  find  expreesko. 
I  value  this  not  only  fv)r  my  own  sake,  though  it  is  very  sweet  to  be  the  object  of 
sucli  hearty  love,  but  because  I  see  in  it  tho  evidence  that  our  union  has  been 
ci»montcd  by  years,  and  th<.'  earnest  of  future  years  of  united  effort,  if  God  spares  u. 
Thi^  absence  of  unity  is  weaknesis:  its  indisputable  presence  is  strength. 

On  tlic  closing  day  of  my  thirty -seventh  year,  I  find  m}'self  the  pastor  of  a  bekred 
flock,  who  have  borne  tho  test  of  twelve  Sabbaths  of  their  minister's  almeuce,  and 
the  severer  test  of  more  than  seventeen  years  of  the  same  ministry,  and  are  now 
exhibiting  more  love  to  him  than  ever.  I  bless  God,  but  I  also  thank  you,  lad 
a.'^sure  you  that  I  never  felt  happier  in  the  midst  of  my  people  than  I  do  now  in  the 
prospect  of  returning  to  you. 

I  am  still  weak,  but  the  improvement  in  strength  has  been  this  week  rtaj 
surprising.  I  hartlly  dare  sj»eak  of  tho  future;  but  I  earnestly  hope  we  shall  look 
each  other  in  the  face  on  the  first  Sabbath  of  July. 

The  collection  to-day  is  to  enable  the  London  Baptist  Association  to  build  anew 
chai)el  in  tho  Wandsworth  Koad.  We  are  to  carry  out  tho  project,  so  that  it  will  not 
become  us  to  bo  slack  in  our  collection.  London  grows  so  rapidly,  that  much  Btft 
bo  done  to  keep  pace  with  its  spiritual  needs.  Our  Association  does  somothingi  Iwt 
ttii  times  more  would  bo  little  enough.  You  will  1  am  sure  give  as  God  hjispro^*'*^ 
you.  The  College,  of  course,  will  bo  less  helped  ;  but  I  must  beg  to  thank  you  for 
the  continued  series  of  noble  contributions  which  have  made  each  week  remarktWe. 

Peace  be  with  you  and  the  Lord's  own  anointing.  -May  those  who  speak  to  y<* 
to-day  be  filled  with  the  Spirit.  May  tho  soft  south  wind  of  tho  Spirit's  kfe  b* 
among  you,  and  may  you  pour  forth  pmise  as  flowers  breathe  perfume. 

Yours  very  truly, 

C.  H.  SPUBGEON. 


^^tr0j!0litmt  i^ahni^de 


THE  ALARUM. 


DELIVERED  BT 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,     NEWINGTON. 


"  I  myself  will  awake  early.*' — Psalm  Ivii.  8. 

The  proper  subject  to  treat  upon  with  such  a  text  as  this  would  be  the 
propriety  and  excellence  of  early  rising,  especially  when  we  are  desirous 
of  praising  or  serving  God.  The  dew  of  dawn  should  be  consecrated  to 
devotion.  The  text  is  a  very  remarkable  expression,  and  might  fitly 
be  made  the  early-riser*s  motto.  It  is,  in  the  original,  a  highly  poetical 
phrase,  and  Milton  and  others  have  borrowed  or  imitated  it.  "  I  will 
awaken  the  morning."  So  early  would  the  psalmist  arise  for  the  praise 
of  God,  that  he  would  call  up  the  day,  and  Lid  the  sun  arise  from  the 
chambers  of  the  east,  and  proceed  upon  his  journey.  "  I  will  awaken 
the  morning."  Early  rising  has  the  example  of  Old  Testament  saints 
to  recommend  it,  and  many  modem  saints  having  conscientiously 
practised  it,  have  been  loud  in  its  praise.  It  is  an  economy  of  time, 
and  an  assistance  to  health,  and  thus  it  doubly  lengthens  life.  Late 
rising  is  too  often  the  token  of  indolence,  and  the  cause  of  disorder 
throughout  the  whole  day.  Be  assured  that  the  best  hours  are  the 
first.  Our  City  habits  are  to  be  deplored,  because  by  late  hours  of 
retirement  at  night  we  find  early  rising  difficult  if  not  impossible. 
If  we  are  able  to  escape  the  shackels  of  custom,  and  secure  for  devotion 
and  contemplation  the  hour  when  the  dew  is  on  the  grass,  we  may  count 
ourselves  thrice  happy.  If  we  cannot  do  all  we  would  in  this  matter, 
at  least  let  us  do  all  we  can. 

That  is  not,  however,  the  topic  upon  which  I  now  desire  to  speak 
to  you.  I  come  at  this  time,  not  so  much  to  plead  for  the  early  as  for 
the  awakening.  The  hour  we  may  speak  of  at  another  time — the  fact  is 
our  subject  now.  It  is  bad  to  awake  late,  but  what  shall  be  said  of  those 
who  never  awake  at  all  ?  Better  late  than  never :  but  with  many  it  is 
to  be  feared  it  will  be  never.  I  would  take  down  the  trumpet  and  give 
a  blast,  or  ring  the  alarm-bell  till  all  the  faculties  of  the  sluggard's 
Baanhood  are  made  to  bestir  themselves,  and  he  cries  with  new-born 
determination,  *'  I  myself  will  awake." 
**  WiU  auake.'*  This  is  a  world  in  which  most  men  nowadays  are 
Kos.  996-97. 


—^ 


336  METROPOLITAN  TAHKKNACLE  Pi:U»lT. 

aliTc  to  their  temporal  interests.  If  in  these  pushing  times  any  mm 
goes  to  his  business  in  a  sleepy,  listless  fashion,  he  very  soon  finds  himself 
on  an  ebb-tide,  and  all  his  affairs  aground.  The  wideawake  man 
seizes  opportunities  or  makes  them,  and  thus  those  who  are  widest 
awake  usually  come  to  the  front.  Years  ago  affairs  moved  like  tho 
broad-wheel  waggon,  very  sleepily,  wiih  sober  pause  and  leisurely 
progression,  and  then  the  son  of  the  snail  had  a  chance;  but  now. 
when  we  almost  fly,  if  a  man  would  succeed  in  trade  he  must  be  all 
alive,  and  all  awake.  If  it  be  so  in  temporals,  it  is  equally  so  m 
spirituals,  for  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil  are  all  awake  to  com- 
pete with  us ;  and  there  is  no  resolution  that  1  would  more  eaniestly 
commend  to  each  one  of  the  ])eople  of  Gnd  than  this  one  :  **  I  will  awake; 
I  will  awake  at  once  ;  I  will  awake  early,  and  I  will  pray  to  God  that 
I  may  be  kept  awake,  that  my  Christian  existence  may  not  be  dreamj, 
but  that  I  may  be  to  the  fullest  degree  useful  in  my  Master's  service." 
If  this  were  the  resolve  of  each,  what  a  change  would  come  over  the 
Christian  church  I  I  long  to  see  the  diligence  of  the  shop  exceeded  by 
the  closet,  and  the  zeal  of  the  market  excelled  by  the  church.  Each 
Christian  is  alive  :  but  is  he  also  awake  ?  He  has  eyes,  but  are  they 
open?  He  has  lofty  possibilities  of  blessing  his  fellow  men,  but  does 
he  exercise  them?  My  heart's  desire  is  that  none  of  us  may  feel 
the  dreiuny  influence  of  this  ajje,  which  is  comparable  to  the  enchanted 
ground;  but  that  each  of  us  may  be  watchful,  wakeful,  vigorous,  intense, 
fervent.  Trusting  that  the  Holy  iSpirit  may  bless  our  meditations  to 
our  spiritual  (juickening,  we  shall  briefly  turn  our  thoughts  to  the 
consideration  of  two  or  three  things. 

I.  Our  text  is  connected  with  tlic  duty  of  praise,  and  therefore  oar 
first  point  shall  Ixj — it  is  most  xec^kssaky  that  our  minds  should 
BE  IN  A  state  of  wakkfl'lnkss  WHEN  WE  ARE  PiiAisiNG  GoD.  There- 
fore, as  we  ought  to  be  always  praising  him,  our  mind  onjjht  always 
to  be  wakeful.  It  is  a  shame  to  pray  with  the  mind  half  asleep  :  it  is 
an  equal  shame  to  attemi)t  to  ])raise  God  till  all  the  i^owers  of  the  mind 
are  thoroughly  aroused.  David  is  herein  a  most  fit  example,  for  he 
sings,  **  My  heart  is  fixed,  0  God,  my  heart  is  fixed:  1  will  sing  and 
give  praise.  Awake  up,  my  glory  ;  awake,  psaltery  and  harp:  I 
myself  will  awake  early." 

We  should  be  fully  awake  when  engaged  in  private  thanksginng; 
the  song  of  our  solitude  should  be  full  of  living  joy.  I  am  afraid  there 
is  very  little  private  singing  nowadays.  AVe  often  hear  discourse  con- 
cerning private  prayer,  but  very  seldom  of  private  praise ;  and  yet 
ought  there  not  to  be  as  much  private  praise  as  private  prayer?  I  fear 
from  the  seldomness  of  its  being  mentioned,  that  private  thanksgiving 
has  grown  to  be  a  sleepy  alfair.  Then  as  to  public  worship,  how  earnest 
oufrht  it  to  be  !  Yet  how  seldom  is  it  hearty  and  real  I  How  often  do 
we  hear  half-awake  singing  !  Sometimes  a  sort  of  musical-box,  con- 
sisting of  pipes,  keys,  and  i)ellows,  is  set  to  do  all  the  adoration.  The 
l.eathens  of  Thibet  turn  the  wind  to  account  religiously,  by  makinirit 
turn  their  wiiidniills  and  ])ray  for  them;  and  our  brethren  ni  England, 
by  an  ingenious  aiijustnient  of  pipes,  make  the  same  motive  power  per- 
jrni  their  ])riuVe.  Wlii:r«'  this  nuiehinery  is  not  adopted,  still  the  Lord 
'  robbul  uf  ins  [.raise  by  ut  her  nieihods.  Sometimes  half  a  dozen  skilled 


THE  ALARUM.  3S9 

icsea  of  persons  who  wonld  be  equally  as  much  at  homo  at  the  opera 
the  theatre  as  in  the  house  of  God,  are  formed  into  a  choir  to  per- 
nn  the  psalmody  ;  and  it  is  supposed  that  God  accepts  their  formal 
►tea  as  the  praise  of  the  entire  assembly.  How  far  different  is  the 
nnine  song  of  gracious  men  who  lift  up  their  voices  to  the  Lord 
cause  their  hearts  adore  him !  Oh,  I  love  to  hear  every  voice  pouring 
it  its  note,  especially  if  I  can  but  hope  that  with  every  voice  there  is 
dug  forth  a  fervent  heart.  This  warm-hearfced,  joyful  singing — why, 
makes  the  congregation  on  earth  to  be  like  the  assembly  of  the  skies ; 
id  causes  the  meeting-place  of  the  saints  to  be  a  faint  type  of  the 
kthering  of  the  angels  and  glorified  spirits  before  the  throne  of  God. 
>  drone  or  to  whisper  in  such  a  delightful  exercise  is  criminal.  If 
er  we  should  exhibit  the  angels*  wakefulness,  it  should  be  when  we  are 
anlating  their  employment. 

Our  praise  ought  to  be  performed  with  a  fully  awakened  mind  :  first, 
at  we  may  recollect  what  we  are  praising  God  for.  We  should  have 
vivid  sense  of  the  mercies  we  have  received,  or  we  cannot  bless  God 
ight  for  them.  You  who  have  not  yet  received  spiritual  blessings, 
ould  not  be  forgetful  of  his  temporal  mercies :  it  is  surely  suflicient 
use  for  lively  thanksgiving  that  you  are  not  upon  a  bed  of  sickness  ; 
at  you  are  not  in  the  lunatic  asvlum;  that  you  are  not  in  the  work- 
m&e ;  that  you  are  not  on  the  bord^ers  of  the  grave  ;  that  you  are  not  in 
11 ;  that  you  still  have  food  and  raiment,  and  that  you  are  where  the 
wpel  is  graciously  presented  to  you.  Should  not  all  this  be  thought 
?  Should  not  this  be  fuel  for  the  flame  of  gratitude  ?  As  for  us  who 
.ve  tasted  spiritual  blessings,  if  our  minds  were  awake,  we  should 
ink  of  eternal  love  and  its  goings  forth  from  eternity ;  of  redeeming 
re,  and  the  streams  that  flow  from  the  fount  of  Calvary ;  of  God's 
imutable  love,  and  his  patience  with  our  ill-manners  in  the  wilderness; 
covenant  mercy,  of  mercies  yet  to  come,  of  heaven,  and  the  bliss 
reafter.  Such  recollections  should  call  up  our  whole  man  to  praise 
B  Lord.  If  the  innumerable  benefits  which  we  receive  were  thought 
and  dwelt  upon,  the  contemplation  would  put  a  force,  a  volume,  a 
dy  into  our  song,  and  make  it  far  more  the  fiaming  ethereal  thing 
lich  it  ought  to  be. 

We  want  our  souls  awakened,  next,  so  that  we  inay  remwiier  to 
iam  our  praise  is  offered.  Before  no  mean  king  do  we  bow  the  knee 
homage.  To  praise  God  is  to  stand  in  the  immediate  presence  of 
e  blessed  and  only  Potentate.  Do  not  even  seraphs  veil  their  faces 
that  august  presence  ?  With  what  lowliness  ought  we  bow  1  With 
lat  earnestness  of  spirit  should  we  praise !  "  Put  off  thy  shoes 
)m  off  thy  feet,  for  the  place  whereon  thou  standest  is  holy  ground." 
mrtiers  are  not  expected  to  nod  with  drowsiness  in  the  presence  of 
cir  king  ;  and  if  they  came  to  present  thanksgiving,  it  would  seem 
range  if  they  were  to  yawn  as  men  half  asleep.  Surely,  it  would  be 
pocritical  congratulation  and  insulting  behaviour  if  they  should  be 
tected  in  a  sleepy  condition  !  If  we  come  together  to  praise  God,  let 
really  do  it.  If  we  cannot  praise  him,  let  us  know  and  mourn  that 
)  cannot  do  it,  and  let  us  be  sure  that  the  spirit  is  willing,  even  if  tho 
sh  be  weak.  Let  all  sleepiness  be  put  away  in  the  presence  of  the 
er-wakefol  Jehovah,  before  whose  eyes  all  things  are  naked  and  open. 


340  METIIOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  rULPIT. 

He  never  slnmbereth  nor  sleepeth,  8o  as  to  make  a  pause  in  his  metcj 
to  us  :  let  not  our  slumbering  spirits  cause  au  omission  of  oar  gratefm 
song:. 

We  need  that  we  should  be  awake  in  praise,  that  our  whoh  heartt 
may  le  tlwrovghhj  tvarm  in  the  exercise.     Under  Christ  and  tlie  power 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  aceeptableness  of  our  praise  depends  Teiy  much 
upon  the  warmth  of  it.    As  cold  prayers  virtually  ask  God  to  deny 
them,  so  cold  praises  ask  God  to  reject  them.    Cold  praises  are  a  sort 
of  semi-blasphemy :  they  do,  as  it  were,  say,  "  Thou  art  not  worthy  to 
be  ardently  praised.     0  God,  we  bring  thee  these  poor  thanksgivings: 
they  are  good  enough  for  thee."     Surely  if  we  treated  our  heavenly 
Father  as  we  should,  every  sacred  passion  would  glow  in  our  hearts  like 
a  furnace :  our  whole  heart  would  catch  fire,  and  as  Elijah  went  up  to 
heaven  with  horses  of  fire  and  chariots  of  fire,  so,  too,  our  soul,  as 
we  thought  upon  the  goodness  and  the  graciousness  of  God,  would 
ascend  to  heaven  in  vehement  jcv  of  adoration.    Our  nraises  would  not 
be  like  the  incense  in  the  censor,  sweet  but  cold;  but  coals  of  fire  would 
be  put  in  Avith  the  incense,  and  then,  like  a  holy  cloud  of  smoke,  our 
gratitude  would  ascend  to  heaven.     Mark  with  what  exhilaration  the 
psalmist  rendered  praise  unto  God,  and  imitate  him  therein.    See  him 
dancing  before  the  ark,  and  hear  him  cry  aloud,  "  Sing  praises  to  God, 
sing  praises  :  sing  praises  unto  our  King,  sing  praises." 

Brethren,  we  have  need  to  wake  up  our  souls  in  praise,  or  else  ff» 
sM/l  at  times  fail  at  together  in  the  duff/.  Only  the  wakeful  are  praisefuL 
Sleeping  birds  sing  not.  The  Acry  best  praises  God  receives  from 
earth  are  from  his  troubled  saints;  but  then  they  are  awake;  the 
istrokcH  of  the  rod  have  aroused  them.  "When  the  three  holy  children 
sung  in  the  fire,  their  song  was  sweet  indeed ;  yet  had  they  not  been 
thoroughly  in  earnest,  they  had  poured  fortJi  no  holy  hymn.  When 
martyrs  have  magnified  God  standing  on  the  burning  iagot,  thev  have 
given  God  better  praise  than  even  the  angels  can.  It  was  the  old 
fable,  that  the  nightingale  was  made  to  sing  by  the  thorn  that  pricked 
her  breast  :  and  many  a  child  of  God  has  poured  forth  his  sweetest 
music  when  the  thorn  of  affliction  has  pierced  his  heart.  Wake  up 
your  souls — you  that  are  dcsix)nding,  you  that  are  depressed,  you  that 
have  a  dead  child  at  home,  you  that  are  expecting  soon  to  go  to  the 
grave  with  those  you  love,  you  that  have  been  losing  your  property, 
you  that  are  pinched  with  poverty — wake  up  your  souls  to  praise  God 
still,  for  unless  well  awake  you  will  forget  to  extol  him.  Remember  what 
Job  did.  When  he  sat  on  the  dunghill,  scraping  himself  with  a  bit  of 
broken  pot,  yet  he  praised  God,  and  said,  '*  The  Lord  gave,  and  the 
Lord  hath  taken  away ;  blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord."  It  waa 
grand  of  thee,  0  patriarch  of  Uz,  to  be  able  thus  to  extol  thy  Lord: 
then  was  thy  soul  fully  awake.  Beloved  friends,  may  our  inmost  souh 
be  so  energetic  with  the  power  of  grace  that  we  may  spontaneously  and 
earnestly  bless  the  Lord  at  all  times  and  under  all  circumstances. 

Do  you  believe,  my  brethren,  that  amongst  all  the  throng  of  those 

who  see  Jehovah  face  to  face,  there  is  one  dull,  cold,  careless  worshipper? 

0^^jook  through  the  seraphim  and  cherubim :  they  are  all  flaming  one^ 

gaming  with  intense  desire  and  fervent  adoration.     Look  throueh  the 

Mosta  of  angels:  they  are  a\\  Vv\ft  ia\m€.ter8  that  do  his  pleasorCi  and  Uesi 


THE  ALARUM.  841 

him  while  they  do  it.  Search  through  all  those  Ranctified  and  glorified 
bands  of  spirits,  and  you  shall  not  find  one  with  half-closed  eye  wearily 
praising  his  Maker.  Heaven  consists  in  joyful  praise.  Look  at  the  very 
birds  on  earth  how  they  shame  us  I  Dear  little  creatures,  if  you  watch  them 
when  they  are  singinjr,  you  will  sometimes  wonder  how  so  much  sound 
can  come  out  of  such  diminutive  bodies.  How  they  throw  their  whole 
selves  into  the  music,  and  seem  to  melt  themselves  away  in  song !  How 
the  wing  vibrates,  the  throat  pulsates,  and  every  part  of  tneir  body  rejoices 
to  assist  the  strain  I  This  is  the  way  in  which  we  ought  to  praise  God.  If 
birds  that  are  sold  at  three  for  two  farthings  yet  render  God  such  praise, 
how  much  more  heartily  ought  we  to  sing  before  him  ?  Let  it  be  a  reso- 
lution with  us  at  this  hour  that  we  will  praise  God  more ;  that  we  will 
Biccr  to  him  more  at  home,  about  our  business,  and  in  all  proper  places ; 
and  that  whenever  we  do  sing  we  will  do  it  heartily,  waking  up  our 
tongue  and  all  the  powers  of  our  mind  and  body  to  bless  and  praise  the 
name  of  God. 

IL  Now,  secondly,  we  shall  notice  that  wakefulness  is  a  great 
ITEED  IX  THE  ENTIRE  SPIRITUAL  LIFE.    1  bclicve  it  to  be  ouc  of  the  great 
Wants  of  the  church  now.    I  question  whether  most  of  us  are  awake 
ipiritually.  I  question  whether  I  am.    I  wish  to  be  wakened  far  more  to  a 
sensibility  of  the  power  of  the  world  to  come,  and  a  tenderness  in  regard  to 
spiritual  truth.    Slumber  is  so  natural  to  ns.    "  Well,"  says  one,  **  but  we 
falk  about  the  things  of  God."    Yes,  but  people  talk  when  they  are  asleep, 
^nd  a  good  deal  of  Christian  conversation  is  very  much  like  the  talk  of 
sleepers.    There  is  not  the  force  in  it — the  life  in  it  that  there  would 
be   in   conversation  if  we  were  really  awakened  to  feel  the  power  of 
sternal  verities.     "  Yet,'*  says  one,  **  I  hope  Ave  cLct  consistently."     I 
trust  you  do,  but  there  are  many  people  who  walk  in  their  sleep,  and, 
aina !  I  know  some  Christian  professors  who  appear  to  be  trying  very 
hazardous  feats  of  sleep-walking  just  now.    Some  somnambulists  have 
been  able  to  walk  on  places  where,  had  they  been  awake,  they  never  would 
have  been  able  to  endure  the  dizzy  height ;  and  I  see  some  Christians,  if 
indeed  they  be  Christians,  running  awful  risks  which  I  think  they  would 
never  veuture  upon  unless  tliey  had  fallen  into  the  deep  sleep  of  carnal 
security.     Speak  of  a  man  slumbering  at  the  mast-head,  it  is  nothing 
to  a  professor  of  religion  at  ease  while  covctousness  is  his  master,  or 
worldly  company  his  delight.     If  professors  were  awake,  they  would  see 
their  danger,  and  avoid  sinful  amusements  and  ungodly  associations, 
as  men  fly  from  fierce  tigers  or  deadly  cobras.     "  Well,  but  wc  are 
doing  much  good  and  useful  work,"  says  one :  **  teaching  in  Sabbath- 
schools,  distributing  religious  tracts,  or  labouring  in  some  other  form 
of  service ;  wc  are  spending  our  time  in  commendable  engagements." 
I  am  glad  to  hear  it ;  but  people  can  do  a  great  deal  in  their  sleep.    We 
have  beard  many  strange  instances  of  how  habit  at  last  has  enabled 
penons  to  pursue  their  callings,  to  answer  signals,  and  keep  up  all  the 
appearance  of  industry,  and  yet  they  have  been  at  the  time  asleep.     Oh, 
it  is  a  very  shocking  thinij  that  so  many  of  our  churches  in  England  are 
iuadeep  sleep!    Dissenting  churches  I  know  best  about,  and  there  are 
ttMiy  where  the  minister  preaches  in  his  sleep,  where  the  people  sing  in 
^^  sleep,  where  prayer  is  offered  in  j<lecp,  and  even  the  communion  is 
•debratca  amid  a  profound  spiritUHl  slumber.    Have  you  never  been  at  a 


■^ 


342  METnOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

prayer-meeting  where  half,  if  not  all,  both  of  those  who  prayed  TOcaDy 
and  those  who  listened,  were  in  a  lethargy  as  rigid  as  death  ?    Talk  d 
sleeping  women  who  have  been  in  a  swoon  by  the  month  together, 
the  wonder  may  be  a  lying  one  in  the  natural  world,  bnt  in  the  spiritnal 
world  it  is  as  common  as  daisies  in  the  meadows.    Adam  slept  somidlj 
when  the  taking  away  of  his  rib  did  not  wake  him,  bub  what  shall  we 
say  of  those  who  startle  not  though  they  are  losing  all  the  strength  and 
glory  of  their  souls  ?     Alas  1  for  some  congregations,  it  is  long  since 
they  had  a  revival,  they  have  lost  the  very  idea  of  vigorous  piety  and 
vital  energy.    All  the  week  round  they  are  all  asleep,  and  if  a  real, 
earnest,  living,  stirring  sermon  were  preached  among  them,  it  would  be 
almost  as  if  the  King  of  Prussia's  Krupp  guns  had  dropped  a  lift 
shell  into  their*  midst.     I  wish  a  spiritual  live  shell  could  fall  into 
some  congregations,  and  burst  among  them,  killing  their  convention- 
ality, and  wounding  their  self-satisfaction  with  a  deadly  wound.    Men 
may  attend  to  outward  worship  with  unimpeachable  decorum  end  cot' 
rcctness,  and  yet  there  may  be  no  wakefulness  in  it,  and  consequently 
no  acccptablencss  with  (jod  Most  High. 

Come,  brethren  and  sisters,  we  must  wake  up,  even  if  we  have  been 
asleep  ourselves,  and  we  must  do  so  because  ivc  are  in  an  enemy's  cmntry; 
it  will  not  do  to  sleep  here.  This  side  of  heaven  we  are  in  every  place 
and  at  all  hours  surrounded  by  foes.  What  did  the  Master  say  ?  **  What 
I  say  unto  you  I  say  unto  all,  Watch !"  Be  like  sentries  at  your  post,  for 
otherwise  the  enemy  will  soon  betray  you.  Will  you  not  grieve  the  Holy 
Spirit  if  you  are  lethargic  ?  Will  you  not  dishonour  your  Master  if  you 
fall  asleep  ?  Remember,  also,  that  the  devil  seeks  your  destruction, and 
can  never  do  you  so  much  mischief  awake  as  he  can  if  he  finds  you 
sleeping.  Let  the  growling  of  the  old  lion  arouse  you.  If  nothing  else 
will  bestir  you,  remember  the  licry  darts  of  the  wicked  one.  Saul  would 
not  have  lain  so  quiet  if  he  had  known  that  Abishai  was  holding  the 
spear  over  him,  and  longing  to  pin  him  to  the  earth  :  yet  this  is  the 
condition  of  professors  who  are  given  to  slumber.  Sjimson  would  have 
scarcely  slept  on  Delihili's  lap  if  he  had  foreseen  that  his  hair  would 
be  cut,  and  his  eyes  i>ut  out  by  the  Philistines.  Up,  then,  ye  drowsy 
professors,  for  llio  Philistines  are  upon  you  ! 

Moreover,  brethren,  aluinbcr  imjwverishcfi  us.  The  sluggard,  and  the 
thistle  and  thorn,  always  go  together,  and  rags  and  ix)verty  follow  close 
behind.  You  may  miss  by  your  sleep  great  spiritual  profit  You  can- 
not expect  sleepy  Christians  to  grow  in  grace.  They  will  miss  many 
instructive  things  in  God's  word,  many  precious  promises  meant  only 
for  the  wakeful.  They  will  lose  high  enjoyments  and  spiritual  ban- 
quetings,  for  the  king's  entertainments  are  not  for  those  who  fold  their 
arms,  and  toss  upon  the  bed  of  indolence.  Wealth  lies  in  the  field  of 
the  wakeful,  but  the  lover  of  ease  shall  have  want  come  upon  him  as  an 
armed  man.  I  blow  the  trumpet  in  Zion,  and  sound  an  alarm  in  God*§ 
holy  mountain,  for  it  is  high  time  to  awake  out  of  sleep. 

Awaken  too,  my  brother,  for  you  are  losint/  opportunities  for  usiful' 
ness.  While  you  sleep  men  are  dyinjr.  See  how  the  cemeteries  art 
becoming  crowded,  how  the  area  of  them  has  to  be  enlarged.  Day  by 
day  you  see  wending  through  the  streets  the  funeral  procession :  tfiai 
gone  beyond  the  reach  of  your  instructions  and  your  warnings  art 


THE  ALARUM.  843 

catTied  to  their  long  homes.  Awake  then,  awake,  for  death  is  busy 
eyerywhere.  Meanwhile,  those  who  do  not  die  before  you  may  be 
remoTed  beyond  the  sphere  of  your  usefulness ;  they  go  where  at  least 
you  cannot  reach  them,  where  perhaps  no  one  ever  will,  and  their 
blood  may  lie  upon  your  head,  and  that  for  ever.  Awake,  for  perhaps 
while  you  are  asleep  another  heart  that  is  now  accessible  to  the  gospel 
may  become  finally  hardened.  Conscience  will  soon  become  seared, 
and  then  there  is  nothing  for  zeal  and  earnestness  to  work  upon.  It 
will  be  too  late  for  you  to  put  the  seal  ui)on  the  wax  when  once  it  is 
cool.  Quick,  sir;  while  the  wax  is  soft  put  the  seal  down !  How  many 
opportunities  for  good  we  all  miss !  But  those  who  are  asleep  lose  all 
their  opportunities,  and  they  will  be  surely  required  of  them  when  the 
Master  comes. 

Awake!  I  pray  you,  because  you  will  insensibhj  lose  the  power ,  Ih^joy 
of  your  spiritml  life.  Communion  with  God  will  become  more  and 
more  scarce  ^v^th  you  as  you  become  more  sleepy.  Awake,  lest  you 
backslide,  lest  you  fall  by  little  and  little ;  lest  after  all  you  become  apos- 
tate, and  prore  yoursel  f  not  to  be  a  child  of  God.  Awake,  for  your  power 
with  others  will  certainly  depart  from  you  as  your  wakefulness  departs. 
A  sleepy  preacher  never  wins  the  souls  of  men.  A  dull,  formrJ  servant 
of  God  is  of  little  or  no  use  in  the  church  of  God.  I  think  I  said  years 
ago,  "  Give  me  half  a  dozen  thorough  red-hot  Christians,  and  I  will  do 
more,  by  God's  grace,  with  them,  than  with  half  a  dozen  hundred  of 
ordinary  professors."  I  am  sure  it  is  so.  Crowds  of  professors 
are  past  all  cure.  I  would  as  soon  hunt  with  dead  dogs,  ns  try  to 
work  with  them.  They  cannot  be  trained  into  heroes :  they  are  dolts 
both  by  nature  and  by  practice;  much  slothfulness  has  drained  out 
their  sours  life.  The  most  you  can  hope  for  them  is  that  they  will 
remain  decently  Christianised,  so  as  not  altogether  to  disjirace  us.  But, 
0  for  thoroughly  wideawake  men,  men  who  feel  the  life  of  God  in  their 
souls,  and  are,  therefore,  more  than  ordinarily  earnest.  Band  together 
half  a  dozen  such,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  being  with  them,  they  will  make 
all  London  feel  their  presence  before  long.  0  may  God  awaken  all  of 
us,  for  our  spiritual  life  absolutely  requires  it. 

III.  Thirdly,  I  am  going  to  mention  certain  ways  of  keeping 
T0UR8ELVK8  AWAKE.  "  How  can  I  be  kept  awake  ?  "  says  one. 
Answer,  first,  make  it  a  matter  of  prayer  with  the  Lord  to  awaken 
yon.  No  one  can  give  you  spiritual  power  and  watch fiiliicsss  but  the 
^irit  of  God.  "  All  my  fresh  springs  are  in  thee."  Where  life  first 
comes  from,  there  more  life  must  be  obtained.  Christ  has  come  that 
ire  may  have  life,  and  that  we  may  have  it  more  abundantly.  He  who 
first  called  us  from  the  dead  must  also  arouse  us  from  among  the 
slumbering.  He  who  brought  us  from  the  grave  of  our  depravity  must 
bring  ns  from  the  couch  of  our  indolence.  Pray  about  the  matter; 
make  it  a  point  with  God :  ask  him  to  arouse  you.  On  your  knees  is 
the  posture  in  which  to  conquer  sloth. 

Next,  means  are  to  he  used.  We  are  not  to  leave  the  matter  with  God, 
and  think  there  is  nothing  to  be  done  by  ourselves.  Act  towards 
jimrselves  about  your  spiritual  wakefulness  as  you  would  with  natural 
wakefulness.  Set  your  inventive  faculties  to  work,  and  devise  lueans 
fcr  ehaaing  away  the  sleep  dragon.  What  would  you  do  if  you  required 


344  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

to  be  awakened  earlj  ?  Perhaps  yon  wonid  set  an  alamrn ;  a  good 
thin^,  no  donbt.  Take  care  you  set  a  spiritnal  alarnm.  Eyetj 
Christian  ought  to  keep  one,  and  it  should  be  so  well  set  as  to  keep 
exact  time,  and  so  powerful  as  to  arouse  the  most  slnmbering.  A 
tender  conscience,  quick  as  the  apple  of  the  eye,  is  a  precions  pre- 
servative against  sinful  sleep ;  but  it  must  never  be  tampered  with,  or 
its  usefulness  will  soon  end.  When  once  the  hour  has  come,  down 
runs  the  alarum,  the  man  starts  up  all  at  once,  and  saya,  **  It  is  time 
to  rise ; "  so  should  my  conscience  be  so  well  regulated,  that  when  a 
temptation  is  near,  or  a  sinner  is  near  me  whom  I  ought  to  warn,  my 
soul  should  at  once  take  the  alarm,  and  say,  **  Here  is  work  to  do^asin 
to  be  conquered,  or  a  s'oul  to  be  instructed :  now,  therefore,  ])erfoim 
the  doiii'::  of  it  with  all  thv  mii^Hit!  I  hear  the  alarum,  and  I  must 
bestir  myself!"  May  we  always  maintain  and  retain  such  a  special 
wakefulness  that  we  may  be  at  our  post  of  duty  or  in  our  place 
ol  conflict  with  a  punctuality  which  none  can  gainsay.  0  for  the  alanim 
of  a  tender  conscience ! 

!Many  of  our  friends  who  have  to  be  u])  early  in  the  moniin«[ 
ask  tiie  policeman  to  call  them  at  the  appointed  hour.  I  may  not 
compare  the  Christian  minister  with  a  policeman  in  some  respects; 
but  yot  he  is  one  of  God's  otticers,  and  it  is  part  of  his  business  to  stir 
up  drowsy  ]>rofcRsors.  It  is  well  to  attend  an  earnest  gospel 
niini.stry,  where  the  minister's  voice,  under  God's  blessing,  vill  be 
likely  to  wake  you  np.  Faithful  preachers  are  among  God's  best  gifts. 
Cherish  them,  and  be  obedient  to  their  admonitions.  I  have  known 
persons  become  ollended  when  a  minister  is  **  too  personal;  "  but  vise 
men  always  prize  a  ministry  in  pro])ortion  as  it  is  |KTSonal  to  them- 
selves, lie  who  never  tells  me  of  my  faults,  nor  makes  me  feel  uneasj, 
is  not  likely  to  be  the  means  of  good  to  my  soul.  What  is  the 
use  of  a  dog  that  never  barks?  AVhy  have  a  doctor,  and  grow  angry 
with  him  if  he  points  out  the  source  of  your  disease  ?  Did  God  send 
us,  as  his  messengers,  to  pander  to  your  taste  or  flatter  your  vanity  ? 
We  seek  not  your  ap])roval  if  it  be  not  founded  on  right.  I  have  often  felt 
pleased  when  1  have  heard  pcojile  confess,  after  their  conversion, "  I  came 
to  the  Tabernacle,  and  at  the  first  I  could  not  endure  the  prcac^hing.  I 
hatid  tlic  ])rcaclier,  and  raged  at  liLs  doctrine  ;  but  I  could  not  help 
cnminir  again."  Just  so.  Conscience  makes  men  respect  the  gospel, 
even  when  their  dej)ravity  makes  them  loathe  it.  They  are  held  fast  by 
the  cords  which  they  fain  would  cast  from  them.  May  it  often  be  so, 
0  my  unregenerate  believers,  that  while  my  plain  dealing  excites  your 
anjzor,  it  may  nevertheless  have  a  power  over  you;  and  may  every  man 
and  woman  here,  whetlier  saved  or  unsavwl,  teel  that  the  preaching  is 
the  truth  of  God  to  his  or  her  soul;  and,  whether  liked  or  not  liked, 
may  it  become  the  prmanent  means  of  arousing  from  sleep,  and 
ultimately  bringing  to  Christ  ever}' one  of  you  to  whom  these  words 
shall  c<»nie.  Be  sure  and  attend  an  arousing  ministry,  and  pray  God 
to  make  the  ministry  which  you  now  listen  to  more  and  more  9R 
arousing  ministry  to  y«ur  own  soul.  Pray  for  the  preacher,  for  he  i* 
in  the  same  danger  as  yourselves,  for  he  too  is  compassed  with  infirmity. 
The  minister  soon  goes  to  sleep  unless  God  wakens  him;  and  wbat 
is  more  sad  than  to  see  the  professed  messenger  of  God  become  a  traitor 


THE  ALARUM.  845 

both  to  his  Master  and  to  men's  sonls  by  a  lack  of  zealous  affection  ? 
It  is  ill  for  the  sheep  if  the  shepherd  himself  be  asleep.  Woe  to  the 
camp  where  the  sentry  is  given  to  slumber  !  May  God  deliver  our 
country  from  being  overrun  with  preachers  whose  souls  are  insensible 
oonceming  their  grand  work,  and  who  love  the  bread  of  their  office 
better  than  the  glory  of  God  or  the  good  of  their  hearers. 

I  have  known  some  persons  adopt  a  plan  for  awaking  in  the 
morning  which  I  can  recommend  spiritually  at  any  rate.  They  have 
drawn  up  the  blinds  in  the  direction  of  the  morning  sun,  that  the  sun 
might  shine  on  their  face  and  wake  them.  I  know  of  no  better 
way  of  waking  for  your  soul  than  letting  the  light,  and  the  life,  and 
the  love  of  6(^  shine  full  into  your  face.  When  the  Sun  of  Righteous- 
ness arises  he  brings  healing  beneath  his  wings,  and  he  brings  awakening 
too.  A  man  cannot  think  much  of  Christ,  and  love  Christ  much,  and 
walk  much  in  Christ's  fellowship,  and  yet  be  asleep.  The  two  who 
went  to  Emmans  in  ImmanueVs  company,  were  their  hearts  cold  ? 
Nav,  do  not  think  so.  "  Did  not  our  heart  bum  within  us  ?  "  Yes, 
and  yonr  hearts  will  burn  too,  and  your  whole  spiritual  system  will 
flame  and  glow  if  you  walk  in  the  company  of  Jesus.  I  can  recom- 
mend constant  fellowship  with  God  as  one  of  the  best  remedies  for 
spiritnal  sloth,  the  surest  provocative  of  holy  zeal. 

Many  times  people  are  awakened  in  the  morning  by  the  noise  of  the 
street  m  which  they  live.  "  I  cannot  sleep  after  such  an  hour,"  says 
one,  "  for  I  hear  the  tramp  of  those  who  are  going  into  the  city,  and  the 
grind  of  the  street  traffic."  At  a  certain  time  you  hear  the  hammer 
of  the  blacksmith,  the  scream  of  an  engine,  or  the  heaving  of  machinery, 
and  after  that  sleep  is  gone.  The  activities  of  the  world  ought  to 
awaken  Christians.  Are  worldlings  so  active  ?  How  active  ought  we 
to  be!  Do  they  labour  and  spend  their  sweat  for  earthly  wages  ?  How 
much  more  ought  I  to  put  forth  my  entire  strength  to  serve  so  good  a 
Master,  whose  reward  of  grace  is  everlasting  bliss  ?  The  world  is  all 
astir  to-day :   let  the  church  be  all  awake  too. 

We  ought  to  be  stimulated  to  supreme  ellbrts  by  the  activity  of  our 
fellow  Christians.  I  find  it  does  me  much  service  to  read  the  biographies 
of  eminent  servants  of  Christ,  such  as  martyrs,  missionaries,  and 
reformers.  I  rise  from  reading  their  memorials  feeling  ashamed  to  be 
of  so  dwarfish  a  stature  compared  with  these  spiritual  giants.  What 
a  hnmbling  effect  such  a  reflection  ought  to  have  on  the  do-nothings 
who  swarm  in  the  churches  I  but  alas !  these  are  not  soon  moved  to 
jadge  themselves.  With  this  one  word  we  leave  them  :  think  of  what 
some  are  doing,  and  be  ashamed  that  you  arc  doing  so  little  in  proportion 
to  what  they  accomplish. 

There  are  many  ways  of  waking,  but  here  is  one,  with  which  I  will 
cloae  my  observations  on  this  point.  Hear  the  trumpet  of  the  second 
coming.  **  Behold,  the  bridegroom  cometh ;  go  ye  out  to  meet  him," 
Was  the  cry  that  awakened  the  virgins  when  they  all  slumbered  and 
dept :  may  it  have  the  like  arousing  power  at  this  moment.  We  know 
Hot  when  Christ  will  come,  nor  is  it  for  us  to  utter  prophecies  about  it : 
tlie  times  and  seasons  are  hidden  from  us.  *'  Of  that  day  and  that 
lionr  knoweth  no  man."  Whether  it  will  be  before  the  Millennium  or 
Ifter  the  Millennium,  let  those  judge  who  can.    I  have  no  judgment 


84C  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PITLPIT. 

upon  it.  I  think,  as  you  carefully  read  the  Scripturcg,  you  will  ftd 
more  and  more  convinced  that  only  this  is  clearly  and  certainly  revealed— 
that  the  liord  will  ])ersonally  come  in  such  an  hour  as  we  look  not  for 
him.  Let  that  awaken  us  ;  let  it  keep  us  always  Tratchfol,  with 
loins  p:ii-t  and  lamps  trimmed,  proving  our  faithful  love  to  our  blessed 
jMa^ter. 

These  are,  it  is  clear,  very  many  ways  by  which  Christians  may  be 
awakened.  God  p:rant  they  may  be  effective  to  each  and  alL  1  think 
it  was  Sydney  Smith  who  was  once  preaching  a  sermon  about  sleeping 
in  churcii,  and  when  he  had  done,  he  said,  **  Now^,  what  ^oodhavel 
done  ?  x\ll  those  who  sleep  have  been  asleep  throujyh  my  sermoq,  and 
only  those  who  are  wakcliil  have  heard  me,  and  they  did  not  need 
my  rebukes  and  advice."  1  often  feel  that  this  is  very  much  ths 
preacher's  case.  Earnest  people,  when  the  conjijregation  is  exhorted  to 
earnestness,  take  it  home  to  themselves ;  but  those  persons  who  do 
nothinfr,  and  are  most  indolent,  are  the  very  ones  who  say,  **I  do  not  see 
the  need  of  it ;  I  do  not  want  to  be  disturbed."  Of  course  not !  It  ii 
not  only  the  mark  of  the  slu<rjrard  to  sleep,  but  it  is  another  characte^ 
istic  of  him  that  he  is  wrath  with  those  who  would  compel  him  to  rise. 
"  A  little  more  sleep,'*  says  he,  "a  little  more  slumber;"  he  turns  his 
heavy  head  upon  t)ie  pillow  once  a^rain,  and  wishes  no  blessings  npon 
those  who  knock  at  his  door  so  heavily.  You  sleepy  professors  are 
likely  to  do  the  same,  but  I  will  not  refrain  from  knocking  till  yoQ 
refrain  J'roin  dozing.  I  pray  God  that  there  may  be  very  few  in  this 
church  of  the  incorrigible  order,  whose  life  is  one  long  dream,  a  dream 
of  self-a;j:.irrandisement,  meanness,  and  littleness.  May  you  and  I,  and 
all  of  us,  be  thoroughly  earnest  in  the  service  of  our  Master,  and  if  we 
cannot  arouse  others  by  our  precept,  at  least  let  us  not  fail  to  try  the 
force  of  our  example. 

IV.  I  must  close  with  a  word  upon  the  fourth  point,  which  is  this— 

THK     CUKAT    AND     UIKJENT     NEED    THAT    THE     UN'CONVKRTKD    SIKKBB 

SHOULD  AWAKK.  HiMierto  I  have  spoken  to  the  converted  man:  now 
let  me  address  myself  to  the  ungodly,  and  may  the  voice  which 
shall  call  the  dead  to  judgment  now  awaken  him.  You,  you  un- 
converted man,  are  asleep ;  a  deep  and  horrible  sleep  holds  you  fast. 
If  it  were  not  so,  you  would  perceive  your  danger,  and  you  would  be 
alarmed.  You  have  broken  Cod's  law;  the  fact  is  certain  and  solemn, 
though  you  treat  it  lightly.  Punisliment  must  follow  every  breach  of 
that  hiw,  for  God  will  not  be  mocked,  nor  suffer  his  government  to  be 
treated  with  contempt.  For  every  transgression  there  is  an  appointed 
recompense  of  reward.  The  retribution  which  is  your  lawful  due  will 
not  lung  be  withheld:  it  is  on  its  road  towards  you.  The  feet  of 
justice  are  shod  with  wool :  you  hear  not  its  ccmiing,  but  it  is  as  sure 
as  it  is  silent.  Its  steps  are  swift,  and  its  stroke  overwhelming. 
Awaken,  0  man,  and  listen  to  this  text:  **God  is  angry  with  the 
wicked  every  day.  If  he  turn  not,  ho  will  whet  his  sword;  be 
hath  bent  his  bow,  and  made  it  ready."  No  peril  of  ])laguc,  battle, 
filiipwreck,  or  poisnn,  can  equal  the  hazard  of  an  unpardoned  sonL 
Beware,  ye  that  forget  God,  lor  his  terrors  are  past  conception,  and 
his  wrath  burnetii  as  an  oven. 

If  you  were  awakened,  0  sin-stricken  transgressor,  you  would  ftbo 


THE  ALARUM.  347 

perceive  that  there  is  a  remedy  for  your  disease,  a  rescue  from  your 
present  danger.  *'  God  was  in  Christ,  reconciling  the  world  unto  him- 
self, not  imputing  their  trespasses  unto  them;"  and,  ** Whosoever 
believeth  in  Jesus  Christ  hath  everlasting  life."  Forgiveness  of  sin  is 
guaranteed  to  every  one  that  rests  in  the  work  of  Jesus,  and  all  other 
necessary  blessings  are  secured  to  him.  If  thou  wert  awake,  thou  wouldst 
not  remain  an  unconverted  sinner  another  hour,  but  thou  wouldst  turn 
unto  God  with  full  purpose  of  heart.  If  God  would  awaken  thee,  thou 
wouldst  tremble  at  the  jaws  of  hell  which  are  open  to  receive  thee ; 
thou  wouldst  turn  to  Christ,  and  say,  "  Jesus,  save  me  !  Save  me  now  ! " 
You  are  asleep,  sinner — ^you  are  asleep,  or  you  would  not  take  matters 
so  coolly.  I  am  afraid  for  you,  and  bowed  down  with  amazement  and 
dread.  The  mercy  is  that  you  may  be  awakened :  you  are  not  yet 
among  the  slain  that  go  down  into  the  pit.  O  that  that  almighty  grace 
would  awaken  you  at  this  present  moment,  ere  your  doom  is  sealed  and 
your  damnation  executed !  Here  oflPer  I  my  I'ervent  prayers  for  you, 
believing  that  he  to  whom  I  pray  is  able  to  bring  to  holy  sensibility  the 
most  stolid  of  mankind. 

Strange  ways  God  has  of  awakening  his  elect  ones  from  their  deadly 
alnmbers.  Awake  them  he  will,  and  he  will  shake  heaven  and  earth 
sooner  than  let  any  one  of  them  perish  in  unfeeling  security.  He 
will  strike  them  down  as  he  did  Paul,  or  send  an  earthquake  to  shake 
ibem,  as  he  did  to  the  gaoler  at  Philippi ;  in  his  own  way  and  time  he 
will  make  them  come  to  themselves  and  then  to  Christ.  Bemember 
the  story  of  Augustine.  To  the  grief  of  his  dear  mother,  Monica,  he 
had  been  leading  a  wicked  life;  but  God's  time  had  come,  and  as 
Augustine  walked  in  the  garden  he  heard  a  little  child  sav,  "  Take ! 
Read !  Take !  Bead  !"  This  induced  him  to  take  the  Bible  and  read 
it.  He  no  sooner  read,  than  a  passage  came  before  his  eyes  which 
awakened  him,  and  he  sought  a  Saviour,  and  found  him.  Perhaps  it 
will  be  a  death  in  your  house  that  will  wake  you — sad  means,  but 
often  most  effectual.  A  mother's  death-bed  has  been  a  soul-saving 
sermon  to  many  a  family.  Some  sleepers  need  a  thunderclap  to 
arouse  them.  Pray,  you  dear  people  of  God  that  are  awake,  that  the 
sinner  may  be  awakened,  for  there  is  this  awful  danger — that  he 
may  sleep  himself  into  hell.  Spiritual  sleep  deepens,  the  slumberer 
becomes  more  heavy  still,  the  stupor  more  dense,  till  the  conscience 
grows  seared,  and  the  soul  is  unimpressible;  the  flesh  is  turned  into  stone, 
the  heart  is  harder  than  steel.  It  may  be  that  some  of  those  who  hear 
these  words  of  warning  may  never  wake  to  think  about  their  souls  till 
in  hell  they  lift  up  their  eyes.  What  an  awful  lifting  up  of  the  eyes 
will  that  be  !  0  you  who  are  now  peaceful  and  secure,  what  a  change 
awaits  you  1  Hurled  from  vainglorious  security  to  blank  despair  in  a 
moment  I  You  took  it  all  so  easily :  you  said,  "  Let  me  alone ;  do  not 
worry  me  ;  there's  time  enough.  The  preacher  ought  not  to  frighten 
ns  with  these  bugbears ;  we  have  a  great  deal  else  to  do  besides  listening 
to  horrible  stories  of  hell  and  damnation ;  "  and  so  you  wrapped  it  up, 
and  so  you  smoothed  it  over,  but  the  end  thereof  who  shall  describe? 
Have  you  never  heard  of  the  Indian  in  his  boat  upon  one  of  the  great 
livers  of  America  ?  Somehow  his  moorings  had  broken,  and  his  canoe 
"Was  in  the  power  of  the  current.     He  was  asleep,  while  his  canoe  was 


848  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

being  borne  rapidly  alongby  the  Btream.   He  was  sound  asleep,  and ycthad 
good  need  to  have  been  awake,  for  tlicre  was  a  tremendons  cataract  not  lar 
ahead.   Persons  on  shore  saw  the  canoe — saw  that  there  was  a  man  in  it 
asleep ;  but  their  vigilance  was  of  no  use  to  the  sleeper :  it  needed  that  he 
himself  should  be  aware  of  his  i)eril.    The  canoe  quickened  its  pace,  for 
the  waters  of  the  river  grew  more  rapid  as  they  approached  the  cataract; 
persons  on  shore  began  to  cry  out,  and  raise  alarm  on  all  sides,  and  at 
last  the  Indian  was  aroused.     He  started  up,  and  began  to  nse  his 
paddle,  but  his  strength  was   altogether  insufficient  for  the  straggle 
with  the  gigantic  force  of  the  wattrs  around  him.     He  was  seen  to 
spring  upright  in  the  boat  and  disappear — himself  and  the  boat— in  the 
fall.     He  had  perished,  for  he  woke  too  late  !     Some  persons  on  their 
dying  beds  just  wake  up  in  time  to  see  their  danger,  but  not  to  escape 
from  it :  they  are  carried  right  over  the  cataract  of  judgment  and  wratk 
They  are  gone,  for  ever  gone,  where  mercy  is  succeeded  by  justice,  and  hope 
forbidden  to  enter.  Let  much  prayer  go  up  from  believing  hearts  that  God 
would  awaken  sinners  now,  and  begin  with  those  who  come  to  the  place 
of  worship,  and  remain  at  ease  in  Zion.     Ask  for  the  arm  of  God  to  be 
revealed  while  the  heavenly  message  is  delivered  ;  for  this  is  our  mes- 
sage :  '*  Awake  thou  that  sleepest,  and  arise  from  the  dead,  and  Christ 
shall  give  thee  light."    There  is  a  man  before  me  now  asleep  in  his  sins, 
whom  God  means  to  make  a  minister  of  Christ :    he  knows  not  the 
divine  purpose,  but  there  are  lines  of  love  in  it  for  him.    Arise,  0 
slumberer,  for  Jesus  calls  thee !     Awake,  thou  Saul  of  Tarsus,  thou  art 
a  chosen  vessel  unto  the  liord !     Turn  thou  from  thy  sin  :  seek  thou  thy 
Saviour.     There  is  one  here  who  has  been  a  great  sinner ;  but  the  Lord 
intends    to  wash  him  in  tlie  cleansing  fount,  and  clothe  him  in  the 
righteousness  of  Christ.     Come,  thou  guilty  one,  awake !  for  mercy 
waits  for  thee.     There  is  a  poor  weeping  woman  here  who  has  gone 
far  into  sin;    but  Jesus  says,  "Neither  do  I  condemn  thee:  go,  and 
sin  no  more."     Sister,  awake !     Come  and  receive  the  mercy  which 
Jesus  Christ  is  ready  to  bestow  upon  thee !     God  give  thee  waking  grace, 
and  saving  grace. 

May  you  and  I,  beloved  brethren  in  Christ,  awake  to  the  most  earnest 
and  inteubc  form  of  life  in  Christ  and  life  for  Christ.  At  once  let  us 
bestir  ourselves:  we  may  think  it  early,  but  it  will  be  none  too  early; 
may  we  awake  now,  for  Jesus'  sake.    Amen. 


Portions  op  Scriptuuk  rkad  before  Sermon— Pb-alm  cviii. ; 

1  Tliessalonians  v.  1 — 11 


3R^t)[iyplton;  SHakmark 


PROSPERITY  UNDER  PERSECUTION. 


%  ^ermon 


DEUVEBED  BT 

C.  H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


"  Come  on,  let  us  deal  wisely  "with  them ;  lest  they  multiply,  and  it  come  to  pass, 
that,  when  there  falleth  out  any  war,  they  join  also  unto  our  enemi^,  and  fight 
against  us,  and  so  get  them  up  out  of  the  land.  Therefore  thoy  did  set  over  them 
taskmasters  to  afflict  them  with  their  hurdens.  And  they  built  for  Pharaoh  treasure 
cities,  Pithom  and  Raamses.  But  the  more  they  afflicted  them,  the  more  they 
multiplied  and  grew." — Exodus  i.  10 — 12. 

The  children  of  tliis  world  are  wise  in  their  generatioti.  Their  policy 
may  be  short-sighted  and  their  stratagems  crooked,  nevertheless  the 
world  admires  the  wisdom  of  their  counsels,  and  makes  light  of  the 
craftiness  of  their  projects.  In  their  opposition  to  the  Christian  church, 
the  men  of  the  world  might  certainly  have  been  as  well  able  to 
outwit  her  by  the  variety  of  their  manoeuvres  as  to  overwhelm  her  by 
the  force  of  their  numbers,  were  it  not  that  there  is  an  unseen  One  in 
her  midst,  who  is  more  than  a  match  for  the  guile  of  their  hearts  and 
the  might  of  their  hosts.  Looking  back  at  the  early  struggles  of  the 
Hebrew  race  to  gain  a  footing  among  the  nations,  it  is  very  clear  that 
had  the  contest  been  merely  between  Pharaoh  and  Israel,  the  Egyptian 
king  could  exercise  power  and  policy  enough  to  defeat  the  sons  of  Jacob 
and  reduce  them  to  serfdom ;  but  when  a  new  name  is  brought  in,  and 
the  contest  appears  to  be  truly  between  Pharaoh  and  Jehovah  the  God 
of  Israel,  it  is  quite  another  matter,  and  a  far  different  issue  may  be 
counted  upon.  There  is  one  behind  the  curtain  that  takes  Israel's  part. 
He  sees  through  all  Pharaoh's  plots.  Or  ever  his  thoughts  nave 
riiK-ncd  into  plans  they  are  forestalled;  fast  as  they  are  set  up  they  are 
upset;  for  every  intrigue  there  is  a  reprisal.  Thus  he  taketh  the 
wise  in  their  own  craftiness.  The  whole  history  of  the  long  feud 
between  the  seed  of  the  woman  and  the  seed  of  the  serpent  illustrates 
the  subtlety  of  the  serpent's  seed,  and  the  simplicity  of  the  woman's 
seed ;  but  still  more  does  it  bring  to  light  the  infinite  wisdom  of  him 
vho  rules  the  seed  of  the  woman,  and  who  will  in  the  end  braise  the 


850  METROPOLITAN  TABKRNACLE  PULPIT. 

serpent's  head,  nnd  j;:ivc  nnto  his  pcoj^le  and  the  cause  they  hare 
espoused  a  complete  triumph.  Whatever  has  been  done  bj  the  enemiei 
in  rage  or  in  recklessness,  God  has  always  met  it  calmly  and  quietly. 
He  has  Bho^\n  himself  ready  for  every  emerfrency.  And  he  has  nofc 
only  baffled  and  utterly  defeated  all  the  inventions  of  wicked  men,  but 
he  has  turned  their  strange  devices  to  good  account,  for  the  develop- 
ment of  his  own  sovereign  purposes.  He  has  made  his  enemies  work 
for  him,  aiding  the  enterprise  they  eschewed  :  he  has  turned  their  curse 
into  a  blessing:  he  has  made  evil  productive  of  good:  he  has  extracted 
sweetness  out  of  their  bitter  spleen,  and  distilled  healthful  medicine  ont 
of  their  deadly  animosity.  He  hath  his  way  in  the  whirlwind:  the 
clouds  are  the  dust  of  his  feet.  He  does  not  only  meet  evil  with  good, 
but  he  takes  the  evil,  and  subjects  it  to  his  own  eternal  purpose,  and 
from  it  brings  forth  a  course  of  events  that  results  in  his  own  glory, 
the  benefit  of  his  children,  and  the  fulfilment  of  their  destiny. 

Of  this  general  principle  we  shall  now  proceed  to  consider  three 
special  illustrations.  First,  the  cimnnstajices  of  tlie  childrtfi  of  Israel; 
secondly,  the  hutory  of  tJte  church  of  Christ;  thirdly,  the  experience^ 
individual  Christians. 

I.  In  the  case  of  Israel,  it  did  seem  to  be  a  deep-laid  plot,  very 
politic  and  crafty  indeed,  that  as  the  kings  of  Egy])t,  themselves  of  an 
alien  race,  had  subdued  the  P^gyptians,  they  should  prevent  the  other 
alien  race,  the  Israelites,  from  conquering  them.  Instead  of  murdering 
them  wholesale,  it  did  seem  a  wise  though  a  cruel  thing  to  make  them 
I  slaves ;  to  divide  them  up  and  down  the  country  ;  to  subject  them  to 
toil  till  their  spirits  were  broken  ;  to  apjwint  them  to  the  most  menial 
work  in  the  land,  that  they  might  be  crushed  down  and  their  spirit* 
become  so  baser  that  they  would  not  dare  to  rebel.  Thus  we  may  sup- 
pose it  was  hoped  that  their  physical  strength  would  be  so  relaxed,  and 
their  circumstances  so  reduced,  that  the  clan  would  soon  be  insignificant 
if  not  utterly  extinct.  But  God  met  and  overruled  this  policy  in  various 
ways.  "  The  more  they  afflicted  them,  the  more  they  multiplied."  The 
census  proved  the  error  of  their  calculation.  The  cause  looked  likely,  but 
it  was  not  productive  of  the  consequence  expected.  Had  it  been  another 
people,  the  tactics  mij»ht  have  been  successful ;  but  they  were  God*8 
people,  endeared  to  him  by  their  ancestry,  ennobled  in  his  sight  by  their 
covenant  destiny,  and  encompassed  with  his  favour  as  with  a  shield. 
No  conspiracy  formed  against  them  could  thrive.  And  so  it  came  to  pass, 
that  like  certain  herbs  which  spring  up  when  trodden  down,  or  hke 
certain  trees  that  grow  taller  if  loaded  with  weights,  Israel  rose  superior 
to  all  her  disadvantages.  **The  more  they  afflicted  them,  the  more 
they  multiplied  and  grew.'' 

The  glory  of  God  shines  forth  conspicuously  in  the  use  to  which  he 
turned  the  persecutions  they  endured.  The  severe  treatment  they  had 
to  bear  from  the  enemy  beeame  to  them  a  salutary  discipline.  This 
Cometh  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  who  is  wonderful  in  counsel  and  excellent 
in  working.  From  that  time,  the  children  of  Israel  began  to  feel  a 
disgust  with  Egypt.  They  had  settled  down  very  quietly  in  Goshen, 
and  thought  that  it  was  their  rest.  They  had  imbibed  much  of  the 
manners  and  customs  of  the  Egyptians.  We  have  it  on  record  that 
they  worshipped  the  gods  of  Egypt.     They  seemed  greatly  to  have 


PBOSPEEITY   UNDER  PEBSECUTION.  851 

appreciated  what  they  afterwards  called  the  luxuries  of  the  land — the 
leeks,  the  garlics,  the  onions,  the  melons,  and  the  cucumbers.  They 
appear  to  have  been  almost  naturalised  to  that  country.  They  were  little 
better  than  Egyptians.  Perhaps  perpons  travelling,  except  by  certain 
toncB  of  language  and  contour  of  countenance,  would  scarcely  ha?e 
known  but  what  they  were  descendants  of  Ham.  But  now  their  masters 
treat  them  cruelly,  and  they  loatlic  the  Egyptians.  They  are  scattered 
np  and  down  throughout  the  land,  and  Goshen  is  no  longer  dear  to  them. 
They  are  treated  like  strangers,  and  they  feel  they  are  strangers.  Now 
that  they  hear  from  morning  till  night  the  taskmaster's  oath,  and  the 
crack  of  the  cruel  whip,  and  arc  subjected  to  incessant  toil  and  bondage, 
they  think  far  less  of  Egypt  than  they  used  to  do.  This  is  what 
the  Lor4  designed.  He  never  intended  that  his  people  Israel  should  be 
abfiorbed  into  any  other  family.  He  never  meant  them  to  be  other  than 
sojourners  on  that  soil.  He  had  some  better  thing  for  them  than  that 
they  should  dwell  in  that  land,  and  be  as  the  heathen  were.  God  was 
thus  answering  one  purpose.  And  he  did  more  than  this.  Now  tliey 
began  to  remember,  as  their  bondage  waxed  more  and  more  severe,  the 
God  of  their  fathers  whom  they  had  forgotten.  I  have  reminded  you 
that  they  had  fallen  into  the  worship  of  the  gods  of  Egypt;  but  now 
they  turn  with  abhorrence  from  the  gods  of  their  oppressors,  and  they 
bethink  themselves  of  the  covenant  which  Jehovah  had  made  with 
Abraham,  and  with  Isaac  and  Jacob,  and  they  betook  themselves 
to  their  knees.  In  secret,  they  utter  their  groaniugs  before  the  Most 
Highy  and  when  their  taskmasters  make  them  smart,  they  lift  their 
eyes,  suffused  with  bitter  tears,  and  silently  appeal  to  heaven,  to  the 
God  of  their  fathers,  that  he  would  have  mercy  upon  them.  They 
had  forgotten  to  pray  until  then.  The  mass  of  them  had  been  unused 
to  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord;  but  now  the  scourge  drives  them  to 
seek  help  from  above.  Their  terrors,  their  pains,  their  griefs,  and  their 
vexations  compel  them  to  lift  up  that  cry  to  heaven  which  came  into 
the  ears  of  Jehovah,  and  moved  his  hand  to  help  them. 

More  than  that,  remember  that  it  was  necessary  for  this  people 
to  be  altogether  rescued  from  that  land  which  for  many  a  year  had 
taxed  their  labour  and  bounded  their  enterprise  ;  because  it  w^is  not  the 
land  which  had  been  promised  them  as  an  inheritance.  It  was  God's 
intention  and  covenant  purpose  to  give  them  the  land  of  Canaan,  aland 
that  flowed  with  milk  and  honey.  But  it  is  not  very  easy  to  induce  a 
nation,  numbering  some  millions,  to  leave  a  country  in  which  they  have 
been  bom  and  nourished  and  found  a  home.  Only  some  veiy  fearful 
evil  can  induce  them  to  expatriate  themselves.  Had  Moses  gone  to  the 
children  of  Israel  before  the  time  of  their  bondage,  and  said,  **  Up !  get 
yon  hence  unto  the  land  which  the  Lord  swears  that  he  will  give  it  to 

J  on,"  he  would  have  seemed  to  them  as  one  that  mocked :  they  would 
aye  laughed  him  to  scorn.  In  order  to  cut  loose  the  bonds  that  bound 
them  to  Egypt,  the  sharp  knife  of  alHiction  must  be  used ;  and  Pharaoh, 
though  he  knew  it  not,  was  God*s  instrument  in  weaning  them  from  the 
^lyptian  world,  and  helping  them  as  his  church  to  take  up  their 
leparate  place  in  the  wilderness,  and  receive  the  portion  whith  God  had 
•{^inted  for  them. 
(hice  more — and  here  you  may  see  the  wisdom  of  God— the  very 


352  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

• 

means  which  Pharaoh  devised  for  the  effectnal  crushing  of  the  people— 
the  destruction  of  the  male  children — becnine  tiie  direct,  nay,  the  dmoe 
provision  for  educatinir  a  deliverer  for  them.     Moses  had  never  been, 
in  all  probability,  trained  in  the  courts  of  Pharaoh  if  he  had  not  been 
put  in  the  basket  of  bulrushes  on  the  brink  of  the  Nile;  and  his  mother 
would  certainly  never  have  put  him  there  if  there  had  not  been  t 
pitiless  edict  that  the  male  children  should  be  put  to  death.    Moved 
vy  maternal  instinct  to  save  her  child,  and  moved  by  faith  in  God  not 
to  obey  the  king's  command,  she  places  her  child  in  the  ark.    Pharaoh's 
daughter  finds  the  child,  compassionates  its  cry,  extricates  it  from  peril, 
loves  it  fondly,  adopts  it  capriciously,  and  educates  it  in  the  very  conrl 
of  Pharaoh.    That  child  grows  up  to  be  the  man  who  should  vei 
the  fields  of  Zoan — the  man  of  God,  who  with  a  high  hand  and  an 
outstretched  arm,  would  lead  forth  the  slaves  of  Egypt  to  become  a 
great  nation,  which  God  should  bless.     So  you  see  the  Lord  in  all 
points  meets  Pharaoh  and  foils  him.     This  Pharaoh  was  the  great 
representative  in  those  days  of  the  power  of  evil,  and  he  stands  still 
to  the  Christian  church  as  the  type  of  the  seed  of  the  serpent.    But 
the  Lord  withstands  him,  despoils  him  of  his  purpose,  and  turns  all 
he  does  to  the  very  highest  and  best  end.     Such  the  narrative,  foil  rf 
instruction,  and  charged  with  portent,  that  serves  as  a  type  of  the 
Lord's  doing  when  he  makes  bare  his  arm  for  the  salvation  of  his  own 
heritage. 

IL  Let  us  now  carry  the  same  thought  a  stage  farther,  and  take  a 
brief  survey  of  the  history  of  tue  children  of  God.  The  like 
means  will  appear  in  manifold  operation.  Men  meditate  mischief,  but 
it  miserably  miscarries.  (Jod  gi'ants  protection  to  the  persecuted,  and 
provides  an  escape  from  the  most  ])erilous  exposure.  Full  often  the 
darkest  conspiracy  is  brou;jht  to  the  direst  confusion.  No  sooner 
docs  Christ  gather  a  church  in  any  place,  be  it  a  renowned  empire 
or  a  paltry  village,  than  opposition  is  stirred  up.  **  If  ye  were  of  the  world, 
the  world  would  love  his  own :  but  because  ye  are  not  of  the  world, 
but  I  have  chosen  you  out  of  the  world,  therefore  the  world  hateth 
you."  "  I  will  put  enmity  between  thee  and  the  woman,  and  between 
thy  seed  and  her  seed,"  is  the  first  check  for  the  serpent's  wiles,  the  first 
ray  of  hope  for  his  helpless  victims;  and  the  prediction  will  continue  to 
be*  fulfilled  till  at  last,  according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord,  the  tares  are 
bound  in  bundles  to  burn  them,  and  the  wheat  is  gathered  into  his 
gamer. 

Whenever  there  has  been  a  great  i)ersecution  raised  against  the 
Christian  church,  God  has  overruled  it,  as  he  did  in  the  case  of 
Pharaoh's  oppression  of  the  Israelites,  by  making  the  aggrieved  com- 
munity more  largely  to  increase.  The  early  persecutions  in  Judea 
promoted  the  spread  of  the  gosj^el ;  hence,  when  after  the  death  of 
Stephen  the  disciples  were  all  scattered  abroad  throujjhout  the  regions 
of  Judea  and  Samaria,  except  the  apostles,  the  result  is  thus  given: 
"  Therefore  they  that  were  scattered  abroad  went  everywhere  preaching 
the  word."  So,  too,  when  Herod  stretched  forth  his  hands  to  vex 
certain  of  the  church,  and  killed  James,  the  brother  of  John,  with  the 
sword ;  what  came  of  it  ?  AVhy,  Luke  tells  us  in  almost  the  same  words 
that  Moses  had  used :  "  The  word  of  God  grew  and  multiplied."   Tbos6 


PROSPERITY  UNDER  PERSECUTION.  863 

errible  and  bloody  persecutiouB  under  the  Roman  Emperor  by  no 
oeans  stayed  the  progress  of  the  gospel;  but  strangely  enough  n.ea 
.eemed  to  press  forward  for  the  crown  of  martyrdom.  The  thurch 
)robably  never  increased  at  a  greater  ratio  tlian  when  her  foes  were 
nost  fierce  to  assail  and  most  resolute  to  destroy  her.  It  was  so  in 
ifker  times.  The  Reformation  in  this  country  and"  throughout  Europe 
lever  went  on  so  prosperously  as  when  it  was  most  vigorously  opposed. 
fou  shall  find  in  any  individual  church  that  wherever  evil  men  have 
inspired  together,  and  a  stonn  of  oppositfon  lias  burst  forth  against 
he  saints,  the  heart  of  the  Lord  has  been  moved  with  compassion,  and 
he  hand  of  the  Lord  has  been  raised  to  succour,  till  we  have  come  to 
ook  upon  opposition  as  an  omen  of  good,  and  persecution  for  rightcous- 
less'  sake  as  a  tearful  seed-time,  quickly  to  be  followed  by  a  harvest  of 
oy.  We  have  looked  on  our  adversaries,  though  thoy  seemed  like  stormy 
>etrels,  as  being  the  index  of  a  favourable  wind  to  the  good  barque  of 
Christ's  church.  Persecution  seems  to  be  the  wave  that,  when  it  leaps 
ip  ^ound  her,  speeds  her  course.  Let  the  mountains  be  removed,  and 
ast  into  the  midst  of  the  sea;  but  after  long  experience  of  Jehovah's 
aithfulness  towards  his  people,  we  are  confident  that  his  church 
hall  not  be  moved :  in  quietude  shall  she  possess  her  soul.  Perse- 
:ation  has  evidently  aided  the  increase  of  the  church  by  the  scattering 
kbroud  of  earnest  teachers.  We  are  very  apt  to  get  hived — too  many  of 
18  together— and  our  very  love  of  one  another  renders  it  difficult  to  part 
IS  and  scatter  us  about.  Persecution  therefore  is  permitted  to  scatter 
ihe  hive  of  the  church  into  various  swarms,  and  each  of  these  swarms 
xigins  to  make  honey.  We  are  all  like  the  salt  if  we  be  true  Ohristians, 
aid  the  proper  place  for  the  salt  is  not  massed  in  a  box,  but  scattered 
3y  handluls  over  the  flesh  wiiich  it  is  to  preserve.  We  are  of  good 
^rvicc  when  we  are  kept  together  in  great  bands :  happy  we  certainly 
ire  in  the  presence  of  each  other  ;  but  we  are  to  separate  and  scatter, 
ffld  we  shall  conquer  ns  we  are  scattered  abroad.  You  remember  the 
lays  of  our  Puritan  forefathers,  when  the  dominant  church  of  the  day 
ietermined  to  crush  out  pure  evangelism.  To  what  extent  did  ft 
mccccd  ?  Did  it  destroy  their  faith  and  their  confidence  ?  Nay,  my 
)rethren;  by  driving  them  out  of  an  apostate  church,  and  compelling 
hem  to  take  up  their  stand  as  separated  believers  without  the  camp, 
>earing  Christ's  reproach  and  cross,  an  everlasting  testimony  for  pure 
ruth  was  enshrined.  Was  the  crisis  prolonged?  Were  deeds  of 
iclcnce  legalised  ?  By  the  increasing  rigour  of  such  persecution,  our 
brefathers  were  constrained  to  leave  their  native  shores,  and  they 
lad  to  i)ass  in  the  May  Flower ^  and  afterwards  in  some  succeeding 
•essels,  across  the  blue  Atlantic,  sadly  but  surely  to  found  another 
jcntreior  the  proclamation  of  Ihc  gospel,  and  upon  the  wide  continent 
)f  a  new  world  they  became  the  progenitors  of  another  nation  holding 
'ast  the  fundamentals  of  the  faith,  and  rejoicing  in  the  liberty  wherewith 
[Christ  has  mnde  us  free.  There  might  have  been  no  church  in  the 
United  States  if  it  had  not  been  that  our  sires  were  driven  to  the  wilds 
Mnongst  the  Red  Indians,  there  to  establish  themselves,  and  set  up  a 
tianner  for  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  It  will  always  be  so.  I  could 
almost  wish  that  in  this  island,  though  I  dread  calamity,  I  could  almost 
irifih,  lor  the  Master's  honour,  that  some  irresistible  impulse  should 


854  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

force  his  disciples  to  go  abroad  to  the  regions  beyond  onr  peaaA 
Bpherc  uf  life  and  labour.  I  rejoice,  though  I  love  not  to  mm  my 
friends,  when  I  find  them  led  or  driven,  it  may  be,  to  eraigrafcioo, 
whether  it  be  to  Australia,  Canada,  or  anywhere  else,  Decanse  I  troifc 
that  if  they  are  livinj?  seed  tliey  will  be  as  a  handfalof  com  sown  in 
the  land,  the  fruit  whereof  shall  shake  like  Lebanon.  Christian  men  in 
sometimes  called  to  leave  ])ositions  of  great  comfort  and  to  occnp/ 
stations  of  great  hardship.  They  may  account  it  a  reverse  of  fortune, 
while  God  designs  it  as  an  appointment  to  especial  service.  If  they  bear 
Christ's  gospel  with  them  to  a  people  sitting  in  darkness,  that  will  be 
great  gain  in  the  long  run  to  the  church.  Yonr  being  sent  to  a  village^ 
though  you  like  it  not,  may  be  a  lasting  blessing  to  the  hamlet  Your 
residing  among  strangers,  when  you  would  far  rather  find  a  more  con- 
genial home  among  your  own  kindred,  may  be  for  the  good  of  tbit 
neighbourhood.  Who  knows  ?  Where  should  lamps  be  set  np  but  ia 
dark  places?  Where  should  we  have  a  guard  for  Christ's  array, bnl 
where  the  enemy  is  most  likely  to  make  the  assault  ?  Be  patient,  then, 
my  brethren,  amidst  the  persecutions  or  trials  you  may  be  called  upon 
to  bear;  and  be  thankful  tliat  they  are  so  often  overruled  for  the  growth 
of  the  church,  the  spread  of  the  gospel,  and  the  honour  of  Christ. 

Moreover,  beloved,  persecution  in  the  church — even  when  it  does  not 
take  the  form  of  burning  or  imprisonment,  but  of  slander,  of  ernd 
mockings,  jesting,  jeering,  and  venomous  spite — in  whatever  form  it  ii 
sent,  persecution  helps  to  keep  up  the  separation  between  the  church 
and  the  world.  I  fear  most  the  rich  when  they  bring  gifts.  I  loathe 
the  world  most  when  it  fawns  and  flatters.  When  I  heard  of  a  lady  who 
had  put  on  Clirist  by  baptism,  that  the  cold  shoulder  was  given  her  in 
all  the  circles  in  which  slie  moved ;  did  I,  think  you,  feel  more  diepoeed 
to  condole  or  to  congratulate  ?  It  was  said  that  now  she  had  but  few 
invitations  to  such  ])lacos  and  such  societv  as  she  had  previously  fre- 
quented ;  and  I  rejoiced,  and  tliankod  God  for  it.  I  was  glad  of  it,  for 
I  felt  she  was  fartJier  removed  from  temptation.  When  I  heard  of  a 
young  man  that,  after  he  joined  the  church,  those  in  his  workshop  met 
him  at  once  with  loud  laughter  and  reproached  him  with  bitter  scorn. 
I  was  thankful,  because  now  he  could  not  take  up  the  same  position 
with  themselves,  lie  was  a  marked  man:  they  who  knew  him  discovered 
that  there  was  such  a  thing  as  Christianity,  and  such  a  one  as  an 
earnest  defender  of  it.  It  is  no  evil  to  the  church,  depend  upon  it^  to 
have  a  great  gulf  fixed  between  her  and  the  world.  The  worst  thing  that 
ever  could  happen  for  us  is,  when  affinities  are  made  between, the  sons 
of  God  and  the  children  of  Belial.  This  brought  on  the  Deluge;  and  if  it 
could  ever  be  carried  out  thoroughly  again,  it  would  bring  on  judg- 
ments terrible  to  think  of.  It  is  ill  for  the  worldly,  since  "  they  that-* 
are  far  from  God  shall  perish  ;**  but  it  is  a  thousand  times  worse  for 
the  professing  when  they  play  foul  with  their  profession,  for  so  it  is 
written,  **  Thou  hast  destroyed  all  them  that  go  a  whoring  from  thee.j 
Summary  vengean-e  is  their  lot.  '^Come  out  from  among  them,  and ' 
ye  separate,  and  touch  not  the  unclean  thing ;  and  I  will  receive  you,  ai 
will  be  a  FatJier  unto  you,  and  ye  shall  be  my  sons  and  daughi 
This  is  a  text  that  needs  to  be  thundered  in  trumpet  tone.  What 
the  great  King  unto  the  spouse?     '* Forget  also  thine  own  pei 


\ 


\ 


PROSPElllTy  UNDER  PBRSEtJUTION.  355 

md  thy  father's  house ;  so  shall  the  Kinpr  greatly  desire  thy  beaity : 
fbr  he  is  thy  Lord ;  and  worship  thou  him."  "  Be  not  conformed  to 
ihis  world :  but  be  ye  trausfonned  by  the  renewing  of  your  mind." 
Poo  much  laxnesB,  givinjij  way  to  the  world  a  friendship  full  of  fasci- 
lation  brings  on  leanness  of  spirit,  and  ciiuses  us  to  be  scarcely  known  as 
christians,  weakens  our  testimony,  and  in  every  way  promotes  Satan's 
mds.  But  when  persecution  breaks  forth,  barriers  are  set  up,  and  dis- 
tinctive colours  are  worn,  so  the  two  camps  are  kept  in  open  hostility, 
ind  when  brought  to  battle  with  each  other,  the  church  is  kept  pure 
(nth  armour  bright ;  victory  waits  her  march,  and  her  champions  wia 
Jieir  laurels. 

Again,  persecution  in  the  Christian  church  acts  like  a  winnowing 
bn  to  the  heaps  gathered  on  the  threshing-floor.  In  these  soft  and 
nlken  days  any  man  may  be  a  Christian  professor.  Oftentimes  it  pays 
^ell  to  make  a  profession  of  godliness.  Men  think  the  better  of  you : 
t  brings  customers  to  the  shop.  No  one  knows  how  many  conveniences 
nay  attach  to  the  profession  of  religion :  albeit,  if  it  be  pretence  without 
pretext,  everlasting  destruction  awaits  such  violation  of  truth,  for  God 
jvill  surely  avenge  hjrpocrisy.  But  in  days  of  persecution,  to  profess 
Christ  is  very  inconvenient.  Then  to  be  baptised  in  water  may  involve 
i  baptism  of  blood.  Then  for  the  soul  to  bum  with  zeal  for  Christ 
jeould  probably  be  followed  with  the  body  being  burnt  at  the  stake. 
Fhen  a  word  for  Jesus  would  bring  a  word  of  conviction  from  the 
judge's  mouth,  and,  close  at  the  heels  of  that  word,  death.  Then 
iiey  who  loved  not  Christ  betook  themselves  to  the  other  side ; 
:;he  cowards  and  the  spies  shrunk  away.  Demas  went,  and  Judas 
frent,  and  all  of  that  brood,  to  their  own  company,  and  then  only  the 
;rue  and  the  brave,  the  regenerate,  the  elect  of  God,  were  left.  They 
stood  fast  and  firm — all  the  stronger  for  losing  such  ill  company.  Then 
n  those  days  the  church  was  like  a  heap  of  golden  wheat,  all  winnowed 
md  clean  grain,  fit  for  a  burnt  offering  to  the  Most  High,  to  be  offered 
ip  as  a  meat  offenng  upon  his  altar.  Her  martyrs  were  amongst 
ler  noblest  sons,  the  very  glory  of  the  church  and  of  the  Lord 
fesus  C'hrist.  So  you  see  persecution  is  overruled  for  this  great 
^ood.  It  ought  never  to  be,  while  there  are  sinners  in  this  world — it 
mght  never  to  be  that  the  Christian  escapes  opposition.  I  take  it  that 
f  a  man  makes  an  advance  in  life,  comes  to  a  position  of  fame,  he 
mght  to  win  it,  ougiit  to  fight  for  it.  Men  ought  not  to  be  crowned 
mtil  first  of  all  they  have  striven  for  the  mastery ;  and  it  should  be  so 
n  the  (jhurch  of  God  that  we  must  fight  if  we  would  reign.  It  should 
lot  be  that  we  should  think  it  an  easy  thing  and  a  light  matter  to  be  a 
bllower  of  him  whose  life  was  sorrow,  and  whose  death  whs  the  death 
)f  the  cross.  If  we  are  to  be  conformed  to  him,  it  cannot  be  by  ease  and 
iloth.  Not  the  downy  couch,  but  the  crown  of  thorns  ;  not  the  triumph, 
)nt  the  shame,  must  be  the  portion  of  the  imitators  of  the  Crucified. 

Persecution  has  a  further  beneficial  use  in  the  church  of  God,  and 
t  is  this.  It  may  be  that  the  members  of  the  church  want  it.  It 
8  a  sorrowful  thing  that  slander  should  be  so  often  used  against  God's 
leople ;  it  is  a  grievous  thing  that  their  little  faults  should  be  severely 
iriticised  and  magnified;  but,  on  the  whole,  it  is  good  and  profitable. 
t  is  a  great  blessing  to  be  made  to  walk  carefully.    Tiie  Roman  who 


856  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Erofesscd  that  he  would  like  to  have  a  window  in  his  bosom,  tbatereiy- 
ody  might  see  his  heart,  would  have  wished,  I  should  think,  befoie 
long  for  a  shutter  to  that  window;  yet  it  is  no  slight  'stimulus  to  a 
man's  own  circumspection  for  him  to  know  that  he  is  obseryed  by  un- 
friendly eyes.      Our  life    ought  to   be  such   as  will   bear  criticism. 
As  Christian  men  we  serve  a  jealous  God,  and  our  works  will  hare 
to  stand  the  test  of  fire  at  the  last  great  day.    The  wood,  and  the 
hay,  and  the  stubble  that  we  have  builded  will   be   consumed,  and 
only  the  gold,  the  silver,  and  the  precious  stones  will  remain.    Are  we, 
therefore,  to  be  afraid  of  the  ordinary  ordeal  of  human  censure  and 
malignity?    If  we  run  with  the  footmen  and  they  weaiy  us,  what  shall 
we  do  when  we  contend  with  horses  ?    And  if  in  this  land  of  com- 
parative peace  we  are  weary,  what  shall  we  do  in  the  swelling  of  Jordan? 
This  is  the  opposition  appointed  for  us.    It  is  through  much  tribulatioo 
we  are  to  inherit  the  kingdom  ;  and  if  we  bo  sincere,  and  honest  and 
true,  we  shall  not  flinch  at  this :  we  shall  feel  that  God  will  overrule  it 
for  our  sanctification,  by  making  us  take  heed  unto  our  ways,  becaase 
the  wicked  watch  our  paths. 

And  this  pcrsccntiou,  dear  brethren,  has  a  further  usefulness.  Often 
does  it  happen  that  the  enmity  of  the  world  drives  the  Christian  nearer 
to  his  God.  How  many  prayers  have  been  offered  up  as  the  result  of 
persecution  that  would  never  have  been  oflered  else,  heaven  alone  can 
tell  I  How  many  a  groan,  and  sigh,  and  tear,  acceptable  to  God,  have 
been  forced  from  true  liearts  by  their  sufferings,  God  alone  knows  1  Ah! 
in  the  soft  days,  the  summer  days  of  peace  and  prosjxjrity,  we  are  apt 
to  gad  abroad  after  vain  delights ;  but  when  the  winter  comes,  with  its 
keen  and  cutting  blast,  we  haste  to  our  own  abode,  we  cleave  to  our 
own  hearth,  we  love  to  dwell  with  our  own  kindred.  Even  so  right 
frequently,  with  hearts  all  chill  and  cheerless,  we  have  sought  the  house 
of  our  Fatlier  and  our  God,  drawn  near  to  his  altar,  and  found  a  refresh- 
ment we  fain  could  wish  that  we  might  never  leave.  Why,  oh  I  why, 
are  we  so  fickle  ?  If  we  could  fin-l  succour  and  solace  apart  from  the 
Rock,  away  from  the  Sun,  absent  from  our  Lord,  our  wayward  hearts 
would  do  60;  but  when  the  waters  of  aflliction  have  covered  all  the 
earth,  th'^n  we  fly  back  to  our  Noah,  our  ark,  and  find  rest  for  the  sole 
of  our  foot.  The  friendship  of  this  world  is  enmity  to  God.  It  rivals 
God's  friendship,  it  deceives  and  deludes  many  hearts;  but  when  the 
world  frowns,  it  is  a  blessed  frown  that  makes  me  seek  my  Savioor's 
smile.  Anything  that  drives  me  to  my  knees  is  good.  Anything  that 
makes  me  trust  in  the  promise,  nnd  wait  only  upon  God  because  my 
expectation  is  from  him,  is  healthful  to  my  soul,  infuses  courage,  ana 
inspires  confidence,  and  invests  her  with  fresh  strength.  0  brethren, 
the  very  glory  of  the  church  is  to  live  nearer  to  God.  The  more  she 
thinks  of  her  great  and  glorious  Head,  and  the  more  she  leans  upon  the 
invisible  arm  of  the  Eternal,  the  more  invincible  she  is.  Persecution  in 
driving  her  to  her  stronghold  is  overruled  to  her  help. 

And  yet,  further,  the  dark  days  of  fiendish  persecution  have  witnessed 
bright  deeds  of  Christian  heroism  never  to  be  forgotten.  How  oftett 
have  the  richest  and  the  ri|.)Pst  fruits  of  the  Spirit  been  put  forth  by 
the  Jiord's  people  wLeti  they  have  been  most  grieved  and  smitten  I 
Then  the  saints  have  been  like  clusters  thrown  into  the  wineprotis; 


PEOSPERITY  UNDER  PERSECUTION'.  357 

hall  bring  forth  the  red  wine?  Whose  but  the  feet  of 
Hies  shall  tread  the  grapes?     And  as  with  exultation  they 

1  trample  down,  they  shall  crush  nothing  in  the  dust  but 
e  living  wine  shall  flow,  and  God  shall  receive  the  whole  of 
work — these  foes  work — and  think  that  with  axes  they  can 
n  our  carved  work,  and  cast  fire  into  the  sanctuary  of  God, 

while  they  bum  not  the  true  sanctuary :  they  burn  but  the 
en  erection  with  which  man  has  defaced  the'  living  temple, 
bum  on  :  they  do  no  hurt,  but  good  ensues.  If  you  read 
ook  of  Martyrs,"  or  any  of  the  martyrologies  of  earlier  ages, 
ind  there  patience,  self-denial,  consecration,  confidence  iu 
all  the  finer  grac2s  of  temper  in  full  bloom,  perfuming  the 
heir  fragrance.  One  is  astonished  at  what  our  poor,  weak 
has  been  able  to  endure  for  the  truth,  when  strengthened  by 
of  God.    Verily,  humble  and  weak,  and  timid  women  have 

2  mettle,  waxing  valiant,  and  cheering  on  men  of  muscle  and 
)se  hearts  had  grown  faint.  We  could  mention  the  names 
aints,  if  this  were  the  time,  who  have  endured  torment  as 
inquisitors  could  devise,  or  relentless  executioners  could 
.  yet  they  have  not  denied  their  Lord.  This  is  the  patience 
ts,  I  think,  when  the  martyrs  perished  in  the  Roman  Amphi- 
id  the  cruel  crowd  looked  down  to  watch  their  agonies  as 
s  were  crushed  between  the  jaws  of  wild  beasts ;  angels 
n  tiers,  invisible  multitudes  of  them,  gathered,  and  looked 
es  of  admiration  at  the  spectacle  of  mortal  men  ravished  with 
f  God,  waving  the  banner  of  immortal  truth,  while  fronv 
rounds  and  horrid  gashes  their  life-blood  streamed.  Oh! 
3an  do  by  us  when  he  works  in  us !     Perhaps  heaven  itself, 

it  gazed  upon  the  cross,  never  saw  a  nobler  spectacle  than 
and  women,  who  bore  the  cross  of  Christ  in  their  hearts,  gave 

up  wholly  as  living  sacrifices  unto  him.  The  church  looks 
shines  brighter  when  she  is  in  the  furnace.  Not  the  smell  of 
pass  upon  her.  Her  Lord  is  with  her,  and  if  the  fire  be 
m  times  hotter,  his  glory  is  seven  times  the  brighter.    Thus, 

principle  of  the  text  is  brought  out :  **  the  more  they 
lem,  the  more  they  multiplied."  Their  enemies  try  to  deal 
1  them  to  put  them  down,  but  their  wisdom  is  folly.  God 
I  the  church  by  her  pers>JCUtion. 

you  not  think  that  persecution  and  opposition — such  little 
5  as  we  meet  with  now;  little  indeed,  compared  with  those  of 
s — arc  permitted  for  our  good,  as  in  IsraePs  case,  to  make  us 
his  is  not  our  rest,  and  cause  us  to  long  for  the  better  land  ? 
[ear  Christian,  if  you  lived  in  a  Christian  household,  where 
ited  order  helped  your  piety,  if  you  were  put  into  the  con- 
)f  a  gracious  providence,  you  might  be  content  to  dwell  below 
''e  soon  take  root  in  this  soil,  for  we  are  earthy  by  nature,  and 
)  earth— like  to  its  like.  But  when  there  comes  the  jeer,  the 
mark,  the  cruel  innuendo,  the  bitter  sarcasm,  then  we  feel, 
ot  my  rest :  I  must  seek  better  company  than  this,  a  better 
I  better  portion  than  I  shall  find  this  side  of  Jordan."  And 
ig  for  the  home-bringing,  when  the  King,  the  Husband^  shall 


358  MErUOIX)LITAN  TABEKNACJiK  PULPIT. 

fetch  home  his  spouse,  and  the  marriap^e  shall  be  consummated  in  thu 
skies.  Oh  !  how  Fomctimcs,  when  the  world  has  been  very  very  coM, 
you  have  longed  for  the  warm  bosom  of  ^oiir  Saviour!  You  would 
have  nestled  in  the  world's  bosom  if  vou  could,  but  when  she  would  BOfc 
receive  you  but  thrust  you  forth,  theu  you  came  to  your  true  selt  and 
exercised  your  right  senses,  and  you  said,  **  I  will  return  unto  my  husband. 
It  was  better  with  me  then  than  now."  0  that  our  hearts  were  alwaji 
set  on  heaven !  There  is  our  treasure :  there  let  our  hearts  be  alia 
There  is  our  Lord  and  King:  to  him  should  our  hearts  fly.  There  are 
the  best  ones  of  our  families,  our  relations,  who  are  everlastingly  onr 
associates,  brethren  and  sisters  whose  brotherhood  and  sisterhood  no 
death  can  bring  to  an  end — 

"  There  my  best  friends  my  kindred  dwell, 
There  God  my  Saviour  reigns." 

We  ought  to  long  for  that  land:  and  I  say  the  whip  of  persecution  ii 
helpful,  because  it  makes  us  learn  that  this  is  the  house  of  bondage,  and 
moves  us  to  long  after  and  seek  for  the  land  of  liberty — i^Q  land  of  joj. 

III.  And  now  I  close  this  address  by  just  very  briefly  hinting  that 

THIS  GREAT  GENERAL   TRUTH   APPLIPISTO  ALL  BELIEVERS;  but  I  will 

make  a  practical  use  of  it.  J)car  brother,  dear  sister,  are  you  passing 
through  great  trials?  Very  well  then,  to  meet  them  I  pray  that  God's 
grace  may  give  you  greater  faith;  and  if  your  trials  increase  more  and 
more,  so  may  your  strength  increase.  I'ou  will  be  acting  after  God's 
manner,  guided  by  his  wisdom,  if  you  seek  to  get  more  faith  out  of 
BQore  trial,  for  that  trial  does  strengthen  faith,  through  divine  grace, 
experience  teaches  us,  and  as  we  nuiUe  full  proof  of  the  faithfulness  of 
God,  our  courage,  once  apt  to  waver,  is  contirmed.  Do  pray  the  Lord 
that  when  the  trials  multiply  you  may  get  faith  wherewith  to  meet 
them;  that  out  of  the  eater  you  may  get  meat;  and  out  of  the  strong 
find  strengtlL 

So,  too,  if  you  know  the  truth  of  God  to  be  at  any  time  assailed, 
and  your  own  mind  is  beset  with  doubt  about  any  doctrine,  always  ask 
God  so  to  open  that  ])articular  truth  to  your  understanding,  and  endear 
it  to  your  heart,  that  by  the  assaults  you  are  enabled  to  repel  your 
faith  may  be  the  more  conlirnied.  Oh !  there  is  a  light  way  of  holding 
truth,  and  there  is  a  tenacious  way  of  grasping  it.  I  have  held  doctrine^ 
as  it  were,  in  my  hand,  like  a  boy's  ball,  that  might  be  thrown  away. 
But  it  is  another  thing  when  the  King  prints  the  mark  of  the  doctrioe 
right  into  your  very  soul,  so  that  you  could  no  more  part  with  it  than 
you  could  part  with  life  itself  Trials  often  bum  doctrines  into  ns, 
and  heresies  and  infidelities  make  the  good  confession  d.*ar  in  our  sight 
as  a  prize  which  we  could  never  ])art  with.  Thus  opjiosition  to  the 
truth  leads  to  the  multiplication  of  evidences  in  its  support-,  and  the 
more  we  are  assailed  with  the  arguments  of  science,  falsely  so-called, 
the  firmer  we  adhere  to  the  oracles  of  God. 

Or  it  may  be,  dear  Christian  worker,  that  of  late  you  have  met 
with  a  great  many  discDura^omcnts.  You  seem  to  have  laboured  m 
vain,  and  spent  your  strength  for  nought.  Ask  then,  in  prayer,  and 
act  accordingly,  tiiat  the  more  vou  are  defeated  the  less  you  may  be 
disposed  to  yield  ;  but  rather  that  you  may  be  endowed  with  lifesb 


PROSPEltlTY  UNDEB  PER8KCUT10N.  359 

energy  for  the  service,  and  strive  with  increased  assurance  for  the  victory. 

When  you  feel  "  I  am  foiled  in  that  point,"  say,  "  Nevertheless,  I 

cannot  be  beaten :  I  belong  to  a  seed  that  cannot  be  vanquished.    If  I  did 

not  belong  to  the  house  of  Israel,  I  might  have  been  destroyed  and 

OTercome ;  but  none  can  stand  against  the  Hebrew  race,  against  true 

Israelites — they  must   win  tfie  day."     Therefore,  settle  it  in  your 

mind  that  if  you  do  not  win  souls  one  day,  you  will  another;   and 

if  you  cannot'  press  into  your  enemies'  territory  in  one  part,  you  will 

in  another  ;  and  if  he  defeats  you  at  any  time,  then  multiply  your  efforts 

to  do  good.   Always  take  revenge  on  Satan  if  he  defeats  you,  by  trying 

to  do  ten  times  more  good  than  you  did  before.    It  is  in  some  such 

way  that  a  dear  brother  now  preaching  the  gospel,  whom  God  has 

blessed  with  a  very  considerable  measure  of  success,  may  trace  the 

opening  of  his    career  to  a  circumstance  that  occurred  to  myself 

Sitting  in  my  pulpit  one  evening,  in  a  country  village,  where  I 

had   to  preach,  my  text  slipped  from   my   memory,   and  with  the 

text  seemed  to  go  all  that  I  had  thought  to  speak  upon  it.    A  rare 

thing  to  happen  to  me ;  but  I  sat  utterly  confounded.    I  could  find 

nothing  to  say.    With  strong  crying  I  lifted  up  my  soul  to  God  to 

pour  out  again  within  my  soul  of  the  living  water  that  it  miirht  gush 

forth  from  me  for  others;  and  I  accompanied  my  prayer  with  avow 

that  if  Satan's  enmity  thus  had  brought  nie  low,  I  would  take  so  many 

Iresh  men  whom  I  might  meet  with  during  the  week,  and  train  them 

for  the  ministry,  so  that  with  their  hands  and  tongues  I  would  avenge 

myself  on  the  Philistines.     The  brother  I  have  alluded  to  came  to  me 

the  next  morning.    I  accepted  him  at  once  as  one  whom  God  had  sent, 

and  I  helped  him,  and  others  after  him,  to  prepare  for  the  service,  and 

to  go  forth  in  the  Saviour's  name  to  preach  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of 

God.     Often  when  we  fear  we  are  defeated,  we  ought  to  say,  "  I  will  do 

all  the  more.     Instead  of  dropping  from  this  work,  now  will  I  make  a 

general  levy,  and  a  sacred  conscription  upon  all  the  powers  of  my  soul, 

and  I  will  gather  up  all  the  strength  I  ever  had  in  reserve,  and  make 

from  this  moment  a  tremendous  life-long  effort  to  overcome  the  powers 

of  darkness,  and  win  for  Christ  fresh  trophies  of  victory."     After  this 

fashion  you  will  have  an  easier  time  of  it,  for  if  you  do  more  good  the 

more  you  are  tempted,  Satan  will  not  so  often  tempt  you.    When  he 

knows  that  all  the  more  you  are  afflicted  so  much  the  more  you  multiply, 

very  likely  he  will  find  it  wiser  to  let  you  alone,  or  try  you  m  some  other 

method  than  that  of  direct  and  overt  opposition.    So  whenever  you  have 

a  trial,  take  it  as  a  favour  ;  whenever  God  holds  in  one  hand  the  rod 

of  a£9iction,  he  has  a  favour  in  the  other  hand  ;  he  never  strikes  a  child 

of  his  but  he  has  some  tender  blessing  iu  store.     If  he  visits  you  with 

unwonted  affliction,  you  will  have    unusual  delight;    the  Lord  will 

open  new  windows  for  you,  and  show  his  beauty  as  he  shows  it  not 

to  others.     According  as  your  tribulations  abound,  so  also  shall  your 

consolations  abound  in  Clirist  Jesua.     In  the  deeper  waters  you  shall 

find  him  nearer,  for  he  has  said,  **  AVhen  thou  passcst  through  the  waters, 

I  will  be  with  thee."     Uc  will  be  with  you  always,  but  he  has  promised 

to  come  to  you  specially  and  peculiarly,  and,  as  it  were,  by  appointment, 

'When  you  are  driven  out  into  the  wilderness,  or  harassed  by  the  foe. 

He  comforteth  thoge  that  are  cast  down.     Rejoice,  therefore,  in  your 


360  METBOrOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

afflictions,  if  so  be  yon  have  faith  to  believe  that  they  shall  be  blenel 
for  your  good. 

What  is  all  this  to  the  unconverted  ?    Ah,  sirs  !  while  the  men  of 
God  flourish  in  adversity,  the  men  of  this  world  are  rained  by  tinar 
prosperity.     Even  the  cnp  of  pleasure  and  sensual  enjoyment,  of 
which  ye  delight  to  drink,  has  its  bitter  dregs  which  ye  shall  be  com- 
pelled to  swallow.    Yet  even  now  all  your  days  are  not  passed  in  son- 
shine.    You  have  your  troubles;  but  you  have  no  God  to  resort  ta 
You  will  have  many  sorer  plagues  than  you  have  ever  yet  been  visited 
with;  but  if  you  continue  in  unbelief,  you  will  still  have  no  God  to  trnst 
in.    Perhaps  you  go  to  some  friends  in  any  emergency  now,  but  no 
friend  can  help  you  in  the  dying  hour.    No  brother  can  go  with  yon 
through  the  swellings   of  Jordan.     0  friendless   one,  0  Ghristless 
sinner !  dost  thou  not  want  God  to  be  thy  helper,  and  Christ  to  be  thf 
friend  ?     If  thou  dost,  then  on  the  cross  behold  the  Saviour.    Turn  to 
him  thine  eye :  penitently  trust  him  :  rely  upon  him,  and  he  is  joun^ 
and  then  henceforth  the  Lord  of  Hosts  shall  be  with  you,  and  God  of 
Jacob  shall  be  your  refuge,  and  your  afflictions  also  shall  work  yoor 
good.    May  God  bless  each  one  of  you,  fer  Jesus*  sake.    Amen. 


Mr.  8purgeo!i  hopes  to  he  permit (o<l  to  preach  on  July  2.  He  i»  most 
thankful  to  iufonn  all  friends  that  he  is  belter  in  health,  and  trusts  be  maj  be 
able  again  to  occupy  the  pulpit  of  the  Tabernacle  from  Sabbath  to  Sabbath. 


Elfletr0pHtHn  ^dbmtult 


MORE   AND    MOBE. 


Delivered  on  Lobd's-day  Morning,  July  2nd,  1871,  by 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

* 

AT     THE     METROPOLITAN     TABERNACLE,     NEWINGTON. 


"  But  I  will  hope  continually,  and  will  yet  praise  thee  more  and  more." — 

Psalm  Ixxi  14, 

HEN  sin  conquered  the  realm  of  manhood,  it  slew  all  the  minstrels 
cept  those  of  the  race  of  Hope.  For  humanity,  amid  all  its  sorrows 
id  sins,  hope  sings  on.  To  oelievers  in  Jesus  there  remains  a  royal 
ce  of  bards,  for  we  have  a  hope  of  glory,  a  lively  hope,  a  hope  eternal 
A  divine.  Because  our  hope  abides,  our  praise  continues — "  I  will 
'pe  continually,  and  will  yet  praise  thee."  Because  our  hopes  grow 
ighter,  and  are  every  day  nearer  and  nearer  to  their  fulfilment,  there- 
^  the  volume  of  our  praise  increases.  "  I  will  hope  continually,  and 
t  praise  thee  more  and  more.''  A  dying  hope  would  bring  forth  declining 
3g8;  as  the  expectations  grew  more  dim,  so  would  the  music  become 
>re  faint ;  but  a  hope  immortal  and  eternal,  flaming  forth  each  day 
th  intenser  brightness,  brings  forth  a  song  of  praise  which,  as  it  shall 
rays  continue  to  arise,  so  shall  it  always  gather  new  force.  See  well, 
''  brethren,  to  your  faith,  and  your  faith  and  hope,  for  otherwise  God 
II  be  robbed  of  his  praise.  It  will  be  in  proportion  as  you  hope  for 
i  good  things  which  he  has  promised  to  your  faith,  that  you  will 
ider  to  him  the  praise  which  is  his  royal  revenue,  acceptable  to  him 

Jesus  Christ,  and  abundantly  due  from  you. 

David  had  not  been  slack  in  praise  :  indeed,  he  was  a  sweet  singer 
Israel,  a  very  choir-master  unto  the  Lord;  yet  he  vowed  to  praise  him 
)re  and  more.  Those  who  do  much  already,  are  usually  the  people 
10  can  do  more.  He  was  old.  Would  he  praise  God  more  when  he 
« infirm  than  he  had  done  when  he  was  young  and  vigorous  ?  If  he 
aid  not  excel  with  loudness  of  voice,  yet  would  he  with  eagerness  of 
art;    and  what  his  praise  might  lack  in  sound,  it  should  gain 

solemn  earnestness.  He  was  in  trouble  too,  yet  he  would  not 
ow  the  heyday  of  his  prosperity  to  surpass  in  its  notes  of  loving 
oration  the  dark  hour  of  his  adversity.  For  him  on  no  account 
dd  there  be  any  going  back.  He  had  adored  the  Lord  when  he  was 
t  a  youth  and  kept  his  father*s  flock.  Harp  in  hand,  beneath  the 
No.  998. 


SG2  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

spreading;  tree,  he  had  worshipped  the  Lord  his  Shepherd,  whose  toi 
and  stair  were  his  comfort  and  delip:ht.  AVhen  an  exile  he  had  made 
the  rocky  fastnesses  of  Adullam  and  Enj^edi  resound  with  the  name  rf 
Jehovah.  In  after  time,  when  he  had  become  king  in  Israel,  his  psalmi 
had  been  multi|)lied,  and  his  liarpstrings  were  daily  accustomed  to  the 
praises  of  the  God  of  his  salvation,  llow  could  that  zealous  songBler 
make  an  advance  in  praise  ?  See  him  yonder  dancincr  before  the 
ark  of  the  Lord  with  all  his  might:  what  more  of  joy  and  zeal  can  be 
manifest  ?  Yet  he  says  :  "  I  will  yet  praise  thee  more  and  more."  His 
troubles  had  been  multiplied  of  late,  and  his  infirmities  too,  yet  for 
all  that,  no  murmuring  escapes  him,  but  he  resolved  that  his  praise 
should  rise  higher  and  higher  till  he  continued  it  in  better  lands  forever 
and  ever. 

Beloved,  it  is  an  intense  joy  to  me  to  address  you  this  morning  after 
so  long  and  sad  an  absence,  and  I  pray  that  the  Holy  Spirit  may  make 
my  word  stimulating  to  you  all.  Our  subject  is  that  of  our  praising 
God  more  and  more.  I  do  not  intenil  to  exhort  you  to  praise  God; 
but  shall  take  it  for  granted  that  you  are  doing  so,  though  I  fear  it 
will  be  a  great  mi  strike  in  the  case  of  many.  We  must,  howeTff, 
take  that  fact  for  granted  in  those  to  whom  we  address  ourselves  upon 
our  particular  topic  ;  for  those  who  do  not  praise  God  at  all  cannot  be 
exhorted  to  praise  him  more  and  more.  To  those  I  direct  my  speech 
who  now  love  to  praise  God  ;  these  would  I  charge  to  resolve  withtiie 
psalmist :  *'  I  will  yet  praise  thee  more  and  more." 
•  I.  Our  first  business  shall  be,  to  URfjE  ourselves  to  this  resolu- 
tion. AVhy  should  we  praise  God  more  and  more?  Here  I  am  em- 
barrassed with  the  multitude  of  arguments  which  beset  me.  So  many 
crowd  around  me  that  I  cannot  number  them  in  order,  but  must  seiie 
them  somewhat  at  random. 

It  is  humbling  to  remember  that  we  may  very  well  praise  God  more 
than  we  have  done,  for  ire  /tare  praised  him  very  little  as  yet.  What  we 
have  done,  as  believers,  in  glorifying  God  falls  far,  far  short  of  his  due. 
Personally,  upon  consideration,  we  shall  each  own  this.  Bethink  thee, 
my  dear  brother,  or  sister,  what  the  Lord  has  done  for  thee.  Some  years 
ago  thou  wast  in  thy  sin,  and  death,  and  ruin  ;  he  called  thee  by  his  ji^race. 
Thou  wast  under  the  burden  and  curse  of  sin ;  he  delivered  thee.  Didst 
thou  not  expect  in  thy  first  joy  of  pardon  to  have  done  more  for  him,  to 
have  loved  liim  more,  to  have  served  him  better  ?  What  are  the  retumB 
which  thou  hast  made  for  the  boons  which  thou  hast  received  ?  Are 
they  at  all  fitting  or  adequate  ?  I  look  at  a  field  loaded  with  precious 
grain  and  ripening  for  the  harvest:  I  hear  that  the  husbandman 
has  expended  so  much  in  rent,  so  much  upon  the  ploughing,  so 
much  upon  enriching  the  soil,  so  much  for  seed,  so  much  more  for 
needful  weeding.  There  is  the  harvest,  and  it  yields  a  pn»fit:  be 
is  contented.  But  I  see  another  field:  it  is  my  own  heart;  and,  my 
brother,  thine  is  the  same.  AVhat  has  the  Husbandman  done  for  itt 
He  has  reclaimed  it  from  the  wild  waste,  by  a  power  no  less  then  omni- 
potent. He  has  hedged  it,  ploughed  it,  and  cut  down  the  thorns.  He 
has  watered  it  as  no  other  field  was  ever  watered,  for  the  bloody  sweat 
of  Christ  has  bedewed  it,  to  remove  the  primeval  curse.  God's  own 
Son  has  given  his  whole  self  that  this  barren  waste  may  become  a  garden. 


HOSE  AND  MORE.  368 

lat  has  been  done  it  were  hard  to  sum :  what  more  could  have  been 
le  none  can  say.  Yet  what  is  the  harvest  ?  Is  it  adequate  to  the 
K)ar  expended  ?  Is  the  tillage  remunerative  ?  I  am  afraid  if  we  cover 
r  fiEK^s,  or  if  a  blush  shall  serve  us  instead  of  a  veil,  it  will  be  the 
mt  fit  reply  to  the  question.  Here  and  there  a  withered  ear  is  a  poor 
x>mpense  for  the  tillage  of  infinite  love.  Let  us,  therefore,  be  shamed 
:o  a  firm  resolve,  and  say  with  resolute  spirit :  "  By  the  good  help  of 
inite  grace,  I,  at  any  rate,  having  been  so  great  a  laggard,  will 
icken  my  pace  ;  I  will  yet  praise  thee  more  and  more." 
Another  argument  which  presses  upon  my  mind  is  this :  that  wherein 
I  have  prai^  God  up  till  now,  we  have  not  found  the  service  to  be  a 
ariness  to  ourselves^  hut  it  has  ever  been  to  us  both  a  profit  and  a 
Ught.  I  would  not  speak  falsely  even  for  God,  but  I  bear  my  testi- 
>ny  that  the  happiest  moments  1  have  ever  spent  have  been  occupied 
th  the  worship  of  God.  I  have  never  been  so  near  heaven  as  when 
oring  before  the  eternal  throne.  I  think  every  Christian  will 
ar  like  witness.  Among  all  the  joys  of  earth,  and  I  shall  not 
preciate  them,  there  is  no  joy  comparable  to  that  of  praise.  The 
locent  mirth  of  the  fireside,  the  chaste  happinesses  of  household  love, 
en  these  are  not  to  be  mentioned  side  by  side  with  the  joy  of  worship, 
s  rapture  of  drawing  near  to  the  Most  High.  Earth,  at  her  best, 
(Ids  but  water,  but  this  divine  occupation  is  as  the  wine  of  Cana's 
irriage  feast.     The  purest  and  most  exhilarating  joy  is  the  delight 

glorifying  God,  and  so  anticipating  the  time  when  we  shall  enjoy 
n  for  ever.    Now,  brethren,  if  God's  praise  has  been  no  wilderness 

you,  return  to  it  with  zest  and  ardour,  and  say:  "I  will  yet 
edse  thee  more  and  more."  If  any  suppose  that  you  grow  weary 
th  the  service  of  the  Lord,  tell  them  that  his  praise  is  such  freedom, 
:h  recreation,  such  felicity,  that  you  desire  never  to  cease  from  it. 
;  for  me,  if  men  call  God's  service  slavery,  I  desire  to  be  such  a 
ndslave  for  ever,  and  would  fain  be  branded  with  my  Master's  name 
lelibly.  I  would  have  my  ear  bored  to  the  door-post  of  my  Lord's 
use,  and  go  no  more  out.    My  soul  joyfully  sings — 

"  Let  thy  grace,  Lord,  like  a  fetter, 
Bind  my  wandering  heart  to  thee." 

ds  to  me  shall  be  ambition — to  be  more  and  more  subservient  to  the 
one  honour.  This  shall  be  gain — to  be  nothing  for  Christ's  sake, 
lis  my  all  in  all — to  praise  thee,  my  Lord,  as  long  as  I  have  any 
ing. 

A  third  reason  readily  suggests  itself.  We  ought  surely  to  praise 
A  more  to-day  than  at  any  other  previous  day,  because  ive  have 
ewed  more  mercies.  Even  of  temporal  favours  we  have  been 
ge  partakers.  Begin  with  these,  and  then  rise  higher.  Some 
you,  dear  brethren  and  sisters,  may  well  be  reminded  of  the 
iat  temporal  mercies  which  have  been  lavished  upon  you.  You  are 
day  in  a  similar  state  with  Jacob  when  he  said :  "  With  my  staff  I 
ssed  over  this  Jordan,  and  now  I  am  become  two  bands."  When 
1  first  left  your  father's  house  to  follow  a  toilsome  occupation,  you 
I  a  scant  enough  purse,  and  but  poor  prospects ;  but  where  are  you 
)r  as  to  temporal  circumstances  and  position?    How  highly  God  has 


864  METBOPOLITAV  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

favonrcd  sonic  of  you  !   Joseph  has  risen  from  the  dnngeoa  to  the 
throne,  David  has  gone  up  from  the  sheepfolds  to  a  palace.  Look  bick 
to  wliat  you  were,  and  give  the  Lord  his  due.    He    lifts  np  the  poor 
from  the  dust,  and  sets  them  among  princes.    Yoa  were  unknown  and 
insignificant,  and  now  his  mercy  has  placed  yon  in  prominence  and 
esteem.    Is  this  nothing  ?   Do  you  despise  the  bounty  of  heayen  ?    "W3I 
you  not  praise  the  Lord  more  and  more  for  this  ?     Snrelj,  you  shoiild 
do  so,  and  must  do  so,  or  else  feel  the  withering  curse  which  blttb 
ingratitude  wherever  it  dwells.     Perhaps  divine  providence  has  not 
dealt  wiiii  you  exactly  in  that  way,  but  witli  equal  goodness  and  wisdom 
has  revealed  itnelf  to  you  in  another  form.    You  have  continued  ia  the 
«3ame  sphere  in  which  you  commenced  life,  but  you  have  been  enabled 
to  pursue  your  work,  have  been  preserved  in  health  and  strength,  haie 
been  supplied  with  food  and  raiment ;  and  what  is  best,  have  been  blened 
with  a  contented  heart  and  a  gleaming  eye.    My  dear  friend,  are  yon 
not  thankful  ?     Will  you  not  praise  your  heavenly  Father  more  and 
more  ?     AVe   ought  not  to  over  estimate  temporal  mercies  so  as  to 
become  worldly ;  but  I  am   afraid  there  is  a  greater  likelihood  of  ov 
nnder  estimating  them,  and  becoming  ungrateful.    We  must  beware  of 
so  under  estimating  them  as  to  lessen  our  sense  of  the  debt  in  whkh 
tliey  involve  us  before  God.     AVe  speak  sometimes  of  great  mmm. 
Come  nuw,  I  will  ask  you  a  question :  Can  you  count  your  great  mercioB? 
I  cannot  count  mine.   Perhaps  you  think  the  numeration  easy  7  I  fiad 
it  endless.    I  was  thinking  the  other  day,  and  I  will  venture  to  oonfeai 
it  publicly,  what  a  great  mercy  it  was  to  be  able  to  turn  over  in  bed. 
Some  of  you  smile,  perhaps.    Yet  1  do  not  exaggerate  when  I  say,! 
could  almost  clap  my  hands  for  joy  when  I  found  myself  able  to  tJun 
in  bed  without  pain.    This  day,  it  is  to  me  a  very  great  mercy  to  be  ahk 
to  sUind  upright  before  you.   AVe  carelessly  imagine  that  there  are  but 
a  score  or  two  of  great  mercies,  such  as  having  our  children  aboat  m, 
or  enjoying  health  and  so  on ;  but  in  trying  times  we  see  that  imui- 
merable  minor  matters  arc  also  great  gifts  of  divine  love,  and  entail 
great  misery  when  withdrawn.    Sing  ye,  then,  as  ye  draw  water  at  the 
nether  springs,  and  as  the  brimming  vessels  overflow,  praise  ye  the  Lead 
yet  more  and  more. 

But  ought  we  not  to  praise  God  more  and  more  when  we  think  of 
our  spiritual  mercies  ?    What  favours  have  we  received  of  this  higher 
sort !    Ten  years  ago  you  were  bound  to  praise  God  for  the  covenant 
mercies  you  had  even  then  enjoyed;  but  now,  how  many  more  haie 
been  bestowed  upon  you ;   how  many  cheerings  amid  darkness ;  how 
many  answers  to  prayer  ;  how  many  directions  in  dilemma ;  how  many 
delights  of  fellowship ;  how  many  helps  in  service;  how  many  sucoefiSfis 
in  coniiict ;  how  many  revelations  of  infinite  love  I     To  adoption  there 
ha?  been  added  all  the  blessings  of  heirship ;  to  justification,  all  the 
security  of  acceptance;  to  conversion,  all  the  energies  of  indwellinfi 
And,  remember,  as  there  was  no  silver  cup  in  Benjamin's  sack  tul 
Josej)!!  put  it  there,  so  there  was  no  spiritual  good  in  you  till  the  Lord 
of  mercy  gave  it.    Therefore,  praise  ye  the  Lord.    Louder  and  louder 
yet  be  the  song.     Praise  him  on  the  high-sounding  cymbals.    Since  we 
cannot  hoix)  to  measure  his  mercies,  let  us  immeasurably  praise  oar 
God.    "  I  will  yet  praise  tliee  more  and  more." 


MORE  AND  MORE.  365 

Let  ns  now  go  on  a  little  farther.  We  have  been  provinq  through  a 
mries  of  years  the  faithfulness^  immufability,  and  veracity  of  our  God — 
proTing  these  attributes  by  our  sinning  against  God,  and  their  bearing 
the  stxtiin  of  onr  misbehaviour — proving  them  by  tlie  innumerable 
benefits  which  the  Lord  has  bestowed  upon  us.  Shall  all  this  experience 
end  in  no  result  ?  Shall  there  be  no  advance  in  gratitude  where  there 
IB  Buch  an  increase  of  obligation  ?  God  is  so  good  that  every  moment 
of  his  love  demands  a  life  of  praise. 

It  should  never  be  forgotten  that  every  Christian  as  he  grows  in 
graes  should  have  a  loftier  idea  of  Ood.  Our  highest  conception  of 
Ood  falls  infinitely  short  of  his  glory,  but  an  advanced  Christian  enjoys 
a  fiur  clearer  view  of  what  God  is  than  he  had  at  the  first.  Now, 
the  greatness  of  God  is  ever  a  claim  for  praise.  '*  Great  is  the  Lord, 
and" — what  follows ?-^" greatly  to  be  praised."  If,  then,  God  is 
greater  to  me  than  he  was,  let  my  praise  be  greater.  If  I  think  of 
mm  now  more  tenderly  as  my  Father — if  I  have  a  clearer  view  of 
bim  in  the  terror  of  his  justice — if  I  have  a  clearer  view  of  the 
aplendonrs  of  his  wisdom  by  which  he  devised  the  atonement — if  I 
have  larger  thoughts  of  his  eternal,  immutable  love — let  every  advance 
in  knowledge  constrain  me  to  say :  *^  I  will  yet  praise  thee  more  and 
more."  I  heard  of  thee  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear,  but  now  mine 
qre  seeth  thee :  therefore  while  I  abhor  myself  in  dust  and  ashes, 
my  praise  shall  rise  yet  more  loflily;  up  to  thy  throne  shall  my 
long  ascend.  I  did  but  see  as  it  were  the  skirts  of  thy  garment,  but 
thon  hast  hidden  me  in  the  cleft  of  the  rock  Christ  Jesus,  and  made 
tby  glory  pass  before  me,  and  now  will  I  praise  thee  even  as  the  seraphs 
do,  and  vie  with  those  before  the  throne  in  magnifying  thy  name.  AVe 
levn  but  little  in  Christ's  school,  if  the  practical  result  of  it  all  be  not 
to  make  us  cry:  '*  I  will  yet  praise  thee  more  and  more." 

Still  enlling  here  and  there  a  thought  out  of  thousands,  I  would 
remind  yon  that  it  is  a  good  reason  for  praising  (U)d  more  that  we 
mre  getting  nearer  to  the  place  where  we  hope  to  praise  liim^  world  without 
end^  after  a  perfect  sort.  Never  have  we  made  these  walls  ring  more  joy- 
ooBly  than  when  we  have  united  in  singing  of  our  Father  s  house  on 
high,  and  the  tents  pitched — 

"  A  day's  march  nearer  home.'* 

Heaven  is  indeed  the  only  home  of  our  souls,  and  we  shall  never  feel 

that  we  have  come  to  our  rest  till  we  have  reached  its  mansions.     One 

reason  why  we  shall  be  able  to  rest  in  heaven,  is  because  we  shall  there 

be  able  perpetually  to  achieve  the  object  of  our  creation.    Am  I  nearer 

heaven  ?  then  I  will  be  doing  more  of  the  work  which  I  shall  do  in 

heaven.    I  shall  soon  use  the  harp:  let  me  be  carefully  tuning  it:  let 

me  rehearse  the  hymns  which  I  shall  sing  before  the  throne;  for  if  the 

vords  in  heaven  shall  be  sweeter  and  more  rich  than  any  that  poets 

«n  put  together  here,  yet  the  essential  song  of  heaven  shall  be  the 

Hme  as  that  which  we  present  to  Jehovah  here  below. 

"  They  praise  the  Lamb  in  hymns  above, 
And  we  in  hymns  below.'* 

^  essence  of  their  praise  is  gratitude  that  he  should  bleed :  it  is  the 


366  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

essence  of  our  praise  too.  Thej  bless  ImmaQuerB  name  for  nndesencd 
favours  bestowed  upon  unworthy  ones,  and  we  do  the  same.  My  aged 
brethren,  I  congratulate  you,  for  you  are  almost  home;  be  yet  more  M 
of  praise  than  ever.  Quicken  your  footsteps  as  the  glory  land  shines 
more  brightly.  You  are  close  to  the  gate  of  pearl ;  sing  on,  dear  brother, 
though  infirmities  increase,  and  let  the  song  grow  sweeter  and  londff 
until  it  melts  into  the  infinite  harmonies. 

Shall  I  need  to  give  another  reason  why  we  should  praise  God  more 
and  more  ?  If  I  must,  I  would  throw  this  one  into  the  scale,  that 
surely  at  this  present  juncture  we  ought  to  be  more  eunest  in  the 
praise  of  God,  because  God's  enemies  are  very  earnest  in  labouring  to 
dishonour  him.  These  are  times  when  scoffers  are  boundlessly  impadat. 
Did  it  not  make  your  blood  chill  when  you  heard  revolutionists  in  un- 
happy Paris  talk  of  having  "  demolished  God  "  ?  It  struck  me  as  aUnost 
a  sadder  thing  when  I  read  the  proposition  of  one  of  their  philosophers 
who  would  have  them  become  religious  again,  that  they  snonld  bring 
God  back  again  for  ten  years  at  least — an  audacious  recommendation 
as  blasphemously  impertinent  as  the  insolence  which  had  proclaimed 
the  triumph  of  atheism.  But  we  need  not  look  across  the  Channel  ,- 
perhaps  they  speak  more  honestly  on  that  side  than  we  do  here;  for  among 
ourselves  we  nave  abounding  infidelity,  which  pretends  to  reverowe 
Scripture  while  it  denies  its  plainest  teachings;  and  we  have  what  is 
quite  as  bad,  a  superstition  which  thrusts  Christ  aside  for  the  human 
priest,  and  makes  the  sacraments  everything,  and  simple  trust  in  the 
great  atonement  to  be  as  nothing.  Now,  my  brethren,  those  who  hold 
these  views  are  not  sleepers,  nor  do  they  relax  their  efforts.  We  may 
be  very  quiet  and  lukewarm  about  religion  (alas !  that  we  should  be); 
but  these  persons  are  earnest  propagators  of  their  faith,  or  no  faifli— 
they  compass  sea  and  land  to  make  one  proselyte.  As  we  think  of  these 
busy  servants  of  Satan,  we  ought  to  chide  ourselves  and  say:  "Shall 
Baal  be  diligently  served,  and  Jehovah  have  such  a  sleepy  advocate? 
Be  stirred,  my  soul !  Awake,  my  spirit !  Arouse  thee  at  once,  and 
praise  thy  God  more  and  more  !'* 

But,  indeed,  while  I  give  you  these  few  arguments  out  of  many  that 
come  to  ray  mind,  the  thought  cheers  my  spirit  that  with  those  of  yon 
who  know  and  love  God,  there  is  little  need  for  me  to  mention  reasons, 
for  your  own  souls  are  hungering  and  thirsting  to  praise  him.  If  yon 
are  debarred  for  a  little  time  from  the  public  service  of  God,  you  pmt 
for  the  assemblies  of  God's  house,  and  envy  the  swallows  that  bnild 
their  nests  beneath  the  eaves,  df  you  are  unable  to  accomplish  serrice 
which  you  were  accustomed  to  perform  for  Christ's  church,  the  honrs 
drag  very  wearily  along.  As  the  Master  found  it  his  meat  and  his  drink 
to  do  the  will  of  him  that  sent  him,  so  when  you  are  unable  to  do  that 
will,  you  arc  like  a  person  deprived  of  his  meat  and  drink,  and  an 
insatiable  hunger  grows  upon  you.  0  Christian  brother,  do  pn  not 
pant  to  praise  God  ?  I  am  sure  you  feel  now :  "  0  that  I  could  praiBe 
him  better !  **  You  are  |)erhaps  in  a  position  in  which  you  have  woik 
to  do  for  him,  and  your  heart  is  saying,  "  How  I  wish  1  could  do  this 
work  more  thoroughly  to  his  praise !"  Or  possibly  you  are  in  sndi^ 
condition  of  life  that  it  is  little  you  can  do,  and  you  often  wish  if  God 
would  make  a  change  for  you,  not  that  it  should  be  one  more  IhU  ^ 


KOBE  AND  MORE.  367 

fort,  but  one  in  which  yon  conld  be  more  serviceable.    Above  all, 
ow  you  wish  yon  were  rid  of  sin,  and  everythinpj  which  hinders  your 
sing  God  more  and  more.     Well,  then,  I  need  not  argue,  for  your 
heart  pleads  the  holy  cause. 

affer  me  to  conclude  this  head  with  a  fact  that  illastrates  the  point. 
low  one,  who  has  been  long  privileged  to  lift  his  voice  in  the  choir  of 
great  King.  In  that  delightful  labour  none  more  happy  than  he. 
longer  he  was  engaged  in  the  work  the  more  he  loved  it.  Now,  it 
e  to  pass  that  on  a  certain  day,  this  songster  found  himself  shut 
of  the  choir;  he  would  have  entered  to  take  his  part,  but  he  was 
permitted.  Perhaps  the  King  was  angry ;  perhaps  the  songster  had 
^  carelessly;  perhaps  he  had  acted  unworthily  in  some  other  matter; 
ossibly  his  master  knew  that  his  song  would  grow  more  sweet  if  he 
5  silenced  for  awhile.  How  it  was  I  know  not,  but  this  I  know,  that 
kused  great  searching  of  heart.  Often  this  chorister  begged  to  be 
3red,  but  he  was  as  often  repulsed,  and  somewhat  roughly  too.  I 
k  it  was  more  than  three  months  that  this  unhappy  songster  was 
t  in  enforced  silence,  with  fire  in  his  bones  and  no  vent  for  it.  The 
d  mnsic  went  on  without  him ;  there  was  no  lack  of  soup:,  and  in 
he  rejoiced,  but  he  longed  to  take  his  place  again.  I  cannot  tell 
how  eagerly  he  longed.  At  last  the  happy  hour  arrived,  the  king  gave 
permit,  he  might  sing  again.  The  songster  was  full  of  gratitude,  and 
lard  him  say — you  shall  hear  him  say  it :  "  My  Lord,  since  I  am 
n  restored,  I  will  hope  continually,  and  will  yet  praise  thee  more 
more." 
[.  Now  let  us  turn  to  another  point.    Let  us  in   the   Spirit's 

Qgth  DRIVE  AWAY  THAT  WHICH  HINDEBfi  US  FROM  PRAISING  GOD 
E  AND  MORE. 

ne  of  the  deadliest  things  is  dreaminess^  sleepiness.  A  Christian 
lily  falls  into  this  state.  1  notice  it  even  in  the  public  congregation. 
jr  often  the  whole  service  is  gone  through  mechanically.  That  same 
jniness  falls  upon  many  professors  and  abides  with  them,  and 
Bad  of  praising  God  more  and  more,  it  is  as  much  as  ever  they  can 

0  keep  up  the  old  strain — and  barely  that.    Let  us  shake  ourselves 

1  all  such  sleep.  Surely  if  there  were  any  service  in  which  a  man 
lid  be  altogether  and  wholly  awake,  it  is  in  praising  and  magnifying 
•  A  sleepy  seraph  before  the  throne  of  Jehovah,  or  a  cherub 
ling  during  sacred  song,  it  were  ridiculous  to  imagine.  And  shall 
L  an  insult  to  the  majesty  of  heaven  be  seen  on  earth  ?  No  I  Let 
ay  to  all  that  is  within  us,  **  Awake  !  awake  !*' 

he  next  hindrance  would  be  divided  objects.  We  cannot,  however 
nay  resolve,  praise  God  more  and  more,  if,  as  we  grow  older,  we 
«r  this  world  to  take  up  our  thoughts.  If  I  say,  **  I  will  praise 
more  and  more,"  and  yet  1  am  striking  out  right  and  left 
I  projects  of  amassing  wealth,  or  I  am  plunging  myself  into  greater 
ness  cares  unnecessarily,  my  actions  belie  my  resolutions.  Not 
we  would  check  enterprise.  There  are  periods  in  life  when  a  man 
be  enabled  to  praise  God  more  and  more  by  extending  the  bounds 
is  business ;  but  there  are  persons  whom  I  have  known  who  have 
ied  God  right  well  in  a  certain  condition,  but  they  have  not 
.  content  to  let  well  alone,  and  they  have  been  for  aggrandising 


368  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PCLPIT. 

thcinFelves,  and  they  have  had  to  give  up  their  Sabbath-school  class,  or 
the  vilhiiro  station,  or  attendance  at  the  visiting  committee,  or  some  other 
form  of  Christian  service,  because  their  raonej-getting  demanded  all 
their  stren<^'tli.  Beloved,  you  shall  find  it  small  gain  if  jou  gain  in 
this  world,  but  lose  in  praising  God.  As  we  grow  older,  it  is  wise  to 
concentrate  more  and  more  our  energies  upon  the  one  thing,  the  only 
thing  worth  living  for — the  praise  of  God. 

Another  great  obstacle  to  praisinj::  God  more  is,  self-conieni;  and 
this,  again,  is  a  condition  into  which  we  may  very  easily  fall.  Onr 
belief  is,  only  we  must  not  avow  it  when  we  may  be  overheard,  we  are 
all  very  fine  fellows  indeed.  We  may  confess  when  we  are  praying; 
and  at  other  times,  that  we  are  miserable  sinners — and  I  daresay  we 
have  some  belief  that  it  is  so — but  for  all  that,  there  is  within  our 
minds  the  conviction  that  we  are  very  respectable  jieople,  and  are  doing 
exceedingly  well  upon  the  whole ;  and  comparing  ourselves  with  other 
Christians,  it  is  much  to  our  credit  that  we  are  praising  G<)d  as  well  as 
we  are.  Now,  I  have  put  this  very  roughly,  but  is  it  not  what  the 
heart  has  said  to  us  at  times?  Oh,  loathsome  thought!  that  a  sinner 
should  gi'ow  content  with  himself.  Self-satisfaction  is  the  end  of 
progress.  Dear  friend,  why  compare  yourself  with  the  dwarfs  aronnd 
you .'  If  von  must  compare  yourself  with  your  fellow  men,  look  at  the 
giants  of  other  days;  but,  better  still,  relinquish  the  evil  habit  al- 
together ;  for  Paul  tells  us  it  is  not  wise  to  compare  ourselves  among 
ourselves.  Look  to  our  Lord  and  Master,  who  towers  so  high  above  us 
in  peerless  excellence.  No,  no,  wc  dare  not  flatter  ourselves,  but  with 
humble  self-condemnation  we  resolve  to  praise  the  Lord  more  and 
more. 

To  red  on  fhe  past  is  another  danger  as  to  this  matter.  We  did  so 
much  for  God  when  we  were  young.  I  occasionally  meet  with  drones 
in  the  Christian  hive,  whose  boast  is  that  they  made  a  great  deal  of 
honey  years  ago.  I  see  men  lying  upon  their  oars  to-day,  but  they 
startle  me  with  a  description  of  the  impetus  they  gave  to  the  boat 
years  ago.  You  should  have  seen  them  when  they  were  master-rowers, 
in  those  former  times.  What  a  pity  that  these  brethren  cannot  be 
aroused  to  do  their  first  works  ;  it  would  be  a  gain  to  the  church,  bnt 
it  would  be  an  equal  benefit  to  themselves.  Suppose  God  should  say, 
"  Kest  on  the  past.  I  gave  you  great  mercies  twenty  years  ago ;  live 
on  them."  Suppose  the  eternal  and  ever  beloved  Spirit  should  say,  **I 
wrouglit  a  work  in  you  thirty  years  ago;  I  withdraw  myself,  and 
1  wiil  do  no  more."  AVhero  were  you  then  ?  Yet,  my  dear  brother,  if 
you  still  have  to  draw  afresh  upon  the  eternal  fountains,  do,  I  beseech 
you,  praise  the  ever-blessed  source  of  all. 

May  God  help  us  then  to  shake  off  all  those  things  which  would  pre- 
vent our  praising  him  !  Possibly  there  is  some  afflicted  one  here,  in  so 
lt»w  a  state,  so  far  pressed  by  poverty  or  bodily  pain,  that  he  is  saying: 
*•  I  cannot  praise  God  more  and  more  :  I  am  ready  to  despair."  Bear 
brother,  may  God  give  you  full  resignation  to  his  will,  and  the  greater 
your  troubles  the  sweeter  will  Le  your  song.  I  met  in  an  old  divine  a 
short  but  sweet  story,  which  touched  my  heart.  A  poor  widow  and  her 
little  child  were  sitting  together  in  great  want,  both  feeling  the  pinch 
of  hunger,  and  the  child  looked  up  into  the  mother's  face,  and  said: 


MOBS  AHB  MOBE.  369 

'  Mother,  (Jod  won't  starve  us,  will  he  ?  "  "  No,  my  child,**  said  the 
aother ;"  I  do  not  think  he  will "  "  But,  mother,"  said  the  child,  "  if  he 
Ices,  we  will  still  praise  him  as  long  as  we  live  ;  won't  we,  mother  ?  "  May 
hose  who  are  grey  headed  he  able  to  say  what  the  child  said,  and  to 
jarry  it  out.  "  Though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  him."  We  have 
•eceived  good  at  the  hands  of  the  Lord;  shall  we  not  also  receive  evil  ?  " 
'The  Jjord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away;  blessed  be  the 
lame  of  the  Lord."    "  I  will  yet  praise  thee  more  and  more." 

III.  Very  briefly  let  us  apply  otjeselves  to  thb  practical 
;abbting  out  of  this  resolution.  I  have  given  you  arguments  for 
t,  and  tried  to  move  away  impediments.  Now  for  a  little  help  in  the 
performance  of  it.    How  shall  I  begin  to  praise  God  more  and  more  ? 

Earnestness  says :  "  I  shall  undertake  some  fresh  duty  this  afternoon." 
itop,  dear  brother,  jnst  a  minute.  If  you  want  to  praise  God,  would  not 
t  be  as  well  first  to  begin  with  yourself?  The  musician  said :  "  I  will 
nraise  God  better;"  but  the  pipes  of  his  instrument  were  foul; 
le  had  better  look  to  them  first.  If  the  strings  have  slipped  &om 
iheir  proper  tension,  it  will  be  well  to  correct  them  before  beginning 
ihe  tune.  If  we  would  praise  God  more,  it  is  not  to  be  done  as  boys 
msh  into  a  bath — ^head  first.  No ;  prepare  yourself;  make  your  heart 
ready.  Thou  needest  the  Spirit's  aid  to  make  thy  soul  fit  for  praising  God. 
[t  is  not  every  fool's  work.  Go  then  to  thy  chamber,  confess  the  sins 
)f  the  past,  and  ask  the  Lord  to  give  thee  much  more  grace  that  thou 
mavst  begin  to  praise  him. 

If  we  would  praise  God  more  and  more,  let  us  improve  our  private 
ievotions.  God  is  much  praised  by  really  devout  prayer  and  adora- 
iion.  Preachings  are  not  fruits :  they  are  sowings.  True  song 
is  fruit.  I  mean  this,  that  the  green  blade  of  the  wheat  may  be  the 
sermon,  but  the  wheat-ear  is  the  hymn  you  sing,  the  prefer  in  which 
fon  unite.  The  true  result  of  life  is  praise  to  God.  **  The  chief  end 
)f  man,"  says  the  catechism,  and  I  cannot  put  it  better,  ^*  is  to  glorify 
Jod,  and  enjoy  him  for  ever;  "  and  wherein  we  glorify  God  in  our  private 
levotion,  we  are  answering  the  true  end  of  our  being.  If  we  desire 
o  praise  God  more,  we  must  ask  grace  that  our  private  devotions  may 
ise  to  a  higher  standard.  I  am  more  and  more  persuaded  from  my 
twn  experience,  that  in  proportion  to  the  strength  of  our  private  life 
ritb  God  will  be  the  force  of  our  character,  and  the  power  of  our  work 
or  God  amongst  men.    Let  us  look  well  to  this. 

Again,  however,  I  hear  the  zealous  young  man  or  woman  saying : 
^  Well,  I  will  attend  to  what  you  have  said.  1  will  see  to  private  prayer 
nd  to  heart  work,  but  I  mean  to  begin  some  work  of  usefulness." 
^uite  right ;  but  stay  a  little.  I  want  to  ask  you  this  question  :  Are 
on  sure  that  your  own  personal  conduct  in  what  you  call  your  everv- 
l^  life  has  as  much  of  the  praise  of  God  in  it  as  it  might  have  ?  It 
s  idl  a  mistake  to  think  that  we  must  come  here  to  praise  God.  You 
tan  praise  God  in  your  shops,  and  in  your  kitchens,  and  in  your  bed- 
t)om6.  It  is  all  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  Sunday  is  the  only  day  to 
iraise  God  in.  Praise  him  on  Mondays,  Tuesdays,  Wednesdays,  every 
iay,  everywhere.  All  places  are  holy  to  holy  people,  and  all  engage- 
ments holy  to  holy  men,  if  they  do  them  with  holy  motives,  lifting  up 
their  hearts  to  God ;  and  whether  a  man  swings  the  blacksmith's 


370  METROPOLITAN  TABEBNAGLE  PULPIT. 

hammer,  or  lays  his  hand  upon  the  ploughtail,  that  is  trae  wmhip 
which  is  done  as  unto  the  Lord  and  not  anto  men.    I  like  the  stoiy  ol 
the  servant-maid,  who,  when  she  was  asked  on  joining  the  chorcfa, 
"  Are  you  converted  ?"    "  I  hope  so,  sir."    "  What  makes  you  think 
you  are  reatly  a  child  of  God  ?"    "  Well,  sir,  there  is  a  great  change 
in  me  from  what  there  used  to  be."    "  What  is  that  change  ?"     *'  I  don't 
know,  sir,  but  there  is  a  change  in  all  things ;  but  there  \b  one  things 
/ always  sweep  under  the  mats  note'*    Many  a  time  she  had  hidden  the 
dust  under  the  mat.   It  was  not  so  now ;  it  is  a  very  excellent  reason  f<Hr 
believinfif  that  there  is  a  change  of  heart  when  work  is  conscientiously 
done.    There  is  a  set  of  mats  in  all  our  houses  where  we  are  accustomed 
to  put  the  dirt  away  ;  and  when  a  man  gets  in  his  business  to  swe^ 
from  under  the  mats — you  merchants  have  your  mats,  you  know,  when 
you  avoid  the  evils  which  custom  tolerates  but  which  Gk)d  condemna, 
then  you  have  marks  of  grace  within.     Oh,  to  have  a  conduct  moulded 
by  the  example  of  Christ !  If  any  man  lived  after  a  holy  sort,  though 
he  never  preached  a  sermon  or  even  sung  a  hymn,  he  would  have  praised 
God;  and  the  more  conscientiously  he  acted,  the  more  thoroughly  woald 
he  have  done  so. 

These  inner  matters  being  considered,  let  us  go  on  to  increase  onr 
actual  and  direct  service  of  God.  Let  us  do  what  we  have  been  doing 
of  Christian  teaching,  visiting,  and  so  on ;  but  in  all  let  ns  do  more, 
give  more,  and  labour  more.  Who  among  us  is  working  at  his  utmo8fc> 
or  giving  at  his  utmost  ?  Let  us  quicken  our  speed.  Or  suppose  we 
are  already  doing  so  much  that  all  the  time  we  can  possibly  spare 
is  fully  occupied,  let  us  do  what  we  do  better.  In  some  Christian 
churches  they  do  not  want  more  societies,  but  they  want  more  foroe 
put  into  them.  You  may  trip  over  the  sand  of  the  sea-shore  and 
scarcely  leave  an  impression,  but  if  you  take  heavy  steps  there  is  a  deep 
foot-mark  each  time.  May  we  in  our  service  of  God  tread  heavily,  and 
leave  deep  foot-prints  on  the  sands  of  time.  Whatsoever  ye  do,  do  it 
heartily;  throw  yourselves  into  it;  do  it  with  thy  might.  ''Thoushalt 
love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thine  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with 
all  thy  might."  Oh,  to  be  enabled  to  serve  God  after  this  fashion— this 
would  be  to  praise  him  more  and  more !  Though  I  do  not  say  that  you 
can  always  tell  how  far  a  man  praises  God  by  the  quantity  of  work  that 
he  does  for  God,  yet  it  is  not  a  bad  gauge.  It  was  an  old  aphorism  rf 
Hippocrates,  the  old  physician,  that  you  could  judge  of  a  man's  heart 
by  his  arm  ;  by  which  he  meant  that  by  his  pulse  he  judged  of  his  heart: 
and  as  a  rule,  though  there  may  be  exceptions,  you  shall  tell  whether 
a  man's  heart  beats  truly  to  God,  by  the  work  that  he  does  for  God. 
You  who  are  doing  much,  do  more ;  and  you  who  are  doing  little» 
multiply  that  little,  I  pray  you,  in  God's  strength,  and  so  praise  him 
more  and  more. 


MORE  AND  MORE.  871 

We  should  praise  God  much  more  if  wc  threw  more  of  his  praise  into 
r  common  conversation — if  we  spoke  more  of  him  when  we  are  by  the 
ij  or  when  we  sit  in  the  house.  We  should  praise  him  more  and 
)re  if  we  fulfilled  our  consecration,  and  obeyed  the  precept,  "  Whether 
Brefore  ye  eat,  or  drink,  or  whatsoever  ye  do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God." 
e  should  do  well  if  we  added  to  our  godly  service  more  singing.  The 
»rld  sings :  the  million  have  their  songs ;  and  I  must  say  the  taste  of 
e  populace  is  a  very  remarkable  taste  just  now  as  to  its  favourite  songs. 
ley  are,  many  of  them^  so  absurd  and  meaningless  ^as  to  be  unworthy 
an  idiot.    I  should  insult  an  idiot  if  I  could  suppose  that  such  songs 

people  sing  nowadays  would  really  be  agreeable  to  him.  Yet  these 
iDgB  will  be  heard  from  many  and  places  will  be  thronged  to  listen  to 
ar  the  stuff.  Now,  why  should  we,  with  the  grand  psalms  we  have  of 
»vid,  with  the  noble  hymns  of  Cowper,  of  Milton,  of  Watts — why 
ould  not  we  sing  as  well  as  they?  Let  us  sing  the  songs  of  Zion .  they 
e  as  cheerftd  as  the  songs  of  Sodom  any  day.  Let  us  drown  the 
^wling  nonsense  of  Gomorrha  with  the  melodies  of  the  New  Jerusalem. 
But  to  conclude,  I  would  that  every  Christian  here  would  labour  to 
I  impressed  with  the  importance  of  the  subject  which  I  have  tried  to 
ing  before  you.  And  when  I  say  every  Christian,  I  may  correct  my- 
If  and  say,  every  person  here  present.  **  I  wUl  yet  praise  thee  more 
kd  more."  Why  some  of  you  present  have  never  praised  God  at  all ! 
ippose  you  were  to  die  to-day,  and  soon  you  must :  where  should  you 
\  ?  To  heaven  ?  Where  would  heaven  be  to  you  ?  There  can  be  no 
taven  for  you.  They  praise  God  in  the  only  heaven  I  have  ever  heard 
The  element  of  heaven  is  gratitude,  praise,  adoration.  You  do 
tt  know  anything  of  this,  and  therefore  it  would  not  be  possible  for  God 

make  a  heaven  for  you.  God  can  do  all  things  except  make  a  sinful 
irit  happy,  or  violate  truth  and  justice.  Thou  must  either  praise  Godor 

wretched.  0  my  hearer,  there  is  a  choice  for  thee :  thou  must  either 
^rship  the  God  that  made  thee,  or  else  thou  must  be  wretched.  It  is 
t  that  he  kindles  a  fire  for  thee,  nor  that  he  casts  upon  it  the  brim- 
me  of  his  wrath,  though  that  be  true  ;  but  thy  wretchedness  will  begin 
thin  thyself,  for  to  be  unable  to  praise  is  to  be  full  of  hell.  To  praise 
)d  is  heaven.  When  completely  immersed  in  adoration,  we  are  com- 
Btely  filled  with  felicity ;  but  to  be  totally  devoid  of  gratitude  is  to  be 
bally  devoid  of  happiness.  0  that  a  change  might  come  over  you 
lo  have  never  blessed  the  Lord,  and  may  it  happen  this  morning ! 
ay  the  work  of  regeneration  take  place  now  I      There  is  power 

the  Holy  Spirit  to  change  thy  heart  of  stone  in  a  moment  into  a 
art  of  flesh,  so  that  instead  of  being  cold  and  lifeless,  it  shall  palpitate 
ith  gratitude.  Seest  thou  not  Christ  on  the  cross  dying  for  sinners  ? 
mst  thou  look  on  that  disinterested  love,  and  not  feel  some  gratitude 
r  such  love  as  is  there  exhibited?     Oh,  if  thou  canst  look  to  Jesus 


372  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

and  trnst  him,  thou  shalt  feel  a  flash  of  life  come  into  thy  soul,  and  with 
it  shall  come  praise,  and  then  shalt  thoa  find  it  possible  to  begin  the 
happy  life,  and  it  shall  be  certain  to  thee  that  as  thoa  shalt  praise  God 
more  and  more,  so  shall  that  happy  life  be  expanded,  be  perfected  in  bliss. 

Bnt  Christians,  the  last  word  shall  be  to  yon.  Are  yon  praising  God 
more  and  more  ?  If  yon  are  not,  I  am  afraid  of  one  thing,  and  that  u^ 
that  yon  are  probably  praising  him  less  and  less.  It  is  a  certain  troth 
that  if  we  do  not  go  forward  in  the  Christian  life,  we  go  backward.  Too 
cannot  stand  still ;  there  is  a  drifl  one  way  or  the  other.  Now  he  that 
praises  God  less  than  he  did,  and  goes  on  to  praise  him  less  to-morrot, 
and  less  the  next  day,  and  so  on — ^what  will  he  get  to  ?  and  what  is 
he  ?  Evidently  he  is  one  of  those  that  draw  back  nnto  perdition,  and 
there  are  no  persons  npon  whom  a  more  dreadfnl  sentence  is  pronoanced, 
often  spoken  of  by  Paul,  and  most  terribly  by  Peter  and  Jude  Those 
" Trees  twice  dead,  plucked  up  by  the  roots;"  the  "Wandering  stars 
for  whom  is  reserved  the  blackness  of  darkness  for  ever.'*  It  would 
have  been  infinitely  better  for  them  not  to  have  known  the  way  of 
righteousness,  than  having  known  it,  alter  a  fashion,  to  have  tuned 
aside !  Better  never  to  have  put  their  hand  to  the  plongh,  than  hanng 
done  so,  after  a  sort,  to  turn  back  irom  it. 

But,  beloved,  I  am  persuaded  better  things  of  yon,  and  things  that 
accompany  salvation,  though  I  thus  speak.  I  pray  that  €rod  will  lead 
you  on  from  strength  to  strength,  for  that  is  the  path  of  the  just.  Hay 
you  grow  in  grace,  for  life  is  proven  by  growth.  May  you  march  lite 
pilgrims  towards  heaven,  singing  all  the  way.  The  lark  may  sene  na 
as  a  final  picture,  and  an  example  of  what  we  all  should  be.  Weshoold 
be  mounting :  our  prayer  should  be,  "  Nearer,  my  God,  to  thee."  We 
should  be  mounting:  our  motto  might  well  be,  "Higher!  higher! 
hif;her !  "  As  we  mount,  we  should  sing,  and  our  song  should  grow 
loader,  clearer,  more  full  of  heaven.  Upward,  brother  I  sing  as  thon 
soarcst.    Upward,  sing  till  thou  art  dissolved  in  glory.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Psalm  IxxL 


\ 


P^tr0pIitan  Si^akrnairk 


THE  WITHERING  WORK  OF  THE  SPIRIT. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  July  Oth,  1S71,  by 

C.  H.  SPUKGEON, 

AT     THE     METROPOLITAN     TABERNACT-E,     NEWINGTON. 


**The  voice  said,  Cry.  And  he  said,  "What  shall  I  cry  ?  All  fle^h  is  grass,  and  all 
e  geodliness  thereof  is  as  the  flower  of  the  field :  the  grass  withereth,  the  flower 
deth  :  because  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  blowoth  upon  it :  surely  the  people  is  gross, 
be  gross  withercth,  the  flower  fodeth :  but  the  word  of  our  God  shall  stand  for 
rer."— Isaiah  xL  G— 8. 

"  Being  bom  again,  not  of  corruptible  seed,  but  of  incorruptible,  by  the  word  of 
tod,  which  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever.  For  all  flesh  is  as  grass,  and  aU  the  glory 
I  man  as  the  flower  of  grass.  The  grass  withoroth,  and  the  flower  thereof  falloth 
way :  but  the  word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever.  And  this  is  the  word  which  by 
be  gospel  is  preached  unto  you." — 1  Peter  i.  23 — 25. 

Phe  passage  in  Isaiah  which  I  have  just  read  in  yonr  hearing  may  be 
ised  as  a  very  eloquent  description  of  our  mortality,  and  if  a  scnnon 
ihonld  be  preached  from  it  upon  the  frailty  of  human  nature,  the 
)reTity  of  life,  and  the  certainty  of  death,  no  one  could  dispute  the 
appropriateness  of  the  text.  Yet  I  venture  to  question  whether  such  a 
liscourse  would  strike  the  central  teaching  of  the  prophet.  Something 
Bore  than  the  decay  of  our  material  flesh  is  intended  here  ;  the  carnal 
nind,  the  flesh  in  another  sense,  was  intended  by  the  Holy  Ghost  when 
w  bade  his  messenger  proclaim  those  words.  It  does  not  seem  to  me 
iat  a  mere  expression  of  the  mortality  of  our  race  was  needed  in  this 
)lace  by  the  context ;  it  would  hardly  keep  pace  with  the  sublime 
"cvelations  which  surround  it,  and  would  in  some  measure  be  a  di- 
[Tession  from  the  subject  in  hand.  The  notion  that  we  are  here  simply 
'^d  alone  reminded  of  our  mortality  does  not  square  with  the  New 
Testament  exposition  of  it  in  Peter,  which  I  have  also  placed  before 
'ou  as  a  text.  There  is  another  and  more  spiritual  meaning  here 
•^ide  and  beyond  tliat  which  would  be  contained  in  the  great  and  very 
*^^on8  truth,  that  all  of  us  must  die. 

Look  at  the  chapter  in  Isaiah  with  care.  What  is  the  subject  of  it  ? 
\  h  the  divine  consolation  of  Zion.  Zion  had  been  tossed  to  and  fro 
'ith  conflicts ;  she  had  been  smarting  under  the  result  of  sin.  The 
•^^rd,  to  remove  her  sorrow,  bids  his  prophets  announce  the  coming  of  the 
*^^-expected  Deliverer,  the  end  and  accomplishment  of  all  her  warfare 
^0.  999. 


874  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

and  the  pardon  of  all  her  iniquity.  There  is  no  doubt  that  this  is 
the  theme  of  the  prophecy ;  and  farther,  there  is  no  sort  of  question 
about  the  next  point,  that  the  prophet  goes  on  to  foretell  the  comiDg  of 
John  the  Baptist  as  the  harbinger  of  the  Messiah.  We  hare  no  ^• 
culty  in  the  explanation  of  the  i^assage,  "  Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the 
Lord,  make  straight  in  the  desert  a  higiiway  for  our  God  ;"  for  the  New 
Testament  again  and  again  refera  this  to  the  Baptist  and  his  ministiy. 
The  object  of  the  coming  of  the  Baptist  and  the  mission  of  the  Messiah, 
whom  he  heralded,  was  the  manifestation  of  divine  glory.  Observe  the 
fifth  verse :  "  The  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  be  revealed,  and  all  flesh 
shall  see  it  together :  for  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it."  Well, 
what  next  ?  Was  it  needful  to  mention  man's  mortality  in  this  con- 
nection ?  We  think  not.  But  there  is  much  more  appropriateness  in 
the  succeeding  verses,  if  we  sec  their  deeper  meaning.  Do  they  not 
mean  this  ?  In  order  to  make  room  for  the  display  of  the  divine  glory 
in  Christ  Jesus  and  his  salvation,  there  would  come  a  withering  of  all 
the  glory  wherein  man  boasts  himself :  the  flesh  should  be  seen  in  its 
true  nature  as  corrupt  and  dying,  and  the  grace  of  God  alone  shoaldbe 
exalted.  This  would  be  seen  under  the  ministrv  of  John  the  Bautist 
first,  and  should  be  the  preparatory  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  mens 
hearts,  in  all  time,  in  order  that  the  glory  of  the  Lord  should  be  re- 
vealed and  human  pride  be  for  ever  confounded. 

The  Spirit  blows  upon  the  flesh,  nnd  that  which  seemed  vieorons 
becomes  weak,  that  which  was  fair  to  look  ui)on  is  smitten  with  2eeay; 
the  true  nature  of  the  flesh  is  thus  discovered,  its  deceit  is  laid  bare,  its 
power  is  destroyed,  and  there  is  space  f(jr  the  dispensation  of  the  ever- 
abiding  word,  and  for  the  rule  of  the  CJreat  Shepherd,  whose  words  are 
spiric  and  life.  There  is  a  withering  ^\Tought  by  the  Spirit  which  is 
tlie  preparation  for  the  sowing  and  implanting  by  which  salvation  is 
wrought. 

The  withering  before  the  sowing  was  very  marvellously  fulfilled  in 
the  preaching  of  John  the  Baptist.  ^Most  ai)propriately  he  carried  on 
his  ministry  in  the  desert,  for  a  spiritual  desert  was  all  around  him; 
he  was  the  voice  of  one  crying  in  the  wilderness.  It  was  not  his  work 
to  plant,  but  to  hew  down.  The  fleshly  religion  of  the  Jews  was  then 
in  its  prime.  IMiarisceism  stalked  through  the  streets  in  all  its  pomp; 
men  complacently  rested  in  outward  ceremonies  only,  and  spiritual 
religion  was  at  the  lowest  conceivable  ebb.  Here  and  there  might  be 
found  a  Simeon  and  an  Anna,  but  for  the  most  part  men  knew  nothing 
of  spiritual  religion,  but  said  in  their  hearts :  "  We  have  Abraham  to 
our  father,"  and  this  is  enough.  AYhat  a  stir  he  made  when  he  called 
the  lordly  Pharisees  a  generation  of  vipers !  How  he  shook  the  nation 
with  the  declaration,  "  Now  also  the  axe  is  laid  unto  the  root  of  the 
trees" !  Stem  as  Elias,  his  work  was  to  level  the  mountains,  and  lay  , 
low  every  lofty  imagination.  That  word,  "  Repent,"  was  as  a  scorching 
wind  to  the  verdure  of  self-righteousness,  a  killing  blast  for  the  con- 
fidence of  ceremonialism.  His  food  and  his  dress  called  for  fasting  and 
mourning.  The  outward  token  of  his  ministry  declared  the  death  amid 
which  he  preached,  as  he  buried  in  the  waters  of  Jordan  those  who  camfl 
to  him.  **  Ye  must  die  and  be  buried,  even  as  he  who  is  to  come  ™ 
save  by  death  and  burial."  This  was  the  meaning  of  the  emblem  which  h« 


THE  WITHERING  WORK  OF  THE  SPIRIT.  375 

jfore  the  crowd.  His  typical  act  was  as  thorough  in  its  teaching  as 
his  words  ;  and  as  if  that  were  not  enough,  he  warned  them  of  a  yet 
searching  and  trying  baptism  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire, 
f  the  coming  of  one  whose  fan  was  in  his  hand,  thoroughly  to  purge 
oor.  The  Spirit  in  John  blew  as  the  rough  north  wind,  searching 
vithering,  and  made  him  to  be  a  destroyer  of  the  vain  gloryings  of 
hly  religion,  that  the  spiritual  faith  might  be  established, 
hen  our  Lord  himself  actually  appeared,  he  came  into  a  withered 
whose  glories  had  all  departed.  Old  Jesse's  stem  was  bare,  and  our 
was  the  branch  which  grew  out  of  his  root.  The  sceptre  had  de- 
d  from  Judah,  and  the  lawgiver  from  between  his  feet,  when  Shiloh 
.  An  alien  sat  on  David's  throne,  and  the  Roman  called  the 
lant-land  his  own.  The  lamp  of  prophecy  burned  but  dimly,  even 
liad  not  utterly  gone  out.  No  Isaiah  had  arisen  of  late  to  console 
,  nor  even  a  Jeremiah  to  lament  their  apostacy.  The  whole 
)ray  of  Judaism  was  as  a  worn-out  vesture  ;  it  had  waxed  old,  and 
ready  to  vanish  away.  The  priesthood  was  disarranged.  Luke 
us  that  Annas  and  Caiaphas  were  high  priests  that  year — two  in  a 
or  at  once,  a  strange  setting  aside  of  the  laws  of  Moses.  All  the 
nsation  which  gathered  around  the  visible,  or  as  Paul  calls  it,  the 
•Idly  "  sanctuary,  was  coming  to  a  close ;  and  when  our  Lord  had 
led  his  work,  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain,  the  sacrifices 
abolished,  the  priesthood  of  Aaron  was  set  aside,  and  carnal  ordi- 
es  were  abrogated,  for  the  Spirit  revealed  spiritual  things.  When 
me  who  was  made  a  priest,  "  not  after  the  law  of  a  carnal  command- 
,  but  after  the  power  of  an  endless  life,"  there  was  "  a  disannulling 
e  commandment  going  before  for  the  weakness  and  unprofitableness 
of." 

ch  are  the  facts  of  history ;  but  I  am  not  about  to  dilate  upon 
. :  I  am  coming  to  your  own  personal  histories — to  the  experience  of 
r  child  of  God.  In  every  one  of  us  it  must  be  fulfilled  that  all 
is  of  the  flesh  in  us,  seeing  it  is  but  as  grass,  must  be  withered,  and 
comeliness  thereof  must  be  destroyed.  The  Spirit  of  God,  like 
wind,  must  pass  over  the  field  of  our  souls,  and  cause  our  beauty 
•e  as  a  fading  flower.  He  must  so  convince  us  of  sin,  and 
eveal  ourselves  to  ourselves,  that  we  shall  see  that  the  flesh 
teth  nothing ;  that  our  fallen  nature  is  corruption  itself,  and 
"  they  who  are  in  the  flesh  cannot  please  God."  There  must  be 
ght  home  to  us  the  sentence  of  death  upon  our  former  legal  and 
al  life,  that  the  incorruptible  seed  of  the  word  of  God,  implanted 
le  Holy  Ghost,  may  be  in  us,  and  abide  in  us  for  ever, 
le  subject  of  this  morning  is  the  withering  work  of  the  Spirit  upon 
louls  of  men,  and  when  we  have  spoken  upon  it,  we  shall  conclude 
a  few  words  upon  the  implanting  work,  which  always  follows  where 
withering  work  has  been  performed. 

Turning  then  to  the  work  of  the  SpiRrr  in  causing  the 
ILINESS  OP  THE  FLESH  TO  FADE,  let  US,  first,  obscrve  that  the  work 
e  Holy  Spirit  upon  the  soul  of  man  in  withering  up  that  which  is 
e  flesh,  is  very  unexpected.  You  will  observe  in  our  text,  that  even 
ipeaker  himself,  though  doubtless  one  taught  of  God,  when  he  was 
en  to  cry,  said,  "  What  shall  I  cry  ?"    Even  he  did  not  know  that 


376  METROPOLITAN  TABEltXACLB  PULPIT. 

in  order  to  the  comforting  of  God's  people,  there  must  first  be  ex- 
perienced a  preliminary  visitation.  Many  preachers  of  God's  gospel 
nave  for^rotten  that  tne  law  is  the  schoolmaster  to  bring  men  to 
Christ.  They  have  sown  on  the  unbroken  fallow  ground,  and  for- 
gotten that  the  plough  must  break  the  clods.  We  have  seen  too 
much  of  trying  to  sew  without  the  sharp  needle  of  the  Spirit's  convin- 
cing power.  Preachers  have  laboured  to  make  Ctmst  precious  to  those 
who  think  themselves  rich  and  increased  in  goods ;  and  it  lias  been 
labour  in  vain.  It  is  our  duty  to  preach  Jesus  Christ  even  to  gell- 
righteous  sinners,  but  it  is  certain  that  Jesus  Christ  will  never  be 
accepted  by  them  while  they  hold  themselves  in  high  esteem.  Onlj 
the  sick  will  welcome  the  physician.  It  is  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of 
God  to  convince  men  of  sin,  and  until  they  are  convinced  of  sin,  they 
will  never  be  led  to  seek  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  by  Jesos 
Christ.  I  am  persuaded,  that  wherever  there  is  a  real  work  of  grace  in 
any  soul,  it  begms  with  a  pulling  down :  the  Holy  Ghost  does  not  bm'Idon 
the  old  foundation.  AVood,  hay,  and  stubble  will  not  do  for  him  to  build 
upon.  He  will  come  as  the  fire,  and  cause  a  conflagration  of  all  proud 
nature's  Babels.  He  will  break  our  bow  and  cut  our  spear  in  sunder,  and 
bum  our  chariot  in  the  fire.  When  every  sandy  foundation  is  gone,  then, 
but  not  till  then,  behold  he  will  lay  in  onr  souls  the  great  foundation- 
stone,  chosen  of  God,  and  precious.  The  awakened  sinner,  when  he  asks 
that  God  would  have  mercy  upon  him,  is  much  astonished  to  find  that, 
instead  of  enjoyin**  a  speedy  peace,  his  soul  is  bowed  down  within  him 
under  a  sense  of  divine  wrath.  Naturally  enough  he  enquires :  "  Is  this 
the  answer  to  my  prayer  ?  I  prayed  the  Lord  to  deliver  me  from  sin 
and  self,  and  is  this  the  way  in  which  he  deals  with  me  ?  I  said,  *  Hear 
me,'  and  behold  he  wounds  me  with  the  wounds  of  a  cruel  one.  I  said, 
*  Clothe  me,'  and  lo !  he  has  torn  off  from  me  the  few  rags  which  covered 
me  before,  and  my  nakedness  stares  me  in  the  face.  I  said,  *  Wash  me,* 
and  behold  he  has  plunged  me  in  the  ditch  till  mine  own  clothes  do  abhor 
me.  Is  this  the  way  of  grace  ?''  Siimcr,  be  not  sunn'ised :  it  is  even  so. 
Perceivest  thou  not  the  cause  of  it  ?  IIow  canst  thou  be  healed  while 
the  proud  flesh  is  in  thy  wound  ?  It  must  come  out.  It  is  the  only 
way  to  heal  thee  permanently  :  it  would  be  folly  to  film  over  thy  sore, 
or  heal  thy  flesh,  and  leave  the  leprosy  within  thy  bones.  The  great 
physician  will  cut  with  his  sharp  knife  till  the  corrupt  flesh  be  removed, 
for  only  thus  can  a  sure  healing  work  be  wrought  in  thee.  Dost  thou 
not  see  that  it  is  divinely  wise  that  before  thou  art  clothed  thou  sliouldst 
be  stripped  I  What,  wouldst  thou  have  Christ's  lustrous  righteousness 
outside  whiter  than  any  fuller  can  make  it,  and  thine  own  filthy  rags 
concealed  within?  Nay,  man;  they  must  be  put  away;  not  a  single 
thread  of  thine  own  must  be  left  upon  thee.  It  cannot  be  that  God 
should  cleanse  thee  until  he  has  made  thee  see  somewhat  of  thy  defile- 
ment ;  for  thou  wouldst  never  value  the  precious  blood  which  cleanses 
us  from  all  sin  if  thou  hadst  not  first  of  all  been  made  to  mourn  that 
thou  art  altogether  an  unclean  thing. 

The  convincing  work  of  the  Spirit,  wherever  it  comes,  is  unexpected, 
and  even  to  the  child  of  God  in  whom  this  process  has  still  to  go  on, 
it  is  often  startling.  We  begin  again  to  build  that  whicn  the 
Spirit  of  God  had  destroyed.    Having  begun  in  the  spirit,  we  act  aa  if  ^ 


THB  WTTHEBING  WORK  OF  THE  &PIBIT.  877 

d  be  made  perfect  in  the  flesh ;  and  then  when  onr  mistaken  np- 
ling  has  to  be.  levelled  with  the  earth,  we  are  almost  as  astonished 
5  were  when  first  the  scales  fell  from  onr  eyes.  In  some  such  con- 
Q  as  this  was  Newton  when  he  wrote : — 

*^I  asked  the  Lord  that  I  might  grow 

In  faith  and  love  and  every  grace, 
Might  more  of  his  salvation  know, 

And  seek  more  earnestly  his  face. 

'Twas  he  who  taught  me  thus  to  pray, 

And  he,  I  trust,  has  answered  prayer ; 
But  it  has  been  in  such  a  way 

As  almost  drove  me  to  despair. 

I  hop*d  that  in  some  favour*d  hour, 

At  once  he'd  answer  my  request. 
And  by  his  love's  constraining  power 

Suhdue  my  sins,  and  give  me  rest. 

Instead  of  this,  he  made  me  feel 

The  hidden  evils  of  my  heart ; 
And  let  the  angry  powers  of  hell 

Assault  my  soul  in  ev'ry  part** 

marvel  not,  for  thus  the  Lord  is  wont  to  answer  his  people.  The 
5  which  saith,  "  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye  my  people,"  achieves  its 
ose  by  first  making  them  hear  the  cry,  *'  All  flesn  is  grass,  and  all 
roodliness  thereof  is  as  the  flower  of  the  field." 

Furthermore,  this  withering  is  after  tJie  usual  order  of  the  divine 
xtion.  If  we  consider  well  the  way  of  God,  we  shall  not  be  atonished 
he  beginueth  with  his  people  by  terrible  things  in  righteousness, 
jrve  the  method  of  creation.  I  will  not  venture  upon  any  dogmatic 
ry  of  geology,  but  there  seems  to  be  every  probability  that  this 
d  has  been  fitted  up  and  destroyed,  refitted  and  then  destroyed 
Q,  many  times  before  the  last  arranging  of  it  for  the  habitation  of 
.    **In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heaven  and  the  earth;" 

came  a  long  interval,  and  at  length,  at  the  appointed  time,  during 
a  days,  the  Lord  prepared  the  earth  for  the  human  race.    Consider 

the  state  of  matters  when  the  great  architect  began  his  work, 
it  was  there  in  the  beginning?  Originally,  nothing.  When  he 
manded  the  ordering  of  the  earth  how  was  it  ?  **  The  earth  was 
lOut  form  and  void ;  and  darkness  was  upon  the  face  of  the  deep." 
re  was  no  trace  of  another's  plan  to  interfere  with  the  great 
itect.  "  With  whom  took  he  counsel,  and  who  instructed  him,  and 
ht  him  in  the  path  of  judgment,  and  taught  him  knowledge,  and 
red  to  him  the  way  of  understanding."  He  received  no  contribution 
>lnmn  or  pillar  towards  the  temple  which  he  intended  to  build.  The 
1  was,  as  the  Hebrew  puts  it,  Tohu  and  Bohu,  disorder  and  confusion 

a  word,  chaos.  So  it  is  in  the  new  creation.  When  the  Lord  new 
:e8  us,  he  borrows  nothing  from  the  old  man,  but  makes  all  things 
He  does  not  repair  and  add  a  new  wing  to  the  old  house  of  our 
aved  nature,  but  he  builds  a  new  temple  for  his  own  praise.  We 
piritually  without  form  and  empty,  and  darkness  is  upon  the  face 
ar  heart,  and  his  word  comes  to  us,  saying,  "  Light  be,"  and  there 
:ht,  and  ere  long  life  and  every  precious  thing. 


S78  METROPOLITAN  TABEP.NACLE  PULPIT. 

To  take  another  iustaiiee  from  the  ways  of  God.  When  man  iuB 
fallen,  when  did  the  Lord  bring  him  the  gospel?  The  first  whisper  of 
the  gospel,  as  you  know,  was,  **  I  will  put  enmity  between  thee  and  the 
woman,  between  thy  seed  and  her  seed.  He  shall  bruise  thy  head." 
That  whis]>er  came  to  man  shivering  in  the  presence  of  his  Maker, 
having  nothing  more  to  say  by  way  of  excuse  ;  but  standing  guilty  before 
the  Lord.  When  did  the  Lord  God  clothe  our  parents?  Not  until  fint 
of  all  he  had  put  the  question,  "Who  told  thee  that  thou  wast  naked?" 
Not  until  the  fig-leaves  had  utterly  failed  did  the  Lord  bring  in  the 
covering  skin  of  the  sacrifice,  and  wrap  them  in  it.  If  you  will  pursue 
the  meditation  upon  the  acts  of  God  with  men,  you  will  constantly  see 
tlie  same  thing.  God  has  dven  us  a  wonderful  tj'pe  of  salvation  in  Noah's 
ark ;  but  Noah  was  saved  in  that  ark  in  connection  with  death ;  he 
himself,  as  it  were,  immured  alive  in  a  tomb,  and  all  the  world  besides 
left  to  destruction.  All  other  hope  for  Noah  was  gone,  and  thea 
the  ark  rose  upon  the  waters.  Remember  the  redemption  of  the 
children  of  Israel  out  of  Egypt :  it  occurred  when  they  were  in  the 
saddest  plight,  and  their  cry  went  up  to  heaven  by  reason  of  their 
bondage.  When  no  arm  brought  salvation,  then  with  a  high  hand  and 
an  outstretched  arm  the  Lord  brought  forth  his  people.  Everywhoe 
before  the  salvation  there  conies  the  humbling  of  the  creatiure,  the 
overthrow  of  human  ho})e.  As  in  the  back  woods  of  America  before  there 
can  be  tillage,  the  planting  of  cities,  the  arts  of  civilization,  and  the 
transactions  of  commerce,  the  woodman's  axe  must  hack  and  hew: 
the  stt^tely  trees  of  centuries  must  fall :  the  roots  must  be  burned,  the 
old  reign  of  nature  disturbed.  The  old  must  go  before  the  new  caa 
come.  Even  thus  the  Lord  takes  away  the  first,  that  he  may  establish 
the  second.  The  first  heaven  and  the  first  earth  must  pass  away,  or 
there  cannot  be  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth.  Now,  as  it  has  beoi 
outwardly,  we  ought  to  expect  that  it  would  bo  the  same  within  us; 
and  when  these  witherings  and  fadings  occur  in  our  souls,  we  should 
only  say,  "  It  is  the  Lord,  let  him  do  as  seemeth  him  good." 

3.  1  would  have  you  notice,  thirdly,  that  we  are  taught  in  our  text 
iiow  universal  this  process  is  in  its  range  over  the  hearts  of  all  those  npoa 
whom  the  Spirit  works.    The  withering  is  a  withering  of  what?    Of 
part  of  the  ilesh  and  some  portion  of  its  tendencies  ?     Nay,  observe, 
^^  All  flesh  is  grass;  and  «// the  goodliness  thereof" — the  very  choice 
and  pick  of  it — **  is  as  the  flower  of  the  field,"  and  what  happens  to  the 
grass  ?     Docs  ;my  of  it  live  ?     "  The  grass  withereth,"  all  of  it    The 
flower,  will  not  that  abide  ?    So  fair  a  thing,  has  not  that  an  immor- 
tality ?     No,  it  fades :  it  utterly  falls  away.    So  wherever  the  Spirit  of 
God  breathes  on  the  soul  of  man,  there  is  a  withering  of  everything  that 
is  of  the  flesh,  and  it  is  seen  that  to  be  carnally  minded  is  death.    Of 
course,  we  all  know  and  confess  that  where  there  is  a  work  of  graces     i 
there  must  be  a  destruction  of  our  delight  in  the  pleasures  of  the  flfish.     j 
When  the  Spirit  of  God  breathes  on  us,  that  which  was  sweet  becomes     ! 
bitter;    that  which  was  bright  becomes  dim.      A  man  cannot  love     | 
sin  and  yet  i)osscss  the  life  of  God.    If  he  takes  pleasure  in  fleshlj 
joys  wherein  he  once  delighted,  he  is  still  what  he  was:  he  minds t& 
things  of  the  flesh,  and  therefore  he  is  after  the  flesh,  and  he  shall  die. 
TliQ  world  and  the  lusts  thereof  are  to  the  unregenerate  as  beautiful  as 


THE  WTTHERINa  WORK  OP  THE  SPIRIT.  879 

he  meadows  in  spring,  when  they  are  bedecked  with  flowers,  but  to 
he  regenerate  soul  they  are  a  wilderness,  a  salt  land,  and  not  in- 
labited.  Of  those  very  things  wherein  we  once  took  delight  we  say, 
*  Vanity  of  vanities ;  all  is  vanity."  We  cry  to  be  delivered  from  the 
x)i8onous  joys  of  earth,  we  loathe  them,  and  wonder  that  we  could 
mce  riot  in  them.  Beloved  hearers,  do  you  know  what  this  kind  of 
Tithering  means  ?  Have  you  seen  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  and  the  pomps 
ind  the  pleasures  thereof  all  fade  away  before  your  eyes  ?  It  must 
>e  so,  or  the  Spirit  of  God  has  not  visited  your  soul. 

But  mark,  wherever  the  Spirit  of  God  comes,  he  destroys  the  goodliness 
md  flower  of  the  flesh ;  that  is  to  say,  our  righteousness  withers  as 
>ur  sinfulness.  Before  the  Spirit  comes  we  think  ourselves  as  good  as 
Jie  best.  We  say,  **  All  these  commandments  have  I  kept  from  my 
ironth  up,*'  and  we  superciliously  ask, "  What  lack  I  yet?  "  Have  we  not 
aeen  moral  ?  Nay,  have  we  not  even  been  religious  ?  We  confess  that 
ive  may  have  committed  faults,  but  we  think  them  very  venial,  and 
we  venture,  in  our  wicked  pride,  to  imagine  that,  after  all,  we  are 
aot  so  vile  as  the  word  of  God  would  lead  us  to  think.  Ah,  my 
iear  hearer,  when  the  Spirit  of  God  blows  on  the  comeliness  of  thy 
9esh,  its  beauty  will  fade  as  a  leaf,  and  thou  wilt  have  quite  another 
idea  of  thyself;  thou  wilt  then  find  no  language  too  severe  in  which  to 
iescribe  thy  ^ast  character.  Searching  deep  into  thy  motives,  and 
Investigating  that  which  moved  thee  to  thine  actions,  thou  wilt  see  so 
much  of  evil,  that  thou  wilt  cry  with  the  publican,  "  God  be  merciful  to 
me,  a  sinner ! " 

Where  the  Holy  Ghost  has  withered  up  in  us  our  self-righteous- 
aess,  he  has  not  half  completed  his  work ;  there  is  much  more  to  be 
Jestroyed  yet,  and  among  the  rest,  away  must  go  our  boasted  power  of 
resolution.  Most  people  conceive  that  they  can  turn  to  God  whenever 
they  resolve  to  do  so.  "  I  am  a  man  of  such  strength  of  mind,"  says 
one,  **  that  if  1  made  up  my  mind  to  be  religious,  I  should  be  without 
diflBculty."  "  Ah,"  saith  another  volatile  spirit,  "  I  believe  that  one  of 
these  days  I  can  correct  the  errors  of  the  past,  and  commence  a  new 
life."  Ah,  dear  hearers,  the  resolutions  of  the  flesh  are  goodly  flowers, 
bt  they  must  all  fade.  When  visited  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  we 
Snd  that  even  when  the  will  is  present  with  us,  how  to  perform  that 
rhich  we  would  we  find  not ;  yea,  and  we  discover  that  our  will  is 
ivcrse  to  all  that  is  good,  and  that  naturally  we  will  not  come  imto 
Jhrist  that  we  may  have  life.  What  poor  frail  things  resolutions  are 
rhen  seen  in  the  fight  of  God's  Spirit ! 

Still  the  man  will  say,  "  I  believe  I  have,  after  all,  within  myself 
01  enlightened  conscience  and  an  intelligence  that  will  guide  me  aright. 
Che  light  of  nature  I  will  use,  and  I  do  not  doubt  that  if  I  wander 
omewhat  I  shall  find  my  way  back  again."  Ah,  man!  thy  wisdom,  which 
B  the  very  flower  of  thy  nature,  what  is  it  but  folly,  though  thou 
oiowest  it  not  ?  Unconverted  and  unrenewed,  thou  art  in  God's  sight 
10  wiser  than  the  wild  ass*s  colt.  I  wish  thou  wert  in  thine  own  esteem 
inmbled  as  a  little  child  at  Jesus'  feet,  and  made  to  cry,  '^  Teach  thou 

When  the  withering  wind  of  the  Spirit  moves  over  the  carnal  mind, 
t  reveals  the  death  of  the  flesh  in  all  respects,  especially  in  the  matter 


380  .METBOPOLITA^'  TABERXACLE  PULPIT. 

of  power  towards  that  which  is  good.  We  then  learn  that  word  of  our 
Lord :  **  Without  me  ye  can  do  nothing."  When  I  was  seeking  the  Lord^ 
I  not  only  believed  tliat  I  could  not  pray  without  diyine  help,  but  I 
felt  in  my  very  soul  that  I  could  not.  Then  I  could  not  even  feel  aright» 
or  mourn  as  I  would,  or  groan  as  I  would.  I  longed  to  long  mm 
after  Christ ;  but,  alas !  I  could  not  even  feci  that  I  needed  him  as  I 
ou^^tit  to  feel  it.  This  heart  was  then  as  hard  as  adamant,  as  dead  as 
those  that  rot  in  their  graves.  Oh,  what  would  I  at  times  have  gives 
for  a  tear !  I  wanted  to  repent,  but  could  not ;  longed  to  believe,  bob 
could  not ;  I  felt  bound,  hampered,  aud  paralysed.  This  is  a  humbling 
revelation  of  God's  Holy  Spirit,  but  a  needful  one  ;  for  the  faith  of  tiie 
flesh  is  not  the  faith  of  God's  elect.  The  faith  which  justifies  the  soul 
is  the  gift  of  God  aud  not  of  ourselves.  That  repentance  which  is  th& 
work  of  the  flesh  will  need  to  be  repented  of.  The  flower  of  the  flesh 
must  wither ;  only  the  seed  of  the  Spirit  will  produce  fruit  unto  per- 
fection. The  heirs  of  heaven  are  born  not  of  mood,  nor  of  the  will  of 
the  flesh,  nor  of  man,  but  of  God.  If  the  work  in  us  be  not  the  Spirit's 
working;:,  but  our  own,  it  will  droop  and  die  when  most  we  require  its 
protection ;  and  its  end  will  be  as  the  grass  which  to-day  is,  and  to- 
morrow is  cast  into  the  oven. 

4.  You  SCO,  then,  the  universality  of  this  withering  work  within  us,  but 
I  be«;  you  also  to  notice  ihe  completeness  of  it.  The  grass,  what  does  it  do? 
Droop  ]  nay,  wither.  The  flower  of  the  field:  what  of  that?  Does  it  hang 
its  head  a  little  ?  No,  according  to  Isaiah  it  fades ;  and  according  to 
Peter  it  falleth  away.  There  is  no  reviving  it  with  showers,  it  has  coma 
to  its  und.  Even  thus  are  the  awakened  led  to  see  that  in  their  flesh 
tlicre  dwelleth  no  good  thing.  What  dying  and  withering  work  some 
of  God's  servants  have  had  in  their  souls!  Look  at  John  Bunyan,as 
he  describes  himself  in  his  *'  Grace  Abounding  !"  For  how  many  months 
and  even  years  was  the  Spirit  engaged  in  writing  death  upon  all  that 
was  the  old  Bunyan,  in  order  that  he  might  become  by  grace  a  new 
man  lit  ted  to  track  the  pilgrims  along  their  heavenly  way.  Wo 
have  not  all  endured  the  ordeal  so  long,  but  in  every  child  of  God  thcie 
must  be  a  death  to  sin,  to  the  law,  and  to  self,  which  must  be  follj 
accomplished  ere  he  is  perfected  in  Christ  and  taken  to  heaven.  Corrnp- 
tion  cannot  inherit  incorrupt  ion ;  it  is  through  the  Spirit  that  wo  mort% 
the  deeds  of  the  body,  aud  therefore  live.  But  cannot  the  fleshly  mind  bo 
inipruved  ?  By  no  means;  for  **  the  carnal  mind  is  enmity  agamst  God: 
for  it  is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  be."  Cannot 
you  improve  the  old  nature?  No;  *'ye  must  be  bom  again."  Can  it 
not  be  taught  heavenly  things  ?  No.  "  The  natural  man  receiveth  not 
the  tilings  of  the  Spirit  of  God:  for  they  are  foolishness  unto  him: 
neither  can  he  know  them,  because  they  are  spiritually  discemei'^ 
Tlicre  is  nothing  to  be  done  with  the  old  nature  but  to  let  it  be  laid 
in  the  grave  ;  it  must  be  dead,  and  buried,  and  when  it  is  so,  then 
the  incorruptible  seed  that  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever  will  devcl(flf 
gloriously,  the  fruit  of  the  new  birth  will  come  to  maturity,  and 
gi'ace  shall  be  exalted  in  glory.  The  old  nature  never  does  improve^ 
it  is  as  earthly,  and  sensual,  and  devilish  in  the  saint  of  eighty  yea» 
of  age  as  it  was  when  fii-st  he  came  to  Christ ;  it  is  unimproved  and 
uiiiin]>rovable ;  towards  God  it  is  enmity  itself:  every  imagination  of 


THE  WITHBRnrG  WORK  OP  THE  SPIRIT.  381 

the  thoughts  of  the  heart  is  evil,  and  that  continnally.  The  old  natuie 
called  **  the  flesh  lusteth  against  the-  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  against 
the  flesh :  and  these  are  contrary  the  one  to  the  other,*'  neither  can 
ihere  be  peace  between  them. 

5.  Let  us  farther  notice  that  all  this  wWiering  work  in  the  soul  is  very 
gainful.    As  you  read  these  verses  do  they  not  strike  you  as  having  a 
Teiy  funereal  tone  ?    "  All  flesh  is  grass,  and  all  the  goodliness  tlicrcof 
is  as  the  flower  of  the  field :    the  grass  withercth,  the  flower  fadeth." 
This  is  mournful  work,  but  it  must  be  done.    I  think  those  who  expe- 
rience much  of  it  when  they  fii^st  come  to  Christ  have  great  reason  to 
be  tbankfal.     Their  course  in  life  will,  in  all  probahiJity,  be  much 
brighter  and  happier,  for  I  have  noticed  that  persons  who  are  converted 
very  easily,  and  come  to  Christ  with  but  comparatively  little  knowlcd.Lre  of 
Hieir  own  depravity,  have  to  learn  it  afterwards,  and  they  remain  lor  a 
long  time  babes  in  Christ,  and  are  perplexed  with  matters  that  would  not 
liaye  troubled  them  if  they  had  experienced  a  deeper  work  at  first.    No, 
mr;  if  grace  has  begun  to  build  in  your  soul  and  left  any  of  the  old  walls 
<rf  self-trust  standing,  thev  will  have  to  come  down  sooner  or  later.     You 
32iaj  congratulate  yourself  upon  their  remaining,  but  it  is  a  false  con- 
Spratulation,  your  glorying  is  not  good.  I  am  sure  of  this,  that  Christ  will 
Xiever  put  a  new  piece  upon  an  old  garment,  or  new  wine  in  old  bottles :  he 
ImowB  the  rent  would  be  worse  in  the  long  run,  and  the  bottles  would 
burst.    All   that  is  of  nature's  spinning  must  be  unravelled.    The 
3iatural  building  must  come  down,  lath  and  plaster,  roof  and  founda- 
tion, and  we  must  have  a  house  not  made  with  hands.     It  was  a  great 
mercy  for  our  city  of  London  that  the  great  fire  cleared  away  all  the  old 
buildings  which  were  the  lair  of  the  plague,  a  far  healthier  city  was  then 
built ;  and  it  is  a  great  mercy  for  a  man  when  God  sweeps  right  away 
all  his  own   righteousness  and  strength,  when  he  makes  him  feel  that 
he  is  nothing  and  can  be  nothing,  and  drives  him  to  confess  that  Christ 
must  be  all  in  all,  and  that  his  only  strength  lies  in  the  eternal  might 
of  the  ever-blessed  Spirit    Sometimes  in  a  house  of  business  an  old 
system  has  been  going  on  for  years,  and  it  has  caused  much  confusion, 
SDd  allowed  much  dishonesty.    You  come  in  as  a  new  manaircr,  and 
joa  adopt  an  entirely  new  plan.    Now,  try  if  you  can,  and  graft  your 
method  on  to  the  old  system.    How  it  will  worry  you !    Y'ear  after  year 
you  say  to  yourself,  "  1  cannot  work  it :  if  I  had  swept  the  whole  away 
and  started  afresh,  clear   from    the   beginning,  it  w^ould  not  have 
giren  me  one-tenth  of  the  trouble."    God  does  not  intend  to  graft  the 
"t^Btem  of  grace  upon  corrupt  nature,  nor  to  make  the  new  Adam  grow 
^t  of  the  old  Adam,  but  he  intends  to  teach  us  this :  **  Ye  are  dead, 
«od  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God."    Salvation  is  not  of  the  flesh, 
but  of  the  Lord  alone ;  that  which  is  bom  of  the  flesh  is  only  flesh 
M  the  best ;  and  only  that  which  is  bom  of  the  Spirit  is  spirit.    It 
^ost  be  the  Spirit's  work  altogether,  or  it  is  not  what  God  will  accept. 
Observe,  brethren,  that  although  this  is  painful  it  is  inevitable.    I 
lUTe  already  entrenched  upon  this,  and  shown  you  how  necessary  it  is 
that  all  of  the  old  should  be  taken  away;  but  let  me  further  remark 
that  it  is  inevitable  that  the  old  should  go,  because  it  is  in  itself  cor- 
ruptible.    Why  does  the  grass  wither?     Because  it  is  a  withering 
thug.    ''  Its  root  is  ever  in  its  gmve,  and  it  must  die.'*    How  could  it 


882  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

spring  out  of  jthe  earth,  and  be  immortal  ?  It  is  no  amaranth :  it  Woonu 
not  in  Paradise :  it  grows  in  a  soil  on  which  the  curse  has  fallen.  Every 
supposed  good  thing  that  grows  out  of  jour  own  self,  is  like  yonrsel^ 
mortal,  and  it  must  die.  The  seeds  of  corruption  are  in  all  the  fmiU 
of  manhood^s  tree;  let  them  be  as  fair  to  look  upon  as  Edoi's 
clusters,  they  must  decay. 

Moreover,  it  would  never  do,  my  brother,  that  there  should  be  some- 
thing of  tlio  flesh  in  our  salvation  and  something  of  the  Spirit ;  for  if  it 
were  so  tliere  would  be  a  division  of  the  honour.  Hitherto  the  praises 
of  God  ;  beyond  this  my  own  praises.  If  I  were  to  win  heaven  partly 
through  what  I  had  done,  and  partly  through  what  Christ  had  done,  and 
if  the  energy  whidi  sanctified  me  was  in  a  measure  my  own,  and  in  a 
measure  divine,  they  tliat  divide  the  work  shall  divide  the  reward,  and 
the  songs  of  licaven  while  they  would  be  partly  to  Jehovah  must  alsobe 
partly  to  the  creature.  But  it  shall  not  he.  Down,  proud  flesh! 
Down  !  I  say.  Though  thou  cleanse  and  purge  thyself  as  thou  mayst, 
thou  art  to  the  core  corrupt ;  though  thou  labour  unto  weariness, 
thou  buildest  wood  that  will  be  burned,  and  stubble  that  will  be  turned 
to  ashes.  Give  up  thine  own  scH-confidence,  and  let  the  work  be,  and 
the  merit  be  where  the  honour  shall  be,  namely,  with  God  alone.  It 
is  inevitable,  then,  that  there  should  be  all  this  withering. 

7.  This  last  word  by  way  of  comfort  to  any  that  are  passing  throngh 
the  process  we  arc  describing,  and  I  hope  some  of  you  are.  It  gives 
me  great  joy  when  I  hear  that  you  unconverted  ones  are  very  miserable, 
for  the  miseries  which  the  Holy  Spirit  works  are  always  the  prelude 
to  happiness.  //  is  the  SpiriCa  work  to  v:ithei\  I  rejoice  in  our  trans- 
lation, "  Because  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  bloweth  upon  it."  It  is  tmetbe 
passage  may  be  translated,  "  The  wind  of  the  Lord  bloweth  upon  it." 
One  word,  as  you  know,  is  used  in  the  Hebrew  both  for  **  wind*'  and 
"  Spirit,*'  and  the  same  is  tine  of  the  Greek;  but  let  us  retain  the  old 
translation  here,  for  I  conceive  it  to  be  the  real  meaning  of  the  text 
The  Spirit  of  God  it  is  tiiat  withers  the  flesh.  It  is  not  the  devil  that 
killed  my  sell-righteousness.  I  might  be  afraid  if  it  were:  nor  was  it 
myself  that  humbled  myself  by  a  voluntary  and  needless  self-degrada- 
tion, but  it  was  the  Spirit  of  God.  Better  to  be  broken  in  pieces  by 
the  Spirit  of  God,  than  to  be  made  whole  by  the  flesh  !  What  doth  the 
Lord  say?  "  I  kill."  But  what  next  ?  "  I  make  alive."  He  nevermakcs 
any  alive  but  those  he  kills.  Blessed  be  the  Holy  Ghost  when  he  kills 
me,  when  he  di-ives  the  sword  through  the  very  bowels  of  my  own 
merits  and  my  self-con fldcncc,  for  then  he  will  make  me  alive.  **! 
wound,  and  1  heal."  He  never  heals  those  whom  he  has  not  wonnded. 
Then  blessed  be  the  hand  that  wounds  ;  let  it  go  on  wounding;  let  it 
cut  and  tear ;  let  it  lay  bare  to  me  myself  at  my  very  worst,  that  I  may 
be  driven  to  self-despair,  and  may  fall  back  upon  the  free  mercy  of  Goo, 
and  receive  it  as  a  poor,  guilty,  lost,  helpless,  undone  sinner,  who  casts 
himself  into  the  arms  of  sovereign  grace,  knowing  that  God  mustgi^ 
all,  and  Christ  must  be  all,  and  the  Spirit  must  work  all,  and  man  mnst 
be  as  clay  in  the  potter's  hands,  that  the  Lord  may  do  with  him  M 
seemethhim  good.  Rejoice,  dear  brother,  however  low  you  arebroughti 
for  if  the  Spirit  humbles  you  he  means  no  evil,  but  he  intcnda  infinite 
good  to  your  soul. 


THE  wrrnEKiNo  work  of  thk  spiutt*  883 

II.  Now,  let  us  close  with  a  few  sentences  concerning  the  implan- 

TTATIOX. 

According  to  Peter,  although  the  flesh  withers,  and  the  flower  thereof 
falls  away,  yet  in  the  children  of  God  there  is  an  unwithering  some- 
thing of  another  kind.  "Being  bom  again,  not  of  corruptible  seed, 
but  of  incorruptible,  by  theworf  of  God,  which  liveth  and  abidetli  for  ' 
ever."  "  The  word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever.  And  this  is  the  word 
•which  by  the  gospel  is  preached  unto  you."  Now,  the  gospel  is  of  use  to 
us  because  it  is  not  of  human  origin.  If  it  were  of  the  flesh,  all  it  could 
do  for  us  would  not  land  us  beyond  the  flesh  ;  but  the  gospel  of  Jesus 
Christ  is  super-human,  divine,  and  spiritual.  In  its  conception  it  was 
of  God;  its  great  gift,  even  the  Saviour,  is  a  divine  gift  ;  and  all  its 
teachings  are  fall  of  deity.  If  you,  my  hearer,  believe  a  gospel  which 
jou  have  thought  out  for  yourself,  or  a  philosophical  gospel  w^hich  comes 
from  the  brain  of  man,  it  is  of  the  flesh,  and  will  wither,  and  you  will 
die,  and  be  lost  through  trusting  in  it.  The  only  word  that  can  bless  you 
and  be  a  seed  in  your  soul  must  be  the  living  and  incorruptible  w^ord  of  the 
eternal  Spirit.  Now  this  is  the  incorruptible  word,  that  "  God  was  made 
flesh  and  dwelt  among  us ; "  that  "  God  was  in  Christ,  reconciling  the 
world  unto  himself,  not  imputing  their  trepasses  unto  them.'*  This  is 
the  incorruptible  word,  that  "Whosoever  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ 
IB  bom  of  God.*'  **  He  that  believeth  on  him  is- not  condemned  :  but  he 
that  believeth  not  is  condemmed  already,  because  he  hath  not  believed  in 
the  name  of  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God.**  "  God  hath  given  to 
US  eternal  life,  and  this  life  is  in  his  Son."  Now,  brethren,  this  is  the 
feed;  but  before  it  can  grow  in  your  soul,  it  must  be  planted  there  by 
the  Spirit.  Do  you  receive  it  this  morning  ?  Then  the  Holy  Spirit 
implants  it  in  your  soul.  Do  you  leap  up  to  it,  and  say,  **  I  believe  it ! 
I  grasp  it !  On  the  incarnate  God  I  fix  my  hope  ;  the  substitutionary 
sacrifice,  the  complete  atonement  of  Christ  is  all  my  confidence ;  I  am 
leconciled  to  God  by  the  blood  of  Jesus.'*  Then  you  possess  the  living 
seed  within  your  soul. 

And  what  is  the  result  of  it  ?  Why,  then  there  comes,  according  to 
the  text,  a  new  life  into  us,  as  the  result  of  the  indwelling  of  the  living 
word,  and  oui-  beinjj  born  again  by  it.  A  new  life  it  is ;  it  is  not  the  old 
nature  putting  out  its  better  parts;  not  the  old  Adam  refining  and 
purifying  itself,  and  rising  to  something  better.  No ;  have  we  not 
said  aforetime  that  the  flesh  withers  and  the  flower  thereof  fades  ?  It 
is  an  entirely  new  life.  Ye  are  as  much  new  creatures  at  your  regenera- 
tion, as  if  you  had  never  existed,  and  had  been  for  the  first  time 
created.  *'  Old  things  are  passed  away ;  behold,  all  things  arc  become 
new."  The  child  of  God  is  beyond  and  above  other  men.  Other 
men  do  not  possess  the  life  which  he  has  received.  They  are  but 
duplex — body  and  soul  have  they.  He  is  of  triple  nature — he  is  spirit, 
soul,  and  body..  A  fresh  principle,  a  spark  of  the  divine  life  has 
dropped  into  his  soul;  he  is  no  longer  a  natural  or  carnal  man,  but  ho 
has  become  a  spiritual  man,  understanding  spiritual  things  and  possess- 
ing a  life  far  superior  to  anything  that  belongs  to  the  rest  of  mankind. 
0  that  God,  who  has  withered  in  the  souls  of  any  of  you  that  wliich  is  . 
of  the  flesh,  may  speedily  gi-ant  you  the  new  birth  through  the  Word. 

Now  observe,  to  close,  wherever  this  new  life  comes  through  the 


884  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

word,  it  is  incorruptible,  it  lives  and  abides  for  ever.  To  get  the  Rood 
seed  out  of  a  true  believer's  heart  and  to  destroy  the  new  nature  in  him, 
is  a  thing  attempted  by  earth  and  hell,  but  never  yet  achieved.  Pluck 
the  sun  out  of  the  firmament,  and  you  shall  not  even  then  be  able  to 
pluck  grace  out  of  a  regenerate  heart  It  "  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever" 
saith  the  text;  it  neither  can  cornipt  of  itself  nor  be  corrupted.  "It 
sinneth  not,  because  it  is  bom  of  God."  "  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life, 
and  they  shall  never  i)erish,  neither  shall  any  man  pluck  them  out  of  my 
hand." "  "  The  water  that  I  shall  give  him  shall  be  in  him  a  well  of 
water  springing  up  into  everlasting  life."  You  have  a  natural  life— 
that  will  die,  it  is  of  the  flesh.  You  have  a  spiritual  life — of  that  it  is 
■written :  "  AVhosoever  liveth  and  believeth  in  me  shall  never  die." 
You  have  now  within  you  the  noblest  and  truest  immortality:  you 
must  live  ns  God  liveth,  in  peace  and  joy,  and  happiness.  Bat  oh, 
remember,  dear  hearer,  if  you  have  not  this  you  "  shall  not  sec  life." 
What  then — shall  you  be  anniiiilated  ?  Ah  !  no,  but  "the  wrath  of  the 
Lord  is  upon  you."  You  shall  exist,  though  you  shall  not  live.  Of 
life  you  shall  know  nothing,  for  that  is  the  gift  of  God  in  Christ  JestiB; 
but  of  an  everlasting  death,  full  of  torment  and  anguish,  you  shall  be 
the  wretched  heritor — "  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him."  You  shall 
be  cast  into  **  the  lake  of  fire,  which  is  the  second  death."  Tou  shall 
be  one  of  those  whose  "  worm  dieth  not,  and  whose  fire  is  not  quenched." 
May  God,  the  ever-blessed  Spirit,  visit  you  !  If  he  be  now  striving 
with  you,  0  quench  not  his  divine  flame !  Trifle  not  with  any  holy 
thought  you  have.  If  this  morning  you  must  confess  that  you  are  not 
born  again,  be  humbled  by  it  Go  and  seek  mercy  of  the  Lord,  entreat 
him  to  deal  graciously  with  you  and  save  you.  Many  who  have  had 
nothing  but  moonlight  have  prized  it,  and  ere  long  they  have  had  sun- 
light. Above  all,  remember  what  the  quickening  seed  is,  and  reverence 
it  when  you  hear  it  preached,  "  for  this  is  the  word  which  by  the  gospel 
is  preached  unto  you."  Respect  it,  and  receive  it.  Remember  that 
the  quickening  seed  is  all  wrapped  up  in  this  sentence:  "Believe  in 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  **  He  that  believeth 
and  is  baptised  shall  be  saved;  but  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be 
damned." 

The  Lord  bless  vou,  for  Jesus'  sake.    Amen. 


Portions  of  ScmrTUKE  iie.vd  before  Sermox — Isaiah  xl.  1— 11; 

Luke  iii.  1—17  ;  and  1  Peter  i.  17— i5. 


^^tr^pBtan  i^alr^mairk 


NUMBBE  ONE  THOUSAND  ;  OR,  "  BREAD  ENOUGH  AND 

TO  SPARE." 


Deliver]^  on  Lobd's-day  Morning,  July  16th,  1871,  by 

C.  H.  SPUKGEON, 

AT    THE    METBOPOLItIn    TABERNACLE,     NEWINGTON. 


"  And  "when  ho  camo  to  himself,  ho  said,  How  many  hirod  fior\'ants  of  my  father'a 
have  bread  enough  and  to  spare,  and  I  perish  with  hunger!'* — Luke  xv.  17. 

*'  He  came  to  himself."    The  word  may  be  applied  to  one  waking  out  of 
«  deep  swoon.    He  had  been  unconscions  of  his  true  condition,  and  he 
had  lost  all  power  to  deliver  himself  fi-om  it ;  but  now  he  was  coming 
lonnd  again,  returning^  to  consciousness  and  action.    The  .voice  which 
fihall  awaken  the  dead  aroused  him ;    the  visions  of  his  sinful  trance  all 
disappeared ;  his  foul  but  fascinatinp;  dreams  were  gone ;  he  came  to 
himself.     Or  the  word  may  be  applied  to  one  recovering  from  insanity. 
The  prodigal  son  had  played  the  madman,  for  sin  is  madness  of  the 
Vrorst  kind.    He  had  been  demented,  he  had  put  bitter  for  sweet  and 
sweet  for  bitter,  darkness  for  light  and  light  for  darkness;  he  had  injured 
himself,  and  had  done  for  his  soul  what  those  possessed  of  devils  in  our 
Saviour's  time  did  for  their  bodies,  when  they  wounded  themselves  with 
BtODCB,  and  cut  themselves  with  knives.    The  insane  man  does  not  know 
himself  to  be  insane,  but  as  soon  as  he  comes  to  himself  he  painfiilly  per- 
ceives the  state  from  which  he  is  escaping.    Returning  then  to  true  reason 
«nd  sound  judgment,  the  prodigal  came  to  himself.    Another  illustration 
of  the  word  may  be  found  in  the  old  world  fables  of  enchantment :  when  a 
man  was  disenthralled  from  the  magician's  spell  he  ''came  to  himself." 
C/lasfiic  story  has  its  legend  of  Circe,  the  enchantress,  who  transformedmen 
into  swine.  Surely  this  young  man  in  our  parable  had  been  degraded  in  the 
«ame  manner.     He  had  lowered  his  mannood  to  the  level  of  the  brutes. 
It  should  be  the  propertv  of  man  to  have  love  to  his  kindred,  to  have 
irespect  for  right,    to  have,  some  care    for  his  own    interest;    this 
^'onng  man  had  lost  all  these'proper  attributes  of  humanity,  and  so  had 
lecome  as  the  beast  that  pensheth.    But  as  the  poet  sings  of  Ulysses, 
that  be  compelled  the  enchantress  to  restore  his  companions  to  their 
<)riginal  form,  so  here  we  see  the  prodigal  returning  to  manhood,  look- 
ing away  from   his  sensual  pleasures,  and  commencing  a  course  of 
conduct  more  consistent  with  his  Krth  and  parentage.    There  are  men 
Xa  1,000. 


38'J  :^IETROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PUI^IT. 

here  to-day  perhaps  who  are  still  in  this  swoon ;  O  God  of  hearen, 
arouse  them  !  Some  here  who  are  morally  insane;  the  Lord  recoTer 
them,  the  divine  PhyBioian  put  his  cooling  hand  upon  their  ferered 
brow,  and  say  to  them :  "  I  will ;  be  thou  made  whole."  Perhaps  tbere 
are  others  here  who  have  allowed  their  animal  nature  to  reijjn  supreme; 
may  he  who  destroys  the  works  of  the  devil  deliver  them  from  the  power 
of  Satan,  and  give  them  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God.  He  shaU 
have  all  the  glory  I 

It  appears  that  when  the  prodigal  came  to  himself  he  was  shut  up  to 
two  thoughts.  Two  facts  were  clear  to  him,  that  there  was  plenty  in 
his  father's  house,  and  that  he  himself  was  famishing.  May  the  two 
kindred  spiritual  facts  have  absolute  power  over  all  your  hearts,  if  yea 
are  yet  unsaved;  for  thoy  were  most  certainly  all-imix)rtant  and 
pressing  truths.  These  are  no  fancies  of  one  in  a  dream ;  no  ravings  of 
a  maniac  ;  no  iuiaginations  of  one  under  fascination :  it  is  most  tnie 
that  there  is  plenty  of  all  good  things  in  the  Father's  house,  and  that 
the  sinner  needs  them.  No  where  else  can  grace  be  found  or  pardon 
gained  ;  but  with  CJod  there  is  plenitude  of  mercy  ;  let  none  ventnpe  to 
dispute  this  (glorious  truth.  E<]ual!y  true  is  it  that  the  sinner  without 
<iod  is  ])eri8hing.  He  is  iK^rishing  now;  he  will  perish  everlastingly. 
All  that  is  worth  having  in  his  existence  will  be  utterly  destroyed,  aw 
he  iiiniself  shall  only  remain  as  a  desolation  ;  the  owl  and  the  bittern 
of  misery  and  anguish  shall  haunt  the  ruins  of  his  nature  for  ever  and 
for  ever.  If  we  could  shut  up  unconverted  men  to  those  two  thoughts, 
what  hopeful  congregations  we  should  have.  Alas  I  they  forget  that 
there  is  mercy  only  with  Cod,  and  fancy  that  it  is  to  be  found  some- 
wIktc  else;  and  they  try  to  slip  away  from  the  humbling  fact  of  their 
own  lost  estate,  and  imagine  that  perhaps  there  may  be  some  back 
door  of  escape;  that,  after  all,  they  are  not  so  bad  as  the  Scriptnre 
declares,  or  that  perchance  it  shall  be  right  with  them  at  the  last,  however 
wrong  it  may  be  with  them  now.  Alas !  my  brethren,  what  shall  we  do  with 
those  who  wilfully  shut  their  eyes  to  truths  of  which  the  evidence  is 
overwhelming,  and  the  importance  overpowering  ?  I  earnestly  entreat 
those  of  you  who  know  how  to  approach  the  throne  of  God  in  faith,  to 
breathe  the  prayer  that  he  would  now  bring  into  captivity  the  uncon- 
verted heart,  and  put  these  two  stnmg  fetters  upon  every  imregenerate 
soul ;  there  is  abundant  grace  with  God,  there  is  utter  destitution 
with  themselves.  Bound  with  such  fetters,  and  led  into  the  presence  of 
Jesus,  the  captive  would  soon  receive  the  liberty  of  the  children  of  God. 

I  intend  only  to  dwell  this  morning,  or  v.ainly,  upon  the  fint 
thouj»ht,  the  master  thought,  as  it  s«ems  to  me,  which  was  in  the 
prodigaPs  mind — that  which  really  constrained  him  to  say,  "  I  will 
arise  and  go  to  my  father."  It  was  not,  I  think,  the  home-bringing 
thought  that  he  was  perishing  with  hunger,  but  the  impulse  towards 
his  father  found  its  mainspring  in  the  consideration,  **  How  many  hired 
servants  of  my  father's  have  bread  enough  and  to  spare  ! "  The  plentji 
the  abundance,  the  superabundance  of  the  father's  house,  was  thit 
which  attracted  him  to  return  home;  and  many,  many  a  sonlhii 
been  led  to  seek  God  when  it  has  fully  believed  that  there  was  tSajOr 
dant  mercy  with  him.  My  desire  ^his  morning  shall  be  to  pot  plaiidT 
before  every  sinner  here  the  exceeding  abundance  of  the  grace  of  Ood 


NUMBER  ONE  THOUSAND;  OR,  "BREAD  ENOUGH  AND  TO  SPARE."  .^^7 

in  Clirist  Jesns,  hoping  thnt  the  Lord  will  find  out  those  who  arc  liis 
sons,  and  that  they  may  catch  at  these  word»,  and  as  they  hear  of  the 
abundance  of  the  bread  in  the  Father's  house,  may  say,  "  I  will  arise 
and  go  to  my  Father." 

I.  First,  then,  let  us  consider  for  a  short  time  the  more  than 

ABUNDANOB  OF  ALL  GOOD  THINGS  IN  THE  FATHER'S  HOUSE.      What  dost 

thoa  need  this  morning,  awakened  sinner  ?  Of  all  that  thou  needest, 
there  is  with  God  an  all-suificient,  a  superabounding  supply;  "  bread 
fjnough  and  to  spare."  Let  us  prove  this  to  thee.  I?'irst,  consiiUrthn 
Father  himself^  and  whosoever  shall  rightly  consider  the  Father,  will 
at  once  perceive  that  there  can  be  no  stint  to  mercy,  no  bound  to  the 
possibilities  of  grace.  What  is  the  nature  and  character  of  the  Supreme .' 
**  Is  he  harsh  or  loving  ?"  saith  one.  The  Scripture  answers  the  question, 
not  by  telling  us  that  God  is  loving,  but  by  assuring  us  that  God  is 
love-  God  himself  is  love ;  it  is  his  very  essence.  It  is  not  that  love 
is  in  God,  but  that  God  himself  is  love.  Can  there  be  a  more  concise 
and  more  positive  way  of  saying  that  the  love  of  God  is  infinite  ?  You 
cannot  measure  God  himself;  your  conceptions  cannot  grasp  tlie  gran- 
deur of  his  attributes,  neither  can  you  tell  the  dimensions  of  his  love, 
nor  conceive  the  fulness  of  it  Only  this  know,  that  high  as  the  heavens 
are  above  the  earth,  so  ai'e  his  ways  higher  than  your  ways,  and  his 
thoughts  than  ^our  thoughts.    His    mercy    endureth  for  ever.    He 

Sardoneth  iniquity,  and  passeth  by  the  transgression  of  the  remnant  of  liis 
eritage.  He  retaineth  not  his  anger  for  ever,  because  he  deligliteth 
in  mercy.  "  Thou,  Lord,  art  good,  and  ready  to  forgive :  and  plenteous 
in  mercy  unto  all  them  that  call  upon  thee."  "  Thy  mercy  is  gi-eat  above 
the  heavens."     "  The  Lord  is  very  pitiful,  and  of  tender  n-iervy." 

If  divine  love  alone  should  not  seem  sufficient  for  your  Ealvation, 
remember  that  with  the  Father  to  whom  the  sinner  returns,  there  i>  as 
much  of  wisdom  as  there  is  of  grace.  Is  thy  case  a  very  difficult  one  .* 
He  that  made  thee  can  heal  thee.  Are  thy  diseases  strange  and 
complex  ?  He  that  fashioned  the  oar,  can  he  not  remove  its  dtafness  * 
He  that  made  the  eye,  can  he  not  enlighten  it  if  it  be  Mind?  No 
mischief  can  have  hapixined  to  tliee,  but  wliat  he  who  is  thy  God 
can  recover  thee  from  it.  Matchless  wisdom  cannot  fail  to  meet 
the  intricacies  of  thy  case. 

Neither  can. there  be  any  failure  of  power  with  the  Father.     Dost 

thon  not  know  that  he  who  made  the  earth,  and  stretched  out  the 

heavens  like  a  tent  to  dwell  in,  hath  no  bound  to  his  strength,  nur 

limit  to  his  might  ?     If  thou  needest  omni|)otence  to  lift  thee  uj)  fiom 

the  slough  into  which  thou  hast  fallen,  omnipotence  is  ready  to  deliver 

thee,  if  thou  cry  to  the  strong  for  strength.    Thonjjh  thou  shouldest 

Heed  all  the  force  with  which  the  Creator  made  the  worlds,  and  all  the 

slrength  with  which  he  bears  up  the  pillars  of  the  universe,  all  that 

strength  and  force  should  he  laid  out  for  thy  good,  if  thou  wouldst 

believingly  seek  mercy  at  the  hand  of  (jod  iu  Christ  Jesus.  None  of  his 

iower  shall  be  against  thee,  none  of  his  wisdom  shall  plan  tliy  overthrow; 
nt  love  shall  reign  in  all,  and  every  attribute  of  God  shall  become 
snbservient  to  thy  salvation.  Oh,  when  I  think  of  sin  I  cannot  under- 
stand how  a  sinner  can  be  saved  ;  J)ut  when  I  think  of  God,  and  look 
into  his  heart,  I  understand  how  readily  he  can  forgive.    *^  Look  into 


388  METEOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

his  licait/'  saith  one ;  "how  can  we  do  that  7  *'  Hath  he  not  laid  bare  his 
heart  to  you  ?  Do  you  enquire  where  he  has  done  this?  I  answer,  yonder, 
upon  Calvary's  cross.  What  was  in  the  very  centre  of  the  divine 
heart  ?  "What,  but  the  person  of  the  "Well-beloved,  his  only  bcgottai 
Son  ?  And  he  hath  taken  his  only  begotten  and  nailed  him  to  the 
rross,  because,  if  I  may  venture  so  to  &i)eak,  he  loved  sinners  better 
than  his  Son.  lie  spared  not  his  Son,  but  he  spares  the  sinner;  be 
])onrod  out  his  wrath  upon  his  Son  and  made  him  the  substitute  for 
sinners,  that  he  might  lavish  love  ujion  the  guilty  who  deserved  bu 
anger.  0  soul,  if  thou  art  lost,  it  is  not  from  any  want  of  grace,  or 
wisdom,  or  power  in  the  Father  ;  if  thou  perish,  it  is  not  because  God 
is  hard  to  move  or  unable  to  save.  If  thou  be  a  castaway,  it  is  not 
because  the  Eternal  refused  to  hear  thy  cries  for  pardon  or  rejected 
thy  faith  in  him.  On  thine  own  head  be  thy  blood,  if  thy  soul  be  lost 
If  thou  starve,  thou  starvest  because  thou  wilt  starve ;  for  in  the 
Father's  house  th^re  is  **  bread  enough  and  to  spare." 

But,  now,  consider  a  second  matter  which  may  set  this  more  clexAj 
before  us.  Think  of  fJie  Son  of  God,  who  is  indeed  the  true  bread  (rf 
life  for  sinners.  Sinner,  I  return  to  my  personal  addi*ess.  Thon 
neudest  a  Saviour;  and  thou  mayst  well  be  encouraged  when  thoa 
seest  that  a  Saviour  is  provided — provided  by  God,  since  it  is  certain 
he  would  not  make  a  mistake  in  the  provision.  But  consider  who  the 
Saviour  is.  He  is  himself  God.  Jesus  who  came  from  heaven  for  onr 
redemption  was  not  an  angel,  else  might  we  tremble  to  trust  the  weight 
of  our  sin  upon  him.  He  was  not  mere  man,  or  he  could  but  have  saffeired 
as  a  substitute  for  one,  if  indeed  for  one  ;  but  he  was  very  God  of  very 
(lod,  in  the  beginning  with  the  Father.  And  docs  such  a  one  come  to 
redeem  ?  Is  there  room  to  doubt  as  to  his  ability,  if  that  be  the  fact? 
I  do  (ronfcKs  this  day,  that  if  my  sins  wore  ten  thousand  times  heavier 
than  they  are,  yea,  and  if  I  had  all  the  sins  of  this  crowd  in  addition 
piled  u{>on  me,  I  could  trust  Jesus  with  them  all  at  this  moment  no» 
that  1  know  him  to  be  the  Christ  of  God.  lie  is  the  mighty  God,  and 
by  his  ])ierced  liand  the  burden  of  our  sins  is  easily  removed ;  he  blotteth 
out  our  sins,  he  casts  them  into  the  depths  of  the  sea. 

But  think  of  what  Jesus  the  Son  of  God  has  done.  He  who  was 
God,  and  thus  blesiicd  for  ever,  left  the  throne  and  royalties  of  heaven, 
and  stooped  to  yonder  manger.  There  he  lies ;  his  mother  wraps  him 
in  swaddling  clothes,  he  hangs  upon  her  breast ;  the  Tufinite  is  clothed 
:is  an  infant,  the  Invisible  is  made  manifest  in  flesh,  the  Almighty  is 
linked  with  weadvuess,  for  our  sakes.  Oh,  matchless  stoop  of  condesoen- 
sion  !  If  tlie  Redeemer  God  does  this  iu  order  to  save  us,  shall  it  be 
thought  a  thing  impossible  for  him  to  save  the  vilest  of  the  vile  ?  Cm 
anything  be  too  hard  for  him  who  comes  from  heaven  to  earth  to 
redeem  ? 

Pause  not  because  of  astonishment,  but  press  onward.  Do  you  sec 
him  who  was  God  over  all,  blessed  for  ever,  living  more  than  thirty  jeaB 
in  the  midst  of  the  sous  of  men,  bearing  the  infirmities  of  manhoodi 
taking  upon  himself  our  sicknesses,  and  sharing  our  sorrows:  \\\%f^ 
weary  with  treading  the  acres  of  Palestine;  his  body  faint  oftentiintf 
with  hunger  and  thirst,  and  labour  ;  his  knees  knit  to  the  earth  with 
midnight  prayer;  his  eyes  red  wi£h  weeping  (for  ofltimes  Jesus  wqitjip 


\ 


VUMBEB  ONE  THOUSAND;  OB,  ''BREAD  ENOUGH  AND  TO  SPARE."      389 

tempted  in  all  points  like  as  we  are  ?  Matchless  spectacle  I  An  incar- 
nate God  dwells  among  sinners,  and  endures  their  contradiction ! 
What  glory  flashed  forth  ever  and  anon  from  the  midst  of  his  lowliness! 
a  glory  which  should  render  faith  in  him  inevitable.  Thou  who  didst 
walk  the  sea :  thou  who  didst  raise  the  dead,  it  is  not  rational  to  doubt 
thy  power  to  forgive  sins  !  Didst  thou  not  thyself  put  it  so  when  thou 
badest  the  man  take  up  his  bed  and  walk  ?  '*  Whether  is  easier,  to  say. 
Thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee ;  or  to  say,  Rise  up  and  walk  ?"  Assuredly 
he  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  them  that  come  unto  God  by  him : 
he  was  able  even  here  on  earth  in  weakness  to  forgive  sins,  much  more 
now  that  he  is  seated  in  his  glory.  He  is  exalted  on  high  to  be  a  Prince 
and  a  Saviour,  to  give  repentance  and  remission  of  sins. 

But,  ah  !  the  master  proof  that  in  Christ  Jesus  there  is  *'  bread  enough 
and  to  spare,"  is  the  cross.  Will  you  follow  me  a  moment,  will  you 
follow  him,  rather,  to  Gethsemane  ?  Can  you  see  the  bloody  sweat  as 
it  falls  upon  the  p^ound  in  his  agony  ?  Can  you  think  of  his  scourging 
before  Herod  and  Pilate  ?  Can  you  trace  him  along  the  Via  Dolorosa  of 
Jemsalem  ?  Will  your  tender  hearts  endure  to  see  him  nailed  to  the  tree, 
and  lifted  up  to  bleed  and  die  ?  This  is  but  the  shell ;  as  for  the  inward 
kernel  of  his  sufferings  no  language  can  describe  it,  neither  can  con- 
ception peer  into  it.  The  everlasting  God  laid  sin  on  Christ,  and 
where  the  sin  was  laid  there  fell  the  wrath.  "  It  pleased  the  Lord  to 
braise  him ;  he  hath  put  him  to  grief.''  Now  he  that  died  upon  the 
cross  was  God's  onljr  begotten  Son.  Can  you  conceive  a  limit  to  the 
merit  of  such  a  Saviour's  death?  I  know  there  are  some  who  think  it 
necessary  to  their  system  of  theology  to  limit  the  merit  of  the  blood  of 
Jesus  :  if  my  system  of  theology  needed  such  a  limitation,  I  would  cast 
it  to  the  winds.  I  cannot,  dare  not,  allow  the  thought  to  find  a  lodging 
in  my  mind  ;  it  seems  so  near  akin  to  blasphemy.  In  Christ's  finished 
work  I  see  an  ocean  of  merit;  my  plummet  finds  no  bottom,  my  eve 
discovers  no  shore.  There  must  be  sufficient  efficacy  in  the  blood  of 
Christ,  if  God  had  so  willed  it,  to  have  saved  not  only  all  this  world, 
but  ten  thousand  worlds,  had  they  transgressed  the  Maker's  law.  Once 
admit  infinity  into  the  matter,  and  limit  is  out  of  the  qnestion.  Having 
a  divine  person  for  an  offering,  it  is  not  consistent  to  conceive  of 
limited  value  ;  bound  and  measure  are  terms  inapplicable  to  the  divine 
•acrifice.  The  intent  of  the  divine  purpose  fixes  the  application  of  the 
infinite  offering,  but  does  not  change  it  into  a  finite  work.  In  the 
atonement  of  Christ  Jesus  there  is  "bread  enough  and  to  spare;"  even 
as  Paul  wrote  to  Timothy,  "  He  is  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  specially  of 
those  tnat  believe." 

But  now  let  me  lead  you  to  another  point  of  solenmly  joyful 
consideration,  and  that  is  the  Holy  Sptril.  To  believe  and  love  the 
Trinity  is  to  possess  the  key  of  theology.  Wc  spoke  of  the  Father, 
we  spoke  of  the  Son;  let  us  now  spak  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
We  do  him  all  too  little  honour,  for  the  Holy  Spirit  condescends  to 
ecHne  to  earth  and  dwell  in  our  hearts ;  and  notwithstanding  all  our 
proToeations  he  still  abides  within  his  people.  Now,  sinner,  thou 
needest  a  new  life  and  thou  needest  holiness,  for  both  of  these  are 
neoeosary  to  make  thee  fit  for  heaven.  Is  there  a  provision  for  this  ? 
The  Holy  Spirit  is  provided  and  given  in  the  covenant  of  grace ;   and 


8D0  METUOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

purely  in  him  there  is  "  enough  and  to  spare."  "What  cannot  the  Holy 
8])irit  do  ?  Ikinjr  divine,  nothing  can  be  beyond  his  power.  Look  i, 
what  1)0  has  already  done.  He  moved  upon  the  face  of  chaos,  and 
brought  it  into  order;  all  the  beauty  of  creation  arose  beneath  his 
moulding  breath.  "We  ourselves  must  confess  with  Elihu,  **  The  Spirit 
of  God  hath  made  me,  and  the  breath  of  the  Almighty  hath  given  me 
life.*'  Think  of  the  great  deeds  of  the  Holy  Spirit  at  Pentecost 
when  men  unlearned  Bi>ake  with  tongues  of  which  they  knew  not  a 
syllable  aforetime,  and  the  flames  of  fire  upon  them  were  also  within 
them,  so  that  their  hearts  bunied  with  zeal  and  courage  to  which  thej 
hitherto  had  been  strangers.  Think  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  work  on  such 
a  one  as  Saul  of  Tarsus.  That  persecutor  foams  blood,  he  is  a  very  woU 
he  would  devour  the  saints  of  God  at  Damascus,  and  yet,  within  a  few 
moments,  you  hear  him  say,  "  "Who  art  thou;  Lord  ?  "  and  yet  again, 
"Lord,  wiiat  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do?"  His  heart  is  changed; 
the  Si>irit  of  God  has  new  created  it;  the  adamant  is  melted  in  a 
moment  into  wax.  Many  of  us  h^tand  before  you  as  the  living  monnmcats 
of  what  the  Holy  Ghost  can  do,  and  we  can  assure  you  from  our  own 
experience,  that  there  is  no  inward  evil  which  he  cannot  overcome,  no 
lustful  desire  of  the  flesh  which  he  cannot  subdue,  no  obduracy  of  the 
affections  ^Yhieh  he  cannot  melt.  Is  anything  too  hard  for  the  Lord? 
Is  the  Sjnrit  of  the  Lord  straitened?  Surely  no  sinner  can  be  beyond 
the  possibilities  of  mercy  when  the  Holy  S[)irit  condescends  to  be  the 
agent  of  human  conversion.  O  sinner,  if  thou  perish,  it  is  not  because 
the  Holy  Spirit  wants  power,  or  tiie  blood  of  Jesus  lacks  efficacy,  or 
tlie  Father  fails  in  love;  it  is  because  thou  believest  not  in  Christ, 
but  dost  abide  in  wilful  rebellion,  refusing  the  abundant  bread  of  life 
which  is  placed  before  thee. 

A  few  rapid  sentences  upon  other  things,  which  will  go  to  show  still 
further  the  greatness  of  the  provision  of  divine  mercy.  Observe  well 
that  Uiroinjhout  all  the  ofjes  (iod  has  been  send huj  one  j^'ophei  after  anotheff 
and  these  prophets  have  been  succeeded  by  apostles,  and  these  by  martjra 
and  confessors,  and  pastors  and  evangelists,  and  teachers  ;  all  these  have 
1  >een  commissioned  by  the  Lord  in  regular  succession ;  and  what  has 
been  the  message  they  have  had  to  deliver?  They  have  all  pointed  to 
Christ,  the  great  deliverer.  Moses  and  the  prophets  all  spoke  of  him, 
and  so  have  all  truly  God-sent  ambassadors.  Dost  thou  think,  sinner, 
that  God  has  made  all  this  fuss  about  a  trifle  ?  Has  he  sent  all  these 
servants  to  call  lliee  to  a  table  insufficiently  furnished?  Has  hemulti- 
l)lied  his  invitations  tlirouL^h  so  louiir  a  time  to  bid  thee  and  others 
come  to  a  provision  which  is  not,  nfter  all,  suflicient  for  them?  On, it 
cannot  be  1  God  is  Hot  mocked,  neither  does  he  mock  poor  needy  souls. 
The  stores  of  his  mercy  are  sufficient  lor  the  utmost  emergencies. 

'*  Rivers  of  love  and  mercy  here 
In  a  rich  ocean  join ; 
Salvation  in  abundance  flows, 
Like  floodij  of  milk  and  wine. 

Great  God,  the  treasures  of  thy  love 

Are  everlasting  mines, 
Deep  as  our  helpless  miseries  are, 

And.  boundless  as  our  sins.'* 


NUMBER  ONE  THOUSAND;  OR,  "BREAD  ENOUGH  AND  TO  SPARE."      391 

Recollect,  aarain,  that  Qoil  luis  leen  pleased  to  stake  hts  Jwiwurvpmi  the 
gospel.  Men  desire  a  name,  and  God  also  is  jealous  of  his  glory.  Now, 
what  has  God  been  pleased  to  select  for  his  name  ?  Is  it  not  the  conver- 
sion and  salvation  or  men  ?  When  instead  of  the  brier  shall  come  np  the 
myrtle-tree,  and  instead  of  the  thorn  shall  come  np  the  fir-tree,  it  shall 
be  to  the  Lord  for  a  name,  for  an  everlasting  sign  that  shall  not  be  cut 
off.  And  dost  thou  think  God  will  get  a  name  by  saving  little  sinners 
by  a  little  Saviour  ?  Ah !  his  great  name  comes  from  washing  out 
stains  as  Black  as  hell,  and  pardoning  sinners  who  were  foulest  of  the 
foul.  Is  there  one  monstrous  rebel  here  who  is  qualified  to  glorify  God 
greatly,  because  his  salvation  will  be  the  wonder  of  angels  and  the 
amazement  of  devils  ?  I  hope  there  is.  0  thou  most  degraded,  black, 
loathsome  sinner,  nearest  to  being  a  damned  sinner,  if  this  voice  can 
reach  thee,  I  challenge  thee  to  come  and  prove  whether  God's  mercy  is 
not  a  match  for  thy  sin.  Thou  Goliath  sinner,  come  thou  hither;  thou 
shalt  find  that  God  can  slay  thine  enmity,  and  make  thee  yet  his  friend, 
and  the  more  his  loving  and  adoring  servant,  because  great  forgiveness 
shall  secure  great  love.  Such  is  the  greatness  of  divine  mercy,  that 
"where  sin  abounded,  grace  doth  much  more  abound." 

Dost  thou  think,  again,  0  sinner,  that  Jesus  Chiist  came  out  of 
heaven  to  do  a  little  deed,  and  to  provide  a  slender  store  of  mercy  ? 
Dost  thou  think  he  went  up  to  Calvary,  and  down  to  the  grave,  and  all, 
that  he  might  do  a  commonplace  thing,  and  provide  a  stinted,  nanow, 
limited  salvation,  such  as  thine  unbelief  would  imagine  his  redemption 
to  be  ?    No.    We  speak  of  the  labours  of  Hercules,  but  these  were 
child's  play  compared  with  the  labours  of  Christ  who  slew  the  lion  of 
hell,  turned  a  purifying  stream  through  the  Augean  stables  of  man's 
sin,  and  cleansed  them,  and  performed  ten  thousand  miracles  besides : 
and  will  you  so  depreciate  Christ  as  to  imagine  that  what  he  has  ac- 
complished is,  after  all,  little,  so  little  that  it  is  not  enough  to  save  you? 
If  it  were  in  my  power  to  single  out  the  man  who  has  been  the  most 
dishonest,  most  licentious,  most  drunken,  most  profane — in  three  words, 
most  earthly,  sensual,  devilish — I  would  repeat  the  challenge  which  I 
gave  just  now,  and  bid  him  draw  near  to  Jesus,  and  see  whether  the 
fountain  filled  with  Christ's  atoning  blood  cannot  wash  him  white.     I 
challenge  him  at  this  instant  to  come  and  cast  himself  at  the  dear 
Bedecmer's  feet,  and  see  if  he  will  say,  "  I  cannot  save  thee,  thou  hast 
sinned  beyond  my  power."    It  shall  never,  never,  never  be,  for  he  is  able 
to  the  uttermost  to  save.    He  is  a  Saviour,  and  a  great  one.    Christ 
will  be  honoured  by  the  grandeur  of  the  grace  which  he  bestows  upon  the 
great'Cst  of  offenders.    1  here  is  in  him  pardon  "  enough  and  to  spare." 

I  must  leave  this  point,  but  I  cannot  do  so  without  adding  that  1  think 

"BREAD  ENOUGH  AND  TO  SPARE  "  might  bc  taken  for  the  motto  of  the 

gospel.     I  believe  in  particular  redemption,  and  that  Christ  laid  down 

bis  life  for  his  sheep  ;  but,  as  I  have  already  said,  I  do  not  believe  in  the 

limited  value  of  that  redemption;  how  else  could  I  dare  to  read  the 

Words  of  John,  **  He  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins  :  and  not  for  ours 

only,  but  also  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world."    There  is  a  sure  portion  for 

iis  own  elect,  but  there  is  also  over  and  above  "  to  spare."  I  believe  in  the 

Meeting  love  which  will  save  all  its  objects — "  bread  enough;"  but  I 

Mieve  in  boundless  benevolence,  "  Bread  enough  and  to  s]>are:'    We, 


392  METROPOLITAN'  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

when  we  have  a  purpose  to  accomplish,  put  forth  the  requisite  quantity 
of  Btrent^th  aud  no  more,  for  we  must  be  economical,  we  most  not  waste 
our  iiinited  store ;  even  charity  ^ives  the  poor  man  no  more  than  he 
absolutely  needs;  but  when  God  feeds  the  multitude,  bespreads  the 
])ourd  with  imperial  bounty.  Our  water-cart  runs  up  and  down,  the 
favoured  road,  but  when  heaven's  clouds  would  favour  the  good  man's 
fields,  they  delu;;re  whole  nations,  and  even  pour  themselves  upon  the 
sea.  There  is  no  real  waste  with  CJod;  but  at  the  same  time  there  isna 
stint.  "Bread  knoucjii  and  to  spare;"  write  that  inscription  OTer 
the  house  of  mercy,  aud  let  every  hungry  passer-by  be  encouraged 
thereby  to  enter  in  aud  eat. 

II.  We  must  now  pass  on  to  a  second  consideration,  and  dwell  tcit 
briefly  on  it.  According  to  the  text,  there  was  not  only  bread  enoi^ 
in  the  house,  but  the  lowest  in  the  Father's  hoitse  enjoted 
enou(ju  axd  to  spare. 

"We  can  never  make  a  parable  run  on  all  fours,  therefore  we  cannot 
find  the  exact  counterpart  of  the  '*  hired  servants."  I  understand  the 
prodigal  to  have  meant  this,  that  the  veiy  lowest  menial  servant  employed 
by  his  father  had  bread  to  eat,  and  had  **  bread  enough  and  to  spare."  Now, 
how  should  we  translate  this  ?  "Why,  sinner,  the  very  lowest  creature  that 
God  has  made,  that  has  not  sinned  against  him,  is  well  supplied  and  has 
abounding  happiness.  There  are  adaptation?  for  pleasure  in  the 
organisations  of  the  lowest  animals.  See  how  the  gnats  dance  in  the 
bummer's  sunbeam;  hear  the  swallows  as  they  scream  with  delight 
when  on  the  wing,  lie  who  cares  for  birds  and  insects  will  surely  care 
for  men.  Ciod  who  hears  the  ravens  when  thev  crv,  will  he  not  hear 
the  returning  penitent?  He  gives  these  in?ects  happiness;  did  he 
mean  me  to  be  wretched?  Surely  he  who  opens  his  hand  and  supplies 
tiie  lack  of  every  living  thing,  will  not  refuse  to  open  his  hand  and 
supply  my  'needs  if  I  seek  his  face. 

Yet  1  must  not  make  these  lowest  creatures  to  be  the  hired  servants. 
"Whom  shall  I  then  select  among  men?  I  will  put  it  thus.  The  very 
worst  of  sinners  that  have  come  to  Christ  have  found  grace  "enough  and 
to  spare,"  and  the  very  least  of  saints  who  dwell  in  the  house  of  the 
Lord  find  love  "enough  and  to  spare."  Take  then  //w  most  guiUy  (f 
'  sinmrs,  liud  see  how  bountifully  the  Lord  treats  them  when  they  turn 
unto  him.  Did  not  some  of  you,  who  are  yourselves  unconverted,  once 
know  j)ersons  who  were  at  least  as  bad,  perhaps  more  outwardly  im- 
moral than  yourselves  ?  "Well,  they  have  been  converted,  though  you 
have  not  been  ;  and  when  they  were  converted,  what  was  their  testimony? 
Did  the  blood  of  Christ  avail  to  cleanse  them  ?  Oh,  yes;  and  more  than 
cleanse  them,  for  it  added  to  beauty  not  tl;eir  own.  They  were  naked 
once  ;  was  Jesus  able  to  clothe  them  ?  "Was  there  a  sufficient  covering 
in  his  righteousness ?  Ah,  yes!  mid  adornment  was  superadded;  they 
received  not  a  bare  appai  el,  but  a  royal  raiment.  You  have  seen  others 
thus  liberally  treated,  does  not  this  induce  you  also  to  come?  Somerf 
us  need  not  confine  our  remarks  to  others,  for  we  can  speak  personally 
of  ourselves.  "We  came  to  Jesus  as  full  of  sin  as  ever  you  can  be,  and 
felt  ourselves  beyond  measure  lost  and  ruined ;  but,  oh,  his  tender  lowj 
I  could  sooner  stand  here  and  weep  than  speak  to  yon  of  it.  My  soul 
jneits  in  gratitude  when  I  think  of  the  infinite  mercy  of  God  to  m^ 


irUMBKB  ORB  THOUSAND;  OB,  ^'BBEAD  ENOUGH  AND  TO  SPARE.**     393 

in  that  hoar  when  I  came  seeking  mercy  at  his  hands.  Oh  !  why  will 
not  yon  also  come?  May  his  Holy  Spirit  sweetly  draw  you !  I  proved 
that  there  was  bread  enough,  mercy  enough,  forgiveness  enough,  and 
to  spare.  Come  along,  come  along,  poor  guilty  one  ;  come  along,  there 
is  room  enough  for  thee. 

Now,  if  the  chief  of  sinners  bear  this  witness,  so  do  the  most  obscure  of 
saints.  If  we  could  call  forth  from  his  seat  a  weak  believer  in  God,  who 
is  almost  unknown  in  the  church,  one  who  sometimes  questions  whether 
lie  is  indeed  a  child  of  God,  and  would  be  willing  to  be  a  hired  servant 
to  long  as  he  might  belong  to  God,  and  if  I  were  to  ask  him,  *'Now 
•after  aU  how  has  the  Lord  dealt  with  you  ?"  what  would  be  his  reply  ? 
Yon  have  many  afflictions,  doubts  and  fears,  but  have  you  any  com- 
plaints against  your  Lord?  When  you  have  waited  upon  him  for 
^aily  grace,  has  he  denied  you  ?  When  you  have  been  full  of  troubles, 
has  ne  refused  you  comfort?  When  you  have  been  plnnged  in  distress, 
has  he  declinea  to  deliver  you?  The  Lord  himself  asks,  **  Have  I 
been  a  wilderness  unto  Israel?"  Testify  against  the  Lord,  ye  his 
people,  if  ye  have  aught  against  him.  Hear,  0  heavens,  and  give  ear, 
"0  earth,  wnosoever  there  be  in  God's  service  who  has  found  him  a  hard 
task-master,  let  him  speak.  Amongst  the  angels  before  Jehovah's 
throne,  and  amongst  men  redeemed  on  earth,  if  there  be  any  one  that 
can  say  he  hath  been  dealt  with  unjustly  or  treated  with  ungenerous 
churlishness,  let  him  lift  up  his  voice !  But  there  is  not  one.  Even  the 
devil  himself  when  he  spoke  of  God  and  of  his  servant  Job,  said,  '*  Doth 
Job  serve  God  for  nought  ? "  Of  course  he  did  not :  God  will  not 
let  his  servants  serve  him  for  nought;  he  will  pay  them  super- 
abundant wages,  and  they  shall  all  bear  witness  that  at  his  table  ^here 
is  '*  bread  enough  and  to  spare."  Now,  if  these  still  enjoy  the  bread  of 
the  Father's  house,  these  who  were  once  great  sinners,  these  who  are 
now  only  very  commonplace  saints,  surely,  sinner,  it  should  encourage 
you  to  say,  "  I  will  arise  and  go  to  my  Father,"  for  his  hired  servants 
"  have  bread  enough  and  to  spare." 

III.  Notice  in  the  third  place,  that  the  text  dwells  upon  the  multi- 
tude OP  THOSE  WHO   HAVE  "  BREAD  ENOUGH    AND    TO    SPARE."      The 

prodigal  lays  an  emphasis  upon  that  word,  "  How  many  hired  servants 
of  my  father's  I"  He  was  thinking  of  their  great  number,  and  counting 
them  ever.  He  thought  of  those  that  tended  the  cattle,  of  those  that 
went  out  with  the  camels,  of  those  that  watched  the  sheep,  and  those 
that  minded  the  com,  and  those  that  waited  in  the  house ;  he  ran  them 
over  in  his  mind  :  his  father  was  great  in  the  land,  and  had  many 
servants ;  yet  he  knew  that  they  all  had  of  the  best  food  **  enough 
and  to  spare."  **  Why  should  I  perish  with  hunger  ?  I  am  only  one  at 
any  rate ;  though  my  hunger  seem  insatiable,  it  is  but  one  belly  that ' 
has  to  be  filled,  and,  lo,  my  father  fills  hundreds,  thousands  every  day ; 
why  should  I  perish  with  hunger?"  Now,  0  thou  awakened  sinner, 
thou  who  dost  feel  this  morning  thy  sin  and  misery,  think  of  the 
numbers  upon  whom  God  has  bestowed  his  grace  already.  Think  of  the 
^countless  hosts  in  heaven :  if  thou  wert  introduced  there  to<day,  thou 
wontdsD  find  it  as  easy  to  tell  the  stars,  or  the  sands  of  the  sea,  as 
to  count  the  multitudes  that  are  before  the  thrv<dne  even  now. 

They  have  come  from  the  east  and  from  the  west,  and  they  are  sitting 


394  METROPOLITAN  TABEllN'ACLE  PULPIT. 

down  with  Abraham,  with '  Isaac,  and  with  Jacob,  and  there  is  room 
enoiit^h  for  thee.  And  beside  those  in  heaven,  think  of  thoEC  on 
oarth.  Blessed  be  God,  his  elect  on  earth  are  to  be  counted  by 
millions,  I  believe,  and  the  days  are  coming,  brighter  days  thin 
those,  when  there  shall  \)e  multitudes  upon  multitudes  brought  to 
know  the  {Saviour,  and  to  rejoice  in  him.  The  Father's  love  is  not  for 
a  few  only,  but  for  an  exceeding  great  company.  A  number  that  no  man 
can  number  will  be  found  in  heaven ;  now,  a  man  can  number  a  toj 
groat  amount.  Set  to  work  your  Newton s,  your  calculators,  they  can 
count  great  numbers,  but  God  and  God  alone  can  tell  the  multitude 
of  his  redeemed.  Now,  sinner,  thou  art  but  one  at  any  rate,  great 
sinner  as  thou  art,  and  the  mercy  of  God  which  embraces  millions  mast 
have  room  enough  in  it  for  thee.  The  sea  which  holds  the  whales  and 
creeping  things  innumerable,  dost  thou  say,  **  It  will  overflow  its  banb 
if  I  bathe  therein"?  The  sun  which  floods  the  universe  with  light, 
canst  thou  sav,  '<  I  should  exhaust  his  beams  if  I  should  ask  him  to 
enlighten  my  darkness  "  ?  Say  not  so.  If  thou  comest  to  thyself  thoa 
wilt  not  tolerate  such  a  thought,  but  thou  wilt  remember  with  hope  the 
richness  of  the  Father's  grace,  even  though  thine  own  poverty  stare 
thee  in  the  face. 

Let  us  add  a  few  words  to  close  with,  close  gi*appling  words  to  some 
of  you  to  whom  God  has  sent  his  message  this  morning,  and  whom  he 
intends  to  save.  0  you  who  have  been  long  hearers  of  the  gospel,  and 
who  know  it  well  in  theory,  but  have  felt  none  of  the  power  of  it  in 
your  hearts,  let  me  now  remind  you  where  and  what  you  are !  Yon 
are  perishing.  As  the  liord  liveth,  there  is  but  ji  step  between  you  and 
deatli ;  but  a  step,  nay,  but  a  breath  between  you  and  hell.  Sinner,  if 
at  tliis  moment  thy  iieart  should  cease  its  beating,  and  there  are  a 
thousand  causes  that  might  produce  that  result  ere  the  clock  ticks 
again,  thou  wouldst  bo  in  the  liaiiies  of  divine  wrath.  Canst  thou  bear 
to  be  in  such  peril  ?  If  you  were  hanging  over  a  rock  by  a  slender 
thread  which  must  socn  break,  and  if  you  would  then  fall  headlong 
<iown  a  terrible  precipice,  you  would  not  sleep,  but  be  full  of  alarm. 
May  you  have  sense  enough,  >>it  enough,  grace  enough,  to  be  alarmed 
until  you  escape  from  the  wrath  to  come. 

Itecollect,  however,  that  while  you  are  perishing,  you  are  perishing 
in  sight  of  plenty;  you  are  famishing  where  a  table  is  abundantly 
spread ;  what  is  more,  there  are  those  whom  you  know  now  sitting  at 
that  table  and  feasting.  "Wliat  sad  perversity  for  a  man  to  persist  in 
l)eiug  starved  in  the  midst  of  a  banquet,  where  others  are  being  satisfied 
with  good  things ! 

But  I  think  I  hear  you  say,  *'  I  fear  I  have  no  right  to  come  to 
Jesus.*'  I  will  ask  you  this  :  have  you  any  right  to  saj  that  till  yon 
have  been  denied  ?  Did  you  ever  try  to  go  to  Christ  ?  Has  he  ever 
rejected  you  ?  If  then  you  have  never  received  a  repulse,  wliy  do  yon 
wickedly  imagine  that  he  would  repel  you  ?  Wickedly,  I  say,  for  ifc  is 
an  offence  against  the  Christ  who  opened  his  heart  upon  the  cross,  to 
imagine  that  he  could  repel  a  i)enitent.  Have  you  any  right  to  aV» 
'*  But  I  am  not  one  of  those  for  whom  mercy  is  provided  "  ?  Who  told 
you  so  ?  Have  you  climbed  to  heaven  and  read  the  secret  recorda  of 
God  election  ?    Has  the  Lord  revealed  a  strange  decree  to  you,  and  said, 


KXIMBEB  ONE  THOUSAND;  OR,  "BREAD  ENOUGH  AND  TO  SPARE."     395 

*  60  and  deepair,  I  will  have  no  pity  on  you  "  ?  If  you  say  that  God 
las  so  spoken,  I  do  not  believe  you.  In  this  sacred  book  is  recorded  what 
3od  has  said,  here  is  the  sure  word  of  testiniony,  and  in  it  I  find  it  said 
>f  no  humble  seeker  that  God  hath  shut  him  out  from  his  grace.  Why 
last  thou  a  right  to  invent  such  a  fiction  in  order  to  secure  thine  own 
lanination  ?  Instead  thereof,  there  is  much  in  the  word  of  God  and 
dsewbere  to  encourage  thee  in  coming  to  Christ.  He  has  not  repelled 
>ne  sinner  yet ;  that  is  good  to  begin  with :  it  is  not  likely  that  he 
i^onld,  for  since  he  died  to  save  sinners,  why  should  he  reject  them 
irhen  they  seek  to  be  saved?  You  say,  "  I  am  afraid  to  come  to  Christ." 
Is  that  wise  ?  I  have  heard  of  a  poor  navigator  who  had  been  con- 
certed, who  had  but  little  education,  but  who  knew  the  grace  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  when  dying,  very  cheerfully  and  joyfully  longed 
l;o  depart.  His  wife  said  to  him,  '^  But,  mon,  ain't  ye  afeared  to  staiid 
Defore  the  judge  ?  "  "  Woman,"  said  he,  "  why  should  I  be  afeared  of 
I  man  as  died  for  me  ?  **  Oh,  why  should  you  be  afraid  of  Christ  who 
lied  for  sinners  ?  The  idea  of  being  afraid  of  him  should  be  banished 
by  the  fact  that  he  shed  his  blood  for  the  guilty.  You  have  much 
reason  to  believe  from  the  very  fact  that  he  died,  that  he  will  receive 
fou.  Besides,  you  have  his  word  for  it,  for  he  saith,  "  Him  that  cometh 
x>  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out " — for  no  reason,  and  in  no  way,  and 
yti  no  occasion,  and  under  no  pretence,  and  for  no  motive.  "  I  will  not 
lot  cast  him  out,"  says  the  original.  *'  Him  that  eometh  to  me  I 
irill  in  no  wise  cast  out."  You  say  it  is  too  good  to  be  true  that 
;here  can  be  pardon  for  yon  :  this  is  a  foolish  measuring  of  God's  com 
irith  your  bushel,  and  because  it  seems  too  good  a  thing  for  you  to 
lecetve,  you  fancy  it  is  too  good  for  God  to  bestow.  Let  the  greatness 
)f  the  good  news  be  one  reason  for  believing  that  the  news  is  true,  for 
t  is  so  like  God. 

**  Who  is  a  pardoning  God  like  thee  ? 
Or  who  hath  grace  so  rich  and  free  ?  " 

Because  the  gospel  assures  us  that  he  forgives  great  sins  through  a 
preat  Saviour,  it  looks  as  if  it  were  true,  since  he  is  so  great  a  God. 

What  should  be  the  result  of  all  this  with  every  sinner  here 
ifc  this  time  ?  I  think  this  good  news  should  arouse  those  who  have 
ilmost  gone  to  sleep  through  despair.  The  sailors  have  been  pumping 
lie  vessel,  the  leaks  are  gaining,  she  is  going  down,  the  captain  is  per- 
maded  she  must  be  a  wreck.  Depressed  by  such  evil  tidings,  the  men 
^se  to  work  ;  and  since  the  boats  are  all  stove  in  and  they  cannot 
nake  a  raft,  they  sit  down  in  despair.  Presently  the  captain  has  better 
lews  for  them..  "  She  will  float,"  he  says ;  "  the  wind  is  abating  too,  the 
pumps  tell  upon  the  water,  the  leak  can  be  reached  yet."  See  how  they 
?ork ;  with  what  cheery  courage  they  toil  on,  because  there  is  hope  ! 
!oal,  there  is  hone !  There  is  hope  I  There  is  hope  !  To  the  harlot, 
a  the  thief,  to  tne  drunkard. 

^  There  is  no  hope,"  says  Satan.  Liar  that  thou  art,  ^t  thee  back 
>  thy  den ;  for  thee  there  is  no  hope  ;  but  for  fallen  man,  though  he 
e  in  the  mire  of  sin  up  to  his  very  neck,  though  he  be  at  the  gates  of 
eathy  while  he  lives  there  is  hope.  There  is  hope  for  hopeless  souls  in 
le  Savionr. 


390  METHOrOLITAX  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

In  addition  to  arousing  us  this  ought  to  elevate  the  sinner's  timmghtL 
Some  years  ago,  there  was  a  crossing-sweeper  in  Dublin,  with  hit 
broom,  at  the  corner,  and  in  all  probability  his  highest  thonghu 
were  to  keej)  the  crossing  clean,  and  look  for  the  pence.  One  day,  a 
lawyer  put  his  hand  uix)n  his  shoulder,  and  said  to  him,  "My good 
fellow,  do  you  know  that  you  are  heir  to  a  fortune  of  ten  thoosaDd 
ix)unds  a  year  ?  '*  **  Do  you  mean  it  ?  "  said  he.  "  I  do,"  he  said.  "I 
have  just  received  the  information  ;  I  am  sure  you  are  the  man."  He 
walked  away,  ami  he  forgot  his  broom.  Arc  you  astonished?  Why, 
who  would  not  have  forgotten  a  broom  when  suddenly  made  possessor 
of  ten  thousand  a  year  ?  So,  I  pray  that  some  poor  sinners,  who  have 
been  thinking  of  the  pleasures  of  the  world,  wlien  they  hear  that  there 
is  ho})e,  and  that  there  is  heaven  to  be  had,  will  forget  the  deceitfbl 
pleasures  of  sin,  and  follow  after  higher  and  better  things. 

Should  it  not  also  purify  the  mind  ?  The  ))rodigal,  when  he  said,  "I 
will  arise  and  go  to  my  father,"  became  in  a  measure  reformed  from 
that  veiy  moment.  How,  say  you  ?  Why,  he  left  the  swine-trongh : 
more,  he  lelt  the  wine  cup,  and  he  left  the  harlots,  lie  did  not  go 
with  the  harlot  on  his  ann,  and  the  wine  cup  in  his  hand,  and  say,  "I 
will  take  these  with  me,  and  go  to  my  father."  It  could  not  be. 
These  were  all  left,  and  though  he  had  no  goodness  to  bring,  yet  he  did 
not  try  to  keep  his  sins  and  come  to  Christ.  1  shall  close  with  this 
remark,  because  it  will  act  as  a  sort  of  caveaf,  and  be  a  fit  word  to 
season  the  wide  invitations  of  the  free  gosjiel.  Some  of  you,  I  fear,  will 
make  mischief  even  out  of  the  gospel,  and  will  dare  to  take  the  crott 
and  use  it  for  a  pibbet  for  your  souls.  If  God  is  so  mercifttl,  you  will 
go  therefore  and  sin  the  more ;  and  because  grace  is  freely  given,  there- 
fore you  will  continue  in  sin  that  grace  may  abound.  If  you  do  this, 
I  would  j^olemnly  remind  you  I  have  no  grace  to  preach  to  such  as  yon 
**  Your  damnation  is  just ; ''  it  is  the  word  of  inspiration,  and  the  only 
one  I  know  that  is  applicable  to  such  as  you  are  ;  but  every  needy, 
guilty  soul  that  desires  a  Saviour  is  told  to-day  to  believe  in  Jesus,  that 
is,  trust  in  the  substitution  and  sacrifice  of  Christ,  trust  him  to  take 
your  sin  and  blot  it  out ;  trust  him  to  t^ike  your  soul  and  save  it  Trust 
Christ  entirely,  and  you  are  forgiven  this  ver}'  moment ;  you  are  saved 
this  very  instant,  and  you  may  rejoice  now  in  the  fact  that  being 
justified  by  faith  you  have  peace  with  (Jod  through  Jesus  Christ  onr 
Lord.  0  come  ye,  come  ye,  come  ye  ;  come  and  welcome ;  come  ye 
HOW  to  the  Kedeemer's  blood.  Holy  Spirit,  compel  them  to  come  in, 
that  the  house  of  mercy  may  be  filled.    Amen,  and  Amen. 


The  ivador,  if  a  telicver  in  Christ,  is  request e<l  to  unite  with  the  preachwin 
praising  tlio  Lonl  for  grace  abundantly  given  in  connection  Mtiih.  thtae  Jwrmeni" 
This  is  tlie  thousandth  of  the  sriaos  of  sornums  which  wo  have  published  COMOOI- 
tivuly  week  by  week  ;  and  of  which  the  circulation  has  continued  toincroatte.  Thesa 
discourses  have  many  of  them  been  reprinted  in  tho  United  ^:Hates,  and  have  also 
been  tninslated  into  Germim,  French,  Swedish,  Dutcli,  Italian,  and  WeWi.  tsowc 
of  them  have  also  been  issued  in  tho  Hung-.irian,  Kussian,  Banish,  Spanish,  Tuhiff^ 
Malagasay,  Maori,  and  Gaelic  tongues.  Of  their  effect,  by  tho  bleissing  of  God'i 
Spirit,  thousands  in  heaven,  and  in  aU  parts  of  the  earth,  arc  joyful  witnoBNB.  K 
we  did  not  praise  God  for  such  mercy  tho  atones  would  try  out. 


P^truplitmi  iUafr^mark  §n\^rt. 


ALTOGETHER  LOVELY. 


%  ^mvion 


DlSLIVEEED  ON  LoBD'S-DAY  MORNINO,  JULY  23BD,   1871,  BY 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT     THE     METROPOLITAN     TABERNACLK,     NKWINQTON. 


**  Yea,  hu  in  altogether  lovely." — Canticlett  v.  16. 

HEN  the  old  Pari  tan  minister  had  delivered  his  disconrse,  and  dwelt 
on  firstly,  and  secondly,  and  thirdly,  and  perhaps  upon  twenty-fifkhly, 
"ore  he  sat  down  he  usually  gave  a  comprehensive  summary  of  all  that 
had  spoken.  Every  one  who  carefully  noted  the  summary  would 
Tj  away  the  essence  of  the  sermon.  The  summary  was  always 
ked  upon  by  the  Puritan  hearer  as  one  of  th.e  most  valuable  helps  to 
morv,  and  consequently  a  most  important  pnrt  of  the  discourse.  In 
«e  live  words,  the  spouse  here  gives  you  her  summary.  She  had 
ivered  a  tenfold  discourse  concerning  her  Lord  ;  she  had  describcKl 
detail  all  his  various  beauties,  and  when  she  had  surveyed  him  from  head 
foot,  she  gathered  up  all  her  commendations  in  this  sentence :  "  Yea, 
is  altogether  lovely."  Remember  these  words,  and  know  their 
aning,  and  you  possess  the  quintessence  of  the  spouse's  portion  of 
;  Song  of  Songs.  Now,  as  in  this  allegorical  eong,  the  bride  sums  up 
r  witness  in  these  words,  so  may  I  say  that  all  the  patriarchs,  all  the 
>phet8,  all  the  apostles,  all  the  confessors,  yea,  and  the  entire  body 
the  church  have  left  us  no  other  testimony.  They  all  spoke  of 
rist,  and  they  all  commended  him.  Whatever  the  type,  or  symbol, 
obscure  oracle,  or  open  word  in  which  they  bore  witness,  that 
tness  all  amounted  to  this:  "Yea, he  is  altogether  lovely."  Yes,  and 
rill  add,  that  since  the  canon  of  inspiration  has  closed,  the  testimony  of 
saints,  on  earth  and  in  heaven,  has  continued  to  confirm  the  declnra- 
n  made  of  old.  The  verdict  of  each  particular  saint  and  of  the  whole 
ct  host  as  a  body,  still  is  this,  "  Yea,  he  is  altogether  lovely."  From 
5  sighs  and  the  songs  which  mingle  on  the  dying  beds  of  saints,  I 
ir  this  note  supreme  above  all  others,  *'  lie  is  altogether  lovely ;  " 
ifrom  the  songs  unmingled  with  groans,  which  perpetually  peal  furth 
m  immortal  tongues  before  the  presence  of  the  Most  High,  I  hear  this 
!  master  note.  "  Yea,  he  is  altogether  lovely."  If  the  whole  church 
ired  to  say  with  the  apostle,  "  Now  of  the  things  which  we  have 
foe.  1,001-2. 


398  M£T£OPULITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPJT. 

spoken  this  is  the  snm."  she  need  not  wait  for  a  brief  and  oomprdieiim 
summary,  for  it  lies  before  her  in  this  golden  sentence,  '^Yea,heii 
alton:ether  lovely.** 

Lookin<^  at  my  text  in  this  light  I  felt  mnch  humbling  of  spirit^  and 
I  hesitated  to  preach  upon  it,  for  I  said  in  mj  heart,  "  It  is  high,  I 
cannot  attain  unto  it."  These  deep  texts  show  us  the  shortnen  of 
our  plumb-line ;  these  ocean  verses  are  so  exceeding  broad  thatonr 
skiffs  are  apt  to  be  driven  far  out  of  si^ht  of  land  where  our  timid 
spirits  tremble  to  spread  the  sail.  Then  I  comforted  myself  by  the 
tlioui^ht  that  though  I  could  not  comprehend  this  text  in  a  measure,  dot 
weigh  its  mountains  in  scales,  or  its  hills  in  a  balance,  yet  it  wm  all  mine 
own,  by  the  gift  of  divine  grace,  and  therefore  I  need  not  fear  to  enter 
upon  the  meditation  of  it.  If  1  cannot  grasp  the  ocean  in  my  6pan,yei 
may  I  bathe  therein  with  sweet  content;  if  I  cannot  de8cril)e  tneking 
in  liis  beauty,  yet  may  I  gaze  upon  him,  since  the  old  proverb  saith,  "A 
bc'gtrar  may  look  at  a  prince.**  Though  I  pretend  not  so  to  preach  from 
bucli  a  heavenly  word  as  that  before  us,  as  to  spread  before  you  all  ita 
marrow  and  fatness,  yet  may  I  gather  up  a  few  crumbs  which  fall  from 
its  tablet  Poor  men  are  glad  of  crumbs,  and  crumbs  from  such  a  feart 
are  better  tliau  loaves  from  the  tables  of  the  world.  Better  to  bare  a 
glimpse  of  Jesus,  than  to  see  all  the  glory  of  the.  earth  all  the  days  of 
ou  r  1 1 le.  I  f  we  fai  1  on  t li  is  subject  we  may  do  better  than  if  we  sncc^ded 
u\ion  another;  so  we  will  pluck  up  courage,  seek  diriue  help,  and  draw 
ntar  to  this  wondrous  text,  with  our  shoes  from  off  our  feet  like  Mow 
wiieu  he  saw  the  bush  aglow  with  God. 

This  verse  has  been  translated  in  another  way  :  "  He  is  all  desires;  * 
and  so  indeed  Josus  is.  He  was  the  desire  of  the  ancients,  he  is  the 
dchin- of  all  nations  still.  To  his  own  people  he  is  their  all  in  all; 
they  arc  cumplete  in  him  ;  they  are  filled  out  of  his  fulness. 

"  All  our  capacioufl  powers  can  wish, 
in  him  doth  richly  meet.'* 

He  is  the  delight  of  his  servants,  and  fills  their  expectations  to  the  foil. 
But  we  will  not  dispute  about  translations,  for,  after  all,  with  anch  a 
text,  so  full  of  unutterable  spiritual  sweetness,  every  man  must  be  hia 
own  translator,  and  into  his  own  soul  must  the  power  of  the  message 
come,  by  the  enforcement  of  the  Holy  Ghost  Such  a  text  as  this  is 
very  like  the  manna  which  fell  in  the  wilderness,  of  which  the  rabbis  say 
it  tasted  alter  each  man*s  liking.  If  the  flavour  in  a  man*s  month  was 
very  sweetness,  the  angePs  food  which  fell  around  tlie  camp  was  InsciouB 
as  any  dainty  he  had  conceived;  whatever  he  might  be,  the  manua 
was  to  him  as  he  was.  So  shall  this  text  be.  To  vou  with  low  ideas 
of  Christ  the  words  shall  but  glide  over  your  ears,  and  be  meaningless; 
but  if  your  spirit  be  ravished  with  the  precious  love  of  Jesus  there 
shall  be  songs  of  angels,  and  more  than  that,  the  voice  of  God's  own 
Spirit  to  your  soul  in  this  short  sentence,  "Yea,  he  is  altogether 
lovely.*' 

I  am  an  engraver  this  morning,  and  I  seek  somewhat  whereon  I  may 
engrave  this  heavenly  line.  Shall  I  take  unto  me  ivory  or  Bilvo*? 
Shall  I  borrow  crystal  or  gold  ?  These  are  too  common  to  bear  this 
nni<jnc  inscription :  1  put  them  all  aside.    Shall  I  spell  my  text  in  gems, 


\ 


ILTOGKTHEE  LOVELY.  899 

with  an  emerald,  a  sapphire,  a  ruby,  a  diamond,  or  a  pearl  for  each 
single  letter  ?  Na^,  these  are  poor  perishable  things :  we  pat  them  all 
awaj.  I  want  an  immortal  spirit  to  be  the  tablet  for  mj  writing  ;  nay, 
I  must  lay  aside  my  graving  tool,  and  ask  the  Spirit  of  God  to  taJce  it : 
I  want  a  heart  prepared  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  npon  whose  fleshy  tablets 
tiiere  shall  be  written  this  morning  no  other  sentence  than  this,  and 
this  shall  snflSce  for  a  right  royal  motto  to  adorn  it  well :  *'  Yea,  he  is 
altogether  lovely."  Spirit  of  God,  find  oat  the  prepared  heart,  and 
with  thy  sacred  hand  write  in  eternal  characters  the  love  of  Christ,  and 
all  his  inimitable  perfections. 

In  handling  oar  text  this  morning  we  shall  note  three  points  of 
character,  and  then  we  shall  show  three  nses  to  which  we  may  profitably 
tnm  it. 

I.  We  shall  consider  three  points  of  charactter  which  are  very 
noticeable  in  these  words,  and  the  first  which  suggests  itself  is  this : 
die  words  are  evidently  uttered  by  one  who  is  under  the  influence  of 
wenvhelming  emotion.  The  words  are  rather  a  veil  to  the  heart  than  a 
glass  through  which  we  see  its  emotiouR.  The  sentence  labours  to  ex- 
press the  inexpressible  ;  it  pants  to  utter  the  unutterable.  The  person 
writing  these  words  evidently  feels  a  great  deal  more  than  any  language 
can  possibly  convey  to  us.  The  spouse  begins  somewhat  calmly  in  her 
description :  "  My  beloved  is  white  and  ruddy.*'  She  proceeds  with 
due  order,  commencing  at  the  head,  and  proceeding  with  the  divers 
parts  of  the  person  of  the  Beloved ;  but  she  warms,  she  glows,  she 
flames,  and  at  last  the  heat  which  had  for  awhile  been  repressed  is  like 
fire  within  her  bones,  and  she  bursts  forth  in  flaming  words.  Here  is 
Uie  live  coal  from  off  the  altar  of  her  heart :  *'  Yea,  he  is  altogether 
lovely."  It  is  the  utterance  of  a  soul  that  is  altogether  overcome  with 
admiration,  and  therefore  feels  that  in  attempting  to  describe  the  Well- 
beloved,  it  has  undertaken  a  task  beyond  its  power.  Lost  in  adoring 
wonder,  the  gracious  1  mind  desists  from  description,  and  cries  with 
rapture,  "  Yea,  he  is  altogether  lovely."  It  has  often  been  thus  with 
true  saints  ;  they  have  felt  the  love  of  Jesus  to  be  overpowering  and 
inebriating.  Believers  are  not  always  cool  and  calm  in  their  thoughts 
towards  their  Lord  :  thore  are  seasons  with  them  when  they  pass  into  a 
state  of  rapture,  their  hearts  burn  within  them,  they  are  m  ecstacy, 
they  mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles,  their  souls  become  like  the  chariots 
of  Amminadib,  they  feel  what  they  could  not  tell,  they  experience  what 
they  could  not  express  though  the  tongues  of  men  and  of  angels  were 
perfectly  at  their  command.  Favoured  believers  are  altogether  en- 
raptured with  the  sight  they  have  of  their  all-beauteous  Lord.  It  is 
to  be  feared  that  such  raptures  are  not  frequent  with  all  Christians, 
though  I  should  gravely  question  his  saintship,  who  has  never  ex- 
perienced any  degree  of  holy  rapture :  but  there  are  some  saints  to  whom 
a  state  of  overwhelming  adoration  of  their  Lord  has  been  by  no 
means  an  unusual  thing.  Communion  with  Jesus  has  not  only 
entranced  them  now  and  then,  hvX  it  has  perfumed  all  their  life  with 
holiness;  and  if  it  has  not  caused  their  faces  literally  to  shine  like  the 
iJKe  of  Moses,  it  has  made  the  spiritual  glory  to  flash  from  their  counte- 
nances, and  elevated  them  among  their  fellow  Christians  to  be  leaders 
of  the   host  of  God,  whereat   others  have  admired  and  wondered. 


4iM)  MLTHUI'ULITAN   TAUKUNACLR   PUU'IT. 

I'crad venture,  J  HjK'ak  to  diildrcii  of  (JoJ  who  know  very  little  of  tliit 
I  mean  bv  the  ovcrwhehning  emotions  created  hy  a  sight  of  onr  I/ird; 
they  have  not  ro  v^eeu  tlie  Lord  as  to  have  felt  their  sonls  meltiiw 
within  them  while  the  Beloved  spake  with  them;  to  p.nch  I  shol 
8j>eak  with  sorrowful  sympathy,  being,  alas !  too  much  like  onto  them, 
but  my  prayer  shall  ^'o  up  afl  the  while,  **  Lord,  reveal  thyself  tons, 
that  we  also  may  be  compelled  to  say,  '  Yea,  he  is  al toother  lovely.* 
Show  us  thy  hands  and  thy  side  till  we  exclaim  with  Thomag, '  Mj  Lord 
and  uiy  God.' " 

iShail  I  lell  you  why  it  is,  my  brethren,  that  many  of  yea  but  seldom 
enjoy  the  exceedin«(  bliss  of  Jesus*  presence?  The  cause  may  lie 
[)artiy  in  what  is,  alas!  too  common  among  Christians,  a  greal  degm 
of  iijiwrance  of  the  [terson  of  the  Lord  Je.^tiis.  Every  soul  that  sees  Jesu 
by  faith  is  saved  thereby.  If  I  look  to  Christ  with  a  bleared  eye,  that 
is  ever  so  weak  and  clouded  with  tears,  and  if  I  only  catch  a  glimpse 
of  him  through  clouds  and  mists,  yet  the  sight  saves  me.  But  who  will 
remain  content  with  such  a  poor  gleam  of  his  glory  as  that  ?  Who 
wishes  to  see  only  '*  through  a  glaas,  darkly  **  ?  No,  let  my  eyes  be  cleansed' 
till  they  become  as  doves  by  the  rivers  of  waters,  and  1  can  see  my  Lord 
ns  he  is  socn  by  his  bosom  friends,  and  can  sing  of  those  beauties  which 
arc  the  light  and  crown  of  heaven  itself.  If  you  do  but  touch  the  hem 
of  Jesus'  irairiuent,  you  shall  be  made  whole:  but  will  this  always  6ati^fy 
vou  ?  AVill  vou  not  desire  to  i^et  bevond  the  hem  and  bevond  the 
^rarincnt,  to  hinisdf,  and  to  his  heart,  and  there  for  ever  take  up  yonr 
ab(Kle  .'  AVho  desires  to  be  for  ever  a  babe  in  grace,  with  a  half- 
awakened  dreamy  twilight  ennsciousuess  nt'  the  Kedeemer  ?  Ba*threii, 
Ikj  diligent  in  the  seliool  of  the  cross,  therein  is  enduring  wisdom. 
Study  your  Saviour  much.  I'he  science  of  Christ  cruciticd  is  tho  most 
excellent  of  sciences :  and  to  know  him  and  the  |K)wer  of  his  rcsurrectiou, 
is  to  know  that  which  is  best  worth  knowini^.  Ignorance  of  Jesus 
deja'ives  many  wiints  of  those  divine  raptures  which  carry  uthere 
out  of  themselves,  therefore  let  us  be  among  those  children  of  Ziou  who 
are  taught  of  the  Lord. 

Next  to  this  von  shall  find  i/ic  want  of  meditation  to  be  a  veiy 
serious  robber  of  the  wealth  of  renewed  hearts.  To  believe  a  thing  is, 
as  it  were,  to  see  the  cool  crystal  sparkling  in  the  cup ;  but  to  meditate 
upon  it  is  to  drink  thereof.  Reading  gathers  the  clusters,  contempla- 
tion squeezes  forth  their  generous  juice.  Meditation  is  of  all  things  the 
most  soul-fattening  when  combined  with  prayer.  The  spouse  had  medi- 
tated much  in  this  chapter,  for  otherwise  she  had  not  been  able  to  speak  ia 
detail  concerning  her  Lord.  0  saintly  hearts,  imitate  ye  her  example! 
Think,  my  brethren,  of  our  Lord  Jesus :  he  is  God,  the  Etcmai,  the 
infinite,  the  ever  blessed;  yet  he  became  man  for  us — ^man  of  the  substance 
of  his  mother,  like  ourselves.  ^leditate  upon  his  spotless  chaxactcr; 
review  the  su  He  rings  which  he  endured  on  Calvary;  follow  him  into  the 
grave,  and  from  the  grave  to  the  resurrection,  and  from  the  resurrection 
up  the  starry  way  to  his  triumphant  throne.  Let  your  souls  dwell  upon 
CMch  of  his  oliices,  as  prophet,  priest,  and  king  ;  pore  over  each  one  of 
his  characters,  and  every  scriptural  title  ;  pause  and  consider  every  phase 
i't*  him,  and  when  vou  have  done  this,  beifin  a^irainand  vet  again.  Iti« 
•'oud  to  chew   the  cud  bv  meditation,  then  shall  the  sweetness  anu 


ALTOGETHER  LOVELY.  401 

ktness  of  diyine  truth  come  to  jonr  soul,  and  yon  8ball  burst  forth  with 
mch  rapturous  expressions  as  that  of  the  text,  *'  Yea,  he  is  altogether 
OTely."  The  most  of  you  are  too  busy,  you  have  too  much  to  do  in 
Jie  world  ;  but  what  is  it  all  about  ?  Scraping  together  dust,  loading 
ronrselTes  with  thick  clay.  0  that  you  were  busy  after  the  true 
iches,  and  could  step  aside  awhile  to  enrich  yourselves  in  solitude,  and 
nake  your  hearts  vigorous  by  feeding  upon  the  person  and  work  of  your 
jver  blessed  Lord  I  You  miss  a  heaven  below  by  a  too  eager  pursuit  of 
sarfch.  Yon  cannot  know  these  joyful  raptures  if  meditation  be  pushed 
into  8  comer. 

Another  reason  why  little  of  the  Lord's  beauty  is  discerned,  is  tJie 
bw  state  of  the  spiritual  life  in  matiy  a  Christian,  Many  a  believer  is 
just  alive  and  no  more.  Do  you  not  know  such  starveling  souls  ?  May 
you  not  be  one  such  yourself!  His  eyes  are  not  delighted  with  the 
beauties  of  Christ,  he  is  purblind,  and  cannot  see  afar  ofp;  he  walks 
not  with  Jesus  in  the  garden  of  pomegranates,  he  is  too  feeble  to  rise 
from  the  couch  of  weakness ;  be  cannot  feed  upon  Christ,  his  appetite  is 
pone — sure  sign  of  terrible  decline.  For  him  there  are  no  clirabings  to 
tlie  top  of  Amana,  no  leaping  for  joy  in  the  temple,  no  dancing  before 
the  ark  with  David;  no,  if  he  be  but  carried  to  the  feet  of  Jesus  in  an 
lunbnlance  as  a  sick  man  borne  of  four,  it  is  as  much  as  he  has  yet 
received.  To  be  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  his  might,  to 
have  tlie  wings  of  eagles  with  which  to  mount  above  the  clouds  of. 
Mtrth,  to  this  many  are  strangers.  But  beloved,  there  are  noble  spirits 
ind  better  taught,  who  know  something  of  the  life  of  heaven  even  while 
jere  below.  The  Lord  strengthen  us  with  grace  in  our  inner  man,  and 
hen  shall  we  drink  deeper  draughts  of  the  wines  on  the  lees  well  refined, 
ind  then  also  our  eyes  being  open,  we  shall  see  Jesus  more  clearly,  and 
year  fuller  witness  that  he  is  "  fairer  than  the  ehildi-en  of  men.'* 

I  am  afraid  that  ilie  visits  of  Christ  to  our  souls  have  been  disesteemed, 
tfid  the  toss  of  tfione  visits  Jias  not  caused  us  corresponding  sorrow. 
I¥e  did  not  sutficiently  delight  in  the  beauty  of  the  Bridegroom 
irhen  he  did  come  to  us ;  when  our  hearts  were  somewhat  lifted  up 
rith  his  love  we  grew  cold  and  idle,  and  then  he  withdrew  his 
xmseious  presence ;  but,  alas !  we  were  not  grieved,  but  we  wickedly 
:ried  to  live  without  him.  It  is  wretched  work  for  a  believer  to  try 
ind  live  without  his  Saviour.  Perhaps,  dear  brethren,  some  of  you 
lave  tried  it  until  at  last  you  have  almost  succeeded.  You  were  wont 
to  mourn  like  doves  if  you  had  no  word  from  your  Master  in  the  morn- 
ing, and  without  a  love-token  before  you  went  to  rest  you  tossed  uneasily 
upon  your  bed ;  but  now  you  are  carnal  and  worldly,  and  careless,  and 
quite  content  to  have  it  so.  Jesus  hides  his  face,  the  sun  is  set,  and  yet 
it  is  not  night  with  you.  0  may  God  be  pleased  to  arouse  you  from 
this  lethargy,  and  make  you  mourn  your  sad  estate !  Even  if  an  afflic- 
tion should  ))e  needful  to  bring  you  back  from  your  backsliding  it 
tould  be  a  cheap  price  to  ]>ay.  Awake,  0  north  wind,  with  all  thy 
sntting  force,  if  thy  bleak  breath  may  but  stir  tlie  lethargic  heart !  May 
the  Lord  grant  us  grace  so  to  love  Christ  that  if  we  have  not  onr  fill  of 
Hm,  we  may  be  ready  to  die  with  hungering  and  thirsting  after  him.  May 
fe  never  be  able  to  find  a  place  to  build  our  nest  upon  while  our  wing 
^andbrs  away  from  the  tree  of  life.    Like  the  dove  of  Noah,  may  we 


402  METBOFOLITAN  TABSUf  AOLI  PULPIT. 

drop  into  tlie  water  and  be  drowned  sooner  \han  find  rest  ftr  the  ide  rf 
our  foot  except  upon  the  ark,  Christ  Jesns,  oar  Sayionr. 

Beloved,  if  none  of  these  suggestions  should  hit  the  maifc,  ul 
reveal  the  cause  why  so  little  is  known  of  raptarons  lore  to  ChriBi,  Id 
me  suggest  another.  Very  often  profMsors'  hearU  am  vain  and/rwokm; 
they  are  taken  up  during  the  week  with  their  business,  lliis  mijeht 
plead  some  excuse ;  but  when  they  have  little  spaces  and  intenrals  then 
are  tilled  up  with  very  vanity.  Now,  if  the  soul  has  come  to  look  A 
the  mere  trifles  of  this  world  as  all-important,  is  it  any  murel  that  it 
Rliould  be  unable  to  perceive  the  exceeding  preciousness  of  Ohrist  Jesni? 
Who  will  care  for  the  wheat  when  he  dotes  on  the  chaff?  And  with 
this  it  will  oft^n  happen  that  the  professor's  mind  has  grown  proud  « 
well  as  vain  ;  he  does  not  remember  his  natural  poverty  aad  meanneni 
and  consequently  does  not  value  the  riches  of  Ohrist  Jesns.  Hehtt 
come  to  think  himself  an  established,  experienced  Christian;  he  fanciei 
that  he  is  not  like  those  foolish  beginners  who  are  so  volatile  and  soreidilj 
led  astray ;  he  has  acquired  the  wisdom  of  years  and  the  stability  or 
experience.  0  soul,  if  thou  art  great,  Christ  will  be  little;  thou  cant 
never  see  him  on  the  throne  until  thon  hast  been  on  thedanghill  thjselC 
If  thou  be  anything,  so  much  the  less  is  Christ ;  for  if  he  be  all  in  all, 
then  there  is  no  room  for  anything  else ;  and  if  thou  be  somethin^i 
thou  hast  stolon  just  so  much  from  the  glory  of  thy  Lord  Jesus.  Ua 
low  in  the  dust,  it  is  the  place  ibr  thee. 

"  The  more  thy  glories  strike  my  eyes, 
The  humbler  1  shall  lie." 

The  hnmbkr  I  am  in  myself,  the  more  shall  I  be  ca}>able  of  seeing  tba 
enchant  in;;  l)oautie«  of  Christ. 

Let  me  just  say  these  two  or  three  words.  I  believe  those  are  tha 
huppioHt  8ainls  who  are  most  overwhelmed  with  a  sense  of  the  grcet- 
nci>s,  goodness,  and  preciousness  of  Christ.  I  believe  these  to  ba 
the  most  useful  saints,  also,  and  to  be  in  the  Christian  church  as  a  tower 
of  strength.  I  pray  that  you  and  I,  walking  with  God  by  faith,  may 
nevertheless  often  have  our  festival  days,  our  notable  seasons,  when  he 
shnll  spLrially  kiss  us  with  the  kisses  of  his  love,  and  we  shall  driok 
larger  draughts  of  his  love,  which  is  better  than  wine.  Oh !  to  be  carried 
right  away  with  the  divine  manifi-^station  of  the  chief  among  ten 
thousand,  so  that  our  sottls  shall  cry  out  in  rapture,  **  Yea,  ha  is 
alto«:ether  lovely."  This  is  one  characteristic  of  the  text:  may  it  be 
transfeiTcd  to  us. 

2.  A  second  is  this,  and  very  manifest  it  is  upon  the  surface  of  tha 
verse — here  is  umlivuicd  affection,  **  He  is  altogether  lovely."  Note 
that  these  words  have  a  world  of  meaning  in  them,  but  chiefly  they  tell 
us  this,  that  Jesus  is  to  the  true  saint  the  only  lovely  one  in  the  world. 
*•  He  is  altogether  lovely ;"  then  there  is  no  loveliness  any  where  elsft  It 
is  as  though  the  spouse  felt  that  Christ  had  engrossed  all  the  beauty  and aU 
the  loveworthinessin  the  entire  universe.  Who  among  us  will  say  that  aba 
erred?  Is  not  Jesns  worthy  of  all  the  admiration  and  love  of  all 
iuLelligenfe  beings?  But  may  we  not  love  our  friends  and  kinsfolk? 
Ay,  but  in  him,  and  in  subservience  to  him ;  so,  and  so  only,  is  it  aafc 

love  them.    Did  not  our  I/ord  himself  say,  "  If  any  man  lore  ftther 


ALTOGKTHKR  LOVELY.  40S 

or  mother  more  than  me,  he  is  not  worthy  of  me  "  ?  Yea,  and  in  another 
pkce  he  put  it  more  strongly  still,  for  he  said,  ''  Except  a  man  hate 
father  and  mother,"  or  love  them  not  at  all  in  comparison  with  me,  *'  he 
is  not  worthy  of  me."  Exceot  these  are  pat  on  a  lower  sta^^e 
than  Jesus  is  we  cannot  be  his  aisciples.  Christ  must  be  monarch  in 
the  breast;  our  dear  ones  may  sit  at  his  footstool,  and  we  may  lore 
them  for  his  sake,  but  he  alone  must  fill  the  throne  of  our  hearts.  I 
may  aee  excellences  in  my  Christian  brethren,  bat  I  must  not  forget 
that  there  would  be  none  in  them  if  they  were  not  deriyed  from  him; 
that  their  loveliness  is  only  a  part  of  his  loTeliness,  for  he  wrought  it 
in  them  by  his  own  Spirit.  I  am  to  acknowledge  that  Josus  is  the 
monopoliser  of  all  loveliness,  the  engrosser  of  all  that  is  admirable 
in  the  entire  universe  ;  and  I  am,  therefore,  to  give  him  all  my  love, 
for  "  he  is  altogether  lovely." 

Our  text  means,  again,  tliat  in  Jesus  loveliness  of  all  kinds  is  to  be 
found.    If  there  be  anything  that  is  worthy  of  the  love  of  an  immortal 

Sirit,  it  is  to  be  seen  in  abandance  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  Whatsoever 
ings  are  trae,  whatsoever  things  are  honest,  whatsoever  things  are  just, 
whatsoever  things  are  pure,  whatsoever  things  are  lovely,  whatsoever 
things  are  of  good  report ;  if  there  be  any  virtue,  and  if  there  be  any 
praise,  all  can  be  found  without  measure  in  Christ  Jesus.  As  all  the 
rivers  meet  in  the  sea,  so  all  beauties  unite  in  the  Redeemer.  Take  the 
character  of  any  gracious  man,  and  you  shall  find  a  measure  of  loveli- 
nesfi,  but  it  has  its  bounds  and  its  mixtures.  Peter  has  many  virtues, 
but  he  has  not  a  few  failings.  John,  too,  excels,  but  in  certain  points  he 
is  deficient  J  but  herein  our  Lord  transcends  all  his  saints,  for  all 
human  virtues,  all  divine,  are  harmoniously  blended  in  him.  He  is  not 
this  flowor  or  that,  but  he  is  the  Paradise  of  f)erfecti(m.  He  is  not  a 
star  here  or  a  constellatitm  there,  he  is  the  whole  heaven  of  stars,  nay, 
he  is  the  heaven  of  heavens;  he  is  all  that  is  fair  and  lovely  condensed 
in  one. 

"When  the  text  snys  again  that  Jesus  *'is  altogether  lovely,"  it  derjures 
that  he  ib  lovely  in  all  views  of  him.  It  generally  hjipj)eii8  that  to  the 
noblest  building  there  is  an  unhappy  point  of  view  from  wliieh  the 
architecture  appears  at  a  disadvantage;  the  choicest  pieee  of  workman- 
ship may  not  he  ecpally  complete  in  all  directions;  the  best  human 
character  is  deformed  by  one  flaw,  if  not  with  more  ;  but  with  our  Lord 
all  is  lovely,  regard  hiuL  as  you  will.  You  shall  contemplate  him  from 
all  points,  and  only  find  new  confirmation  of  the  statement  that ''  he  is 
altogether  lovely,"  As  the  everlasting  God  before  the  world  was  made, 
angels  loved  him  and  adored;  as  the  babe  at  Bethlehem  or  as  the  man 
at  Bethany;  as  walking  the  sea  or  as  nailed  to  the  cross;  in  his  ^mive, 
dead,  and  buried,  or  on  his  throne  triumphant ;  rising  as  forerunner,  or 
descending  a  second  time  to  judge  the  world  in  righteousness;  in  his 
shame,  despised  and  spit  upon,  or  in  his  glory,  adored  and  beloved ; 
with  the  thorns  about  bis  brow  and  the  nails  piercing  his  hands,  or 
with  the  keys  of  death  and  hell  swinging  at  his  girdle ;   view  him  ns 

Gm  will,  and  where  you  will,  and  when  you  will,  "he  is  altogether 
vely."  Under  all  aspects,  and  in  all  offices  and  in  relations,  nt  all 
times  and  all  seasons,  under  all  circumstances  and  conditions,  anywhere, 
everywhere,  "  he  is  altogether  lovely." 


4U4  MKTUOPOJilTAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Nor  is  he  in  any  dc'(;i'ee  unlovely;  the  commendation  forbids  die 
idea  ;  if  he  be  "  altoj^eLher  lovely,"  where  could  you  find  room  for  de- 
furniity?  AVlien  Apolles  painted  Alexander,  he  laid  the  monarch*! 
iinuor  on  an  unsi<rhtly  scar;  but  theie  are  no  scars  to  conceal  when  yon 
l^ourtray  the  countenance  of  Immanucl.  "We  say  of  our  conntiy— And 
wiio  amonf^  us  will  not  say  it? — *'With  all  her  faults  we  love  her 
•;till ;''  but  we  love  Jesus,  and  find  no  strain  put  upon  oar  heaiti 
for  trace  of  fauU  he  has  none.  There  is  no  need  of  apologiea  for 
Jesus,  no  excuses  are  required  for  him.  But  what  is  that  I  see 
upon  his  shoulder  ?  It  is  a  hard  rough  cross ;  and  if  I  follow  him 
I  must  carry  that  cross  for  his  sake.  Is  not  that  croes  unsightly! 
Oh,  no  I  he  is  alto«rcther  lovely,  cross  and  all.  Whatever  it  may 
invt)lve  to  be  a  Christian,  we  count  even  the  reproach  of  Christ 
to  be  ji:n'r.icr  riches  than  the  treasures  of  Egypt.  The  world  will 
iionour  a  half  Christ,  but  a  whole  Christ  it  will  not  acknowledge. 
The  bats-eyed  Socinian  sjiith,  *'  I  admire  thg  man  Christy  but  I  will 
not  adore  Jesus  the  God."  To  him  the  eternal  word  is  but  half  lorelv, 
if  lovely  at  all.  Some  will  liave  Christ  the  exemplar,  but  they  will 
not  accept  him  as  the  vicarious  sacrifice  for  sin,  the  snbstitote  for 
sinners.  Many  will  have  Christ  in  silverslippers— my  lord  archbishop's 
reli;ru)n — but  they  would  not  listen  to  the  gospel  from  a  poor  gracious 
Methodist,  or  think  it  worth  their  while  to  join  the  unlettered  throug 
whose  devout  son«rs  rise  from  the  village  green.  Alas  I  how  much  we  sec 
of  crosses  of  jrold  and  ivory,  but  how  little  do  men  love  the  lowly  cross 
of  JesnsI  Breihren,  we  think  Jesus  **  altogether  lovely  "even  in  poverty, 
or  when  hanjrinsr  naked  on  the  cross,  deserted  and  condemned.  We  see 
unsjHjakable  beauty  in  Jesus  in  the  grave,  all  fair  with  the  pallor  of 
death.  Jesus  bruised  as  to  his  heel  by  the  old  serpent  is  yet  comely. 
His  love  to  us  makes  him  evermore  *' white  and  ruddy"  to  our  eye.  We 
atlore  him  anywlieie  and  every wiiere,  and  in  any  place,  for  we  know 
that  this  saint;  Christ  whose  heel  is  iMHiised  breaks  also  the  serpent's 
htail,  Jiud  he  who  was  naked  for  our  sakes,  is  now  arrayed  in  glorj'.  We 
know  that  tlic  despised  and  rejected  is  also  King  of  king^s,  and  Lord 
of  lords,  the  "Wonderful,  Counsellor,  The  Mighty  God,  The  Ever- 
last-inj;  Fathei".  The  Prince  of  Peace."  **  Yea,  he  is  altogether  lovely." 
There  are  no  flaws  in  him. 

The  text  intends  us  to  know  that  Jesus  is  lovely  in  the  highest 
degree:  not  lovely  positively  and  then  failing  comparatively,  but  lovely 
superlatively,  in  ihe  highesL  possible  sense.  But  I  leave  this  for  your 
hearts  to  enlarge  upon.  I  will  close  this  point  by  saying,  every  child 
of  Goil  acknowledges  that  Christ  Jesus  is  lovely  altogether  to  the  whole  of 
himself.  He  is  lovely  to  my  judgment;  but  many  things  nre  so,  and 
yet  are  not  lovely  to  my  atlectious;  I  know  them  to  be  right,  and  yet 
iliey  are  not  pleasiuit  :  but  Jesus  is  as  lovely  to  my  heart  as  to  my 
head,  as  dear  its  lie  is  good.  He  is  lovely  to  my  hopes  :  are  they  not 
all  in  liini  ?  Is  not  this  my  expectation — to  see  him  as  he  is?  But 
he  is  lovely  to  my  memory  too :  did  ho  not  pluck  me  out  of  the  net? 
Lovely  to  all  my  powers  and  all  my  passions,  my  faculties  and  feelings. 
As  l)avid  pnts  it,  *'My  heart  and  my  tiesh  cricth  oat  for  the  living 
(iod  " — th(»  whole  of  tiie  man  seeking  after  the  whole  of  the  Saviour; 
the  whole  Saviour  sweet  and  inexpressibly  precious  to  the  man's  entire 


AI.lf)(iJ.TnKR    LOVKi.Y.  40.') 

beiii<j.  May  it  be  so  with  you  and  with  me.  Bat  is  it  so?  Do  you 
uot  set  up  idolB  in  your  hcnvts  ?  Men  of  God,  do  you  not  need  to  take 
the  scourge  of  Rmnll  chords,  and  purji^e  the  temple  of  your  souls  this 
morning?  Are  there  not  buyers  and  sellers  where  Christ  alone  ought 
to  be?  Oh,  to  love  him  wholly,  and  to  love  him  only,  bo  that  we 
have  no  eyes  for  other  benuty,  no  heart  for  other  loveliness,  since  he 
fills  our  souls,  and  is  to  us  "  altogether  lovely.'* 

3.  The  third  characteristic  of  the  text  is  that  to  which  I  desire  to 
draw  the  roost  attention,  and  that  is  ardent  devotion.  I  called  the  text 
a  lire  coal  from  off  the  altar,  and  surely  it  is  so.  If  it  should  drop  into 
our  hearts  to  set  them  on  a  blnze,  it  would  be  an  unspeakable  mercy. 
Ardent  devotion  flames  from  this  sentence.  It  is  the  language  of  one  who 
feels  that  no  emotion  is  too  deep  when  Jesus  moves  the  heart.  Do  any 
chide  you  and  say  you  think  too  much  of  your  religion  ?  It  cannot  be,  it 
cannot  be.  If  the  zeal  of  God's  house  should  eat  us  up  until  we  had  no 
existence  except  for  the  Lord's  glory,  we  should  not  have  gone  too  far. 
If  there  be  corresponding  knowledge  to  balance  it,  there  cannot  be  too 
much  of  zeal  for  God.  The  utterance  is  that  of  one  whose  heart  is  like 
a  fnmace,  of  which  love  is  the  fire.  "  He  is  altogether  lovely  " — it  is 
tlie  exclamation  of  one  who  feels  that  no  language  is  too  strong  to 
commend  the  Lord.  The  spouse  looked  through  the  Hebrew  tcmgue  to 
find  an  intense  expression,  and  our  translators  ransacked  the  English 
language  for  a  forcible  word,  and  they  have  put  it  in  the  most  weighty 
way — "  He  is  altogether  lovely."  There  is  no  fear  of  exaggeration 
"when  you  speak  of  Christ;  hyperboles  are  only  sober  truth  when  we 
depict  his  excellences.  We  have  heard  of  a  portrait  painter  who 
owed  his  popularity  to  the  fact  that  he  never  painted  truthfully,  but 
always  gave  a  flattering  touch  or  two  ;  here  is  one  who  would  defy  his 
art,  for  it  is  impossible  to  flatter  Jesus.  Lay  on,  ye  men  of  elo(|uence, 
»pare  no  colours,  ye  shall  never  depict  him  too  bravely.  Bring  forth 
your  harps,  ye  seraphs ;  sing  aloud,  ye  blood-washed  ones ;  all  your 
praises  fall  short  of  the  glory  which  is  due  to  him. 

It  is  the  language  of  one  who  feels  that  no  service  would  be  too  great  to 
render  to  the  Lord.  I  wish  we  felt  as  the  apostles  and  martyrs  and  holy 
men  of  old  did,  that  Jesns  Christ  ought  to  be  served  at  the  highest  and 
richest  rate.  We  do  little,  very  little  :  what  if  I  -had  said  we  do  next  to 
nothing  for  our  dear  Lord  and  Master  nowadays  ?  The  love  of  Christ 
doth  not  constrain  us  as  it  should.  But  those  of  old  bore  poverty  and 
dared  reproach,  marched  weary  leagues,  passed  tempestuous  seas,  bore 
perils  ofrobbers  and  of  cruel  men,  to  plant  the  cross  in  lands  where  as 
yet  Jesns  was  not  known ;  labours  that  nowadays  could  not  be  expected 
of  men,  were  performed  as  daily  matters  of  commonplace  by  the  Chris- 
tians of  the  earliest  times.  Is  Christ  less  lovely,  or  is  his  church  less 
loyal  ?  Would  God  she  estimated  him  at  his  right  rate,  for  then  she 
would  return  to  her  former  mode  of  service.  Brethren,  we  want  to  feel, 
and  wc  shall  feel  if  this  text  is  deeply  engraven  on  our  hearts,  that  no 
gift  is  too  great  for  Christ,  though  we  give  him  all  we  have,  and  conse- 
crate to  him  all  our  time  and  ability,  and  sacrifice  our  very  lives  to  him. 
No  suffering  is  too  great  to  bear  for  the  sake  of  the  Crucified,  and  it  is  a 
great  joy  to  be  reproached  for  Christ's  sake.  "  He  is  altogether 
foyely."      Then,  my  soul,  I  charge  thee  think  nothing  hard  to  which 


40(J  MCTIi()l»<>IiITAX  TABKUXACLK   PULPIT. 

he  culls  tkee,  nothing  Rharp  which  ho  bids  thee  endnre.  As  the 
knight  of  the  olden  time  consecratod  himself  to  the  CniBade»  ud 
wore  the  red  cross  on  his  arm,  fearing  not  to  meet  death  at  the 
hands  of  the  Infidel,  if  he  might  be  thought  a  soldier  of  the  Lord, 
so  we  too  would  face  all  foes  for  Jesus'  sake.  We  want,  only  refined 
and  purified,  and  delivered  from  its  earthly  grossness,  we  want  the 
chivalrous  spirit  once  r.gain  in  the  churcli  of  (iod.  A  now  crusade fkin 
would  I  preach :  had  J  tlie  tongue  of  such  a  one  as  the  old  hermit 
to  move  all  Christendom,  1  would  say,  ^'  This  day  Christ,  the  alto- 
gether lovely  one,  is  dishonoured  :  can  ye  endure  it  ?  This  day  idols 
stand  where  he  should  be  and  men  adore  them ;  lovers  of  Jesus,  can  ye 
brook  it  ?  This  day  Juggernaut  rides  through  the  streets  on  his 
bloody  way,  this  day  God's  Christ  is  still  unknown  to  millions,  and 
the  precious  blood  cleanses  not  the  nations,  how  long  will  ye  have  it  bo? 
We,  in  England,  with  ten  thousand  Christian  hearts,  and  as  manr 
tongues  endowed  with  eloquence,  and  purses  weighted  with  gold,  shill 
we  refuse  our  gifts,  withhold  our  witness,  and  suffer  the  Lord  to  be 
dishonoured  ?  The  church  is  doing  next  to  nothing  for  her  great  Lord, 
she  falls  short  both  of  her  duty  and  of  the  grim  need  of  a  periihing 
world.  0  for  a  flash  of  the  celestial  fire  !  Oh,  when  shall  the  Spirit's 
energy  visit  us  asrain  !  When  shall  men  put  down  their  selfishness 
and  seek  only  Christ  ?  When  shall  they  leave  their  strifes  about  trifles 
to  rally  round  his  cross !  When  shall  we  end  the  glorification  of  our- 
selves, and  begin  to  make  him  glorious,  even  to  the  world's  end  ?  God 
help  us  in  this  matter,  and  kindle  in  our  hearts  the  old  consumioj^, 
heart-inflaming  fire,  Avhich  shall  make  men  see  that  Jesus  is  all  in  all 
to  us. 

n.  Thus  I  have  shown  you  the  characteristics  of  the  text,  and  not 
I  desire  to  U8E  it  in  threk  ways  for  practical  purposes.  As 
time  flies,  we  must  use  it  briefly. 

The  first  word  is  to  you,  Christians.  Here  is  very  street  imiructm. 
The  Lord  Jesus  "  is  altogether  lovely."  Then  if  I  want  to  be  lovely,  I 
must  be  like  him,  and  the  model  for  me  as  a  Christian  is  Christ  Hare 
you  ever  noticed  how  badly  boys  write  at  the  bottom  of  the  pages  in 
their  copy-books  ?  There  is  the  copy  at  the  top ;  and  in  the  first  line 
they  look  at  that ;  in  the  second  line,  they  copy  their  own  imitation;  in 
the  third  line,  they  copy  their  imitation  of  their  imitation,  and  so  the 
writing  grows  worse  and  worse  as  it  descends  the  page.  Now,  the 
apostles  followed  Christ;  the  first  fathers  imitated  the  apostles;  the  next 
fathers  copied  the  first  fathers,  and  so  the  standard  of  holiness  fell 
dreadfully;  and  now  we  are  too  apt  to  follow  the  very  lees  and  dregs  of 
Christianity,  and  we  think  if  we  are  about  as  good  as  our  poor,  imperfect 
ministers  or  leaders  in  the  church,  that  we  shall  do  well  and  deserve  prsi^ 
But  now,  my  brethi'en,  cover  up  the  mere  copies  and  imitations,  and 
live  by  the  first  line.  Copy  Jesiis :  *'  he  is  altogether  lovely ;  "  and  if  Jon 
can  write  by  the  first  line,  you  will  write  by  the  truest  and  best  mod"!  in 
the  world.  We  want  to  have  Christ's  zeal,'  but  we  must  balance  it  with 
his  prudpRce  and  discretion ;  we  must  seek  to  have  Christ's  lore  to 
God,  and  we  must  feel  his  love  to  men,  his  forgiveness  of  injury,  his 

i gentleness  of  speech,  his  incorruptible  truthfulness,  his  meekness  and 
owliness,  bis  utter  unselfishness,  his  entire  consecration  to  his  Father's 


ALTOGETHER  LOVELY.  407 

busmess.  O  that  we  had  all  this,  for  depend  upon  it  whatever  other 
pattern  we  select,  we  have  made  a  mistake  ;  we  are  not  following  the  true 
classic  model  of  the  Christian  artist.  Our  master  model  is  the  "  altogether 
lovely  "  one.  How  sweet  it  is  to  think  of  our  Lord  in  the  double  aspect 
as  onr  exemplar  and  our  Saviour !  The  laver  which  stood  in  the  temple 
was  made  of  brasu :  in  this  the  priests  washed  their  feet  whenever  they 
offered  sacrifices  ;  so  does  Christ  purify  us  from  sin  ;  but  the  tradition 
is  that  this  laver  was  made  of  very  bright  brass,  and  acted  as  a  mirror, 
so  that  as  often  as  the  priests  came  to  it  they  conld  see'  their  own  spots 
in  it.  Oh,  when  I  come  to  my  Lord  Jesus,  not  only  do  I  get  rid  of  my 
sins  as  to  their  guilt,  but  1  see  my  spots  in  the  light  of  his  perfect 
character,  and  I  am  humbled  and  taught  to  follow  after  holiness. 

The  sef^ond  use  to  which  we  would  put  the  verse  is  this,  here  is  a 
v«7  gmtie  rebuke  to  some  of  you.  Though  very  gentle,  [  beseech  you  to 
let  it  sink  deep  into  your  hearts.  You  do  not  see  the  lowliness  of  Christ, 
yet  **  he  is  altogether  lovely."  Now,  I  will  not  say  one  hard  word,  but  I 
will  tell  you  sorrowfully  what  pitiable  creatures  you  are.  I  hear  enchant- 
ing music,  which  seems  more  a  thing  of  heaven  than  of  earth  :  it  is  one 
of  Handel's  half-inspired  oratorios.  Yonder  sits  a  man,  wiio  says,  "I 
hear  nothing  to  commend."  He  has  not  the  power  to  perceive  the 
linked  sweetnesses,  the  delicious  harmonies  of  sounds.  Do  you  blame 
him?  No,  but  you  who  have  an  ear  for  music,  say,  **How  I  pity 
him:  he  misses  half  the  joy  of  life!"  Here,  again,  is  a  glorious 
landscape,  hills  and  valleys,  and  flowing  rivers,  expansive  lakes 
and  undulating  meadows.  I  bring  to  the  point  of  view  a  friend,  whom 
I  would  gratify,  and  I  say  to  him,  "  Is  not  that  a  charming  scene  ?  " 
Turning  his  head  to  me,  he  says,  "I  see  nothing."  I  perceive  that  he 
cannot  enjoy  what  is  so  delightful  to  me;  he  has  some  little  sight,  but 
he  sees  only  what  is  very  near,  and  he  is  blind  to  all  beyond.  Now,  do  I 
blame  him  ?  Or  if  he  proceed  to  argue  with  me,  and  say,  "  You  are  very 
foolish  to  be  so  enthusiastic  about  a  non-existent  landscape,  it  is  merely 
vour  excitement,"  shall  I  argue  with  him?  Shall  I  be  angry  Avith  him  ? 
ifo,  bat  I  shed  a  tear,  and  whisper  to  myself, "  Great  are  the  losses  of  the 
blind."    Now,  you  who  have  never  heard  music  in  the  name  of  Jesus, 

{ou  are  to  be  greatly  pitied,  for  your  loss  is  heavy.  You  who  never  saw 
eauty  in  Jesus,  and  who  never  will  for  ever,  you  need  all  our  tears.  It  is 
hell  enough  not  to  love  Christ  I  It  is  the  lowest  abyss  of  Tartarus,  and 
its  fiercest  flame,  not  to  be  enamoured  of  the  Christ  of  God.  There  is  no 
heaven  that  is  more  heaven  than  to  love  Christ  and  to  be  like  him,  and 
tbere  is  no  hell  that  is  more  hell  than  to  be  unlike  Christ  and  not  to 
want  to  be  like  him,  but  even  to  be  averse  to  the  infinite  perfect  ons 
of  the  "  altogether  lovely."  The  Lord  open  those  blind  eyes  of  yours,  and 
imstop  those  deaf  ears,  and  give  you  the  new  and  spiritual  life,  and 
then  will  you  join  in  saying,  "  Yea,  he  is  altogether  lovely." 

The  last  use  of  the  text  is,  that  of  fender  atiractiveiuss,  "  Yea,  he  is 
altogether  lovely."  Where  are  you  this  morning,  you  who  are  con- 
Hnced  of  sin  and  want  a  Saviour,  where  have  you  crept  to  ?     Are 

E[|  hidden  away  where  my  eyes  cannot  reach  you  ?  At  any  rate, 
this  sweet  thought  reach  you.  You  need  not  be  afraid  to  come  to 
Jesus,  for  "he  is  altogether  lovely."  It  does  not  say  he  is  altogether 
leirible — ^that  is  your  misconception  of  him  ;  it  does  not  say  he  is  some- 


4()«  MKTROPtllJTAN  TAP.KRNACLE   PULPIT. 

what  lovely,  and  sometimes  willing  to  receive  a  certain  sort  of  sinner; 
but  **he  is  altoj;ether  lovely,"  ami  therefore  he  is  always  ready  to 
welcome  to  himself  the  vilest  of  the  vile.  Think  of  his  name.  It  is 
Jesus,  the  Saviour.  Is  not  that  lovely?  Think  of  his  work.  He  is 
come  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost.  This  is  his  occnpaiion. 
Is  not  that  lovely  ?  Think  of  what  he  has  done.  He  hath  redeemed onr 
souls  with  blood.  Is  not  that  lovely  ?  Think  of  what  he  is  doing.  He 
is  pleading  before  the  throne  of  God  for  sinnera.  Think  of  what  he 
is  giving  at  this  moment — he  is  exalted  on  high  to  give  repentance 
and  remission  of  sins.  Is  not  this  lovely  ?  Under  every  aspect  Christ 
Jesus  is  attractive  to  sinners  who  need  him.  Come,  then,  come  and 
welcome,  there  is  nothing  to  keep  you  away,  there  is  everything  to  bid 
you  come.  May  this  very  Sabbath  day  in  which  I  have  preached  Christy 
and  lifted  him  up,  be  the  day  in  which  you  shall  be  drawn  to  him,  nerer 
again  to  leave  him,  but  to  be  his  for  ever  and  for  ever.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Solomon's  »Song  t. 


Mil.  SruRCKON  begs  oarnostly  to  thank  a  friend,  who  desires  to  be  anonymous,  f» 
£500  towards  T)uilding^8  for  the  Pastors'  CoUege,  to  commemorate  the  thousandtii 
Sermon,  as  also  Mr  Thomas  Ness  for  £10,  and  a  Sermon-reader  for  a  guinea.  Tbi8 
last  donor  believes  that  at  least  a  thoasand  readers  might  send  a  guinea  each  at  on* 
to  eelebrate  the  oecasion,  and  to  !iid  in  ereeting  rooms  in  which  preachers  wo*"** 
be  trained,  wh(»se  theme  would  be  the  gospel  of  Jesus.  Mr.  Spurgeon  is  thankW 
for  tlie  t'melv  aid.     Some  £3.000  more  will  pr^babiy  be  required  for  the  buildings. 


etpplilan;  W^imfk 


NOW,  AND  THEN. 


^  pennon 

DELIVERED  BY 

C.  H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NBWINQTON. 


"  For  now  wo  see  through  a  glass,  darkly ;  but  then  face  to  face.'* — 1  Cor.  xiii.  12. 

X  this  chciptcr  the  apostle  Paul  has  spoken  in  the  highest  terms  of 
harity  or  love.  He  accounts  it  to  be  a  gvBce  far  more  excellent  than  any 
f  the  spiritual  gifts  of  which  he  had  jnst  before  been  speaking.  It  is 
as?  to  see  that  there  were  good  reasons  for  the  preference  he  gave  to  it. 
'hoRc  j(ift8,  you  will  obseiTe,  Avere  distributed  among  godly  men,  to  every 
ian  his  several  portion,  so  that  what  one  had  another  might  have  lacked; 
Dt  this  grace  belongs  to  all  who  have  passed  from  death  unto  life, 
'he  proof  that  they  are  disciples  of  Christ  is -found  in  their  love  to  him 
nd  to  the  brethren.  Those  pifts,  again,  were  meant  to  fit  them  for 
.*rvice,  that  eac^h  member  of  the  body  should  be  profitable  to  the  other 
members  of  the  body  ;  but  this  grace  is  of  personal  account :  it  is  a 
ght  in  the  heart  and  a  star  on  the  breast  of  every  one  who  possesses 
•  Those  gifts,  moreover,  were  of  temporary  use :  their  value  was 
mited  to  the  sphere  in  which  they  were  exercised;  but  this  grace 
tirivoR  at  all  times  and  in  all  places,  and  it  is  no  less  essential  to  our 
ternal  future  state  than  it  is  to  our  present  welfare.  By  all  means 
>vet  the  best  gifts,  my  dear  brother,  as  an  artist  would  wish  to  be  deft 
Jth  all  his  limbs  and  quick  Avith  all  his  senses;  but  above  all,  cherish 
►ve,  as  that  same  artist  would  cultivate  the  pure  taste  which  lives  and 
'^thes  within  him— the  secret  spring  of  all  his  motions,  the  faculty 
•at  prompts  his  skill.  Learn  to  esteem  this  sacred  instinct  of  love  beyond 
1  the  choicest  endowments.  However  poor  you  may  be  in  talents,  let  the 
▼e  of  Christ  dwell  in  you  richly.  Such  an  exhortation  as  this  is  the 
ore  needful,  because  love  has  a  powerful  rival.  Paul  may  have 
>ticed  that  in  the  academies  of  Greece,  as  indeed  in  all  our  modem 
hools,  knowledge  was  wont  to  take  all  the  prizes.    Who  can  tell  how 


410  METUOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

mnch  of  Dr.  Arnold's  success,  as  a  schoolmaster,  was  dae  to  the  honou 
in  which  he  held  a  good  boy  in  preference  to  a  clever  boy?  Most  cer- 
tainly Paul  coald  discern  in  the  church  many  jealonsies  to  which  th6 
superior  abilities  of  those  who  could  speak  foreign  tongues,  and  those 
who  could  prophecy  or  preach  well,  gave  rise.  So,  then,  while  he 
extols  the  grace  of  love,  he  seems  rather  to  disparage  knowledge :  it 
loast,  he  uses  an  illustration  w-hich  tends  to  show  that  the  kind  of  knot- 
ledge  we  pride  oui^selves  in,  is  not  the  most  reliable  thing  in  the  world. 
Paul  remembered  that  he  was  once  a  child.  A  very  good  thing  for  anj 
of  us  to  bear  in  mind.  If  we  forget  it,  our  sympathies  are  soon  dried 
up,  our  temper  is  apt  to  get  churlish,  our  opinions  may  be  rather  over- 
bearing, and  our  seliishness  very  repulsive.  The  foremost  man  of  Ui 
day  in  the  Christian  church,  and  exerting  the  widest  influence  among 
the  converts  to  Christ,  Paul  thought  of  the  little  while  ago  when  he 
was  a  young  child,  and  he  thought  of  it  very  opportunely  too.  Though 
he  might  have  hinted  at  the  attainments  he  had  made  or  the  high  offioe 
he  held,  and  laid  claim  to  some  degree  of  respect,  he  rather  looks  back 
at  his  humble  beginuiugs.  If  there  is  wisdom  in  his  reflectioo,  there 
is  to  my  mind  a  vein  of  pleasantry  in  his  manner  of  expressing  it 
**AVhen  I  was  a  child  I  spake  as  a  child,  I  understood  as  a  child, 
I  thou)(ht  as  a  child :  but  when  I  became  a  man,  I  put  away  childiih 
things.*'  Thus  he  compares  two  stages  of  his  natural  life,  and  it 
serves  him  for  a  parable.  In  spiritual  knowledge  he  felt  himaelf 
to  be  then  in  his  infancy.  His  maturity,  his  thorough  manhood, 
lay  before  him  in  prospect,  lie  could  easily  imagine  a  future  in 
which  he  should  look  bacjv  on  his  present  self  as  a  mere  tyro,  groping 
his  way  amidst  the  shadows  of  his  own  fancy.  **  For  now,"  he 
says,  "we  see  through  a  glass,  darkly;  but  then  face  to  face:  not 
I  know  in  part;  but  then  shall  I  know  even  as  also  I  am  known.** 
Here  he  employs  one  or  two  fresh  figures.  "  Through  a  glass  T  Whit 
kind  of  a  glass  he  alluded  to,  we  may  not  be  able  exactly  to  determina 
Well ;  we  will  leave  that  (juestion  lor  the  critics  to  disagree  about.  It 
is  enough  for  us  that  the  meaning  is  obvious.  There  is  all  the  dif- 
ference between  viewing  an  object  through  an  obscure  medium,  and 
closely  inspecting  it  with  the  naked  eye.  We  must  have  the  power  of 
vision  in  either  case,  but  in  the  latter  case  we  can  use  it  to  more 
advantage.  "  Now  we  see  through  a  glass,  darkly^  Darkly— in  i 
riddle !  So  weak  are  our  |>erceptions  of  mind,  that  plain  truihs  often 
puzzle  us.  The  words  that  teach  us  are  pictures  which  need  explani- 
tion.  The  thoughts  that  stir  us  are  visions  which  float  in  our  brain* 
and  want  rectifying.  Oh,  for  clearer  vision !  Oh,  for  more  perfect 
knowledge  I  Mark  you,  brethren,  it  is  a  matter  of  congratulation  that 
see;  though  we  have  much  cause  fur  diflidence,  because  we  do 
through  a  glass,  darkly.**    Thank  God  we  do  hiow;  but  letit 


<^ 


{ 


NOW,  AND  THEN.  411 

cdie«k  our  conceit,  we  know  onlj  in  part.  Beloved,  the  objects  we  look 
at  are  distant,  and  we  are  near-sigkted.  The  revelation  of  God  is  ample 
and  profound,  but  our  understanding  is  weak  and  shallow. 

Tliere  are  some  things  which  we  count  very  precious  now,  which  will 
sbon  be  of  no  value  to  us  whatever.  There  are  some  things  that  we 
know,  or  think  we  know,  and  we  pride  ourselves  a  good  deal  upon  our 
knowledge ;  but  when  we  shall  become  men  we  shall  set  no  more  value 
upon  that  knowledge  than  a  child  does  upon  his  toys  when  he  grows  up 
to  be  a  man.  Our  spiritual  manhood  in  heaven  will  discard  many  things 
whKh  we  now  count  precious,  as  a  full  grown  man  discards  the 
treasures  ef  his  childhood.  And  there  are  many  things  that  we  have 
been  accustomed  to  see  that,  after  this  transient  life  has  passed,  we  shall 
•ee  no  more.  Though  we  delighted  in  them,  and  they  pleased  our  eyes 
while  sojourning  on  earth,  they  will  pass  away  as  a  dream  when  one 
twaketh ;  we  shall  never  see  them  again,  and  never  want  to  see  them ; 
kft  our  eyes  in  clearer  light,  anointed  with  eye-salve,  shall  see  brighter 
visions,  and  we  shall  never  regret  what  we  have  lost,  in  the  presence  of 
barer  scenes  we  shall  have  found.  Other  things  there  are  that  we  know 
ttow  and  shall  never  forget ;  we  shall  know  them  for  ever,  only  in  a 
higher  degree,  because  no  longer  with  a  partial  knowledge  ;  and  there 
lie  some  things  that  we  see  now  that  we  shall  see  in  eternity,  only  we 
ihell  see  them  there  in  a  clearer  light. 

So  we  shall  speak  upon  imne  things  thnl  we  do  see  now,  which  we  are  to 
M»  more  fully  and  more  distinctly  hereafter;  then  enquire  how  it  is 
w§  shall  see  them  more  clearly;  and  finish  up  by  considering  what  this 
fitei  teaches  us, 

I.  Among  the  things  that  we  see  now,  as  many  of  us  as  have  had 
our  eyes  enlightened  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  is  ourselves. 

To  see  ourselves  is  one  of  the  first  steps  in  true  religion.    The  mass 

•f  men  have  never  seen  themselves.     They  have  seen  the  flattering 

image  of  themselves,  and  they  fancy  that  to  be  their  own  fac-simile,  but 

H  is  not.    You  and  I  have  been  taught  of  God's  Holy  Spirit  to  see  our 

mfai  in  the  fall ;  we  have  bemoaned  ourselves  on  account  of  that  fall ; 

we  have  been  made  conscious  of  our  own  natural  depravity ;  we  have 

been  ground  to  the  very  dust  by  the  discovery ;  we  have  been  shown 

oar  actual  sinfulness  and  how  we  have  transgressed  against  the  Most 

Bigh.    We  have  repented  for  this,  and  have  fled  for  refuge  to  the  hope  fret 

httore  us  in  the  gospel.    Day  by  day  we  see  a  little  more  of  ourselves — 

BOtbing  very  pleasing,  I  grant  you — but  something  very  profitable,  for  it 

ii  a  great  thing  for  us  to  know  eur  emptiuess.    It  is  a  step  towards  re- 

Hmug  his  fulness.    It  is  something  to  discover  our  weakness  ;  it  is  a 

i^  essential  towards  our  participation  of  divine  strength.    I  suppose 

'^  longer  we  live  the  more  we  shall  see  ourselves;    and  we  shall 

ffobably  come  to  this  conclusion :  "  Vanity  of  vanities ;  all  is  vanity :" 


4\'2  MKTItol'Ol.lTAN    TAISKitXACliE   IMLPIT. 

und  cry  out  with  tlob,  **  J  uin  vile."    The  more  we  shall  difiooverof  oitf^ 
Kcives,  the  more  we  shall  be  sick  of  ourselTes.   Bat  in  heaven,  I  doabtnoi, 
we  shall  find  out  that  we  never  saw  even  ourselves  in  the  clearest  light, 
but  only  us  '*  through  a  glass,  darkly/'  only  as  an  noriddled  thing,  ai  « 
deep  enigma  ;  for  we  shall  understand  more  about  ourselves  in  heami 
than  we  do  now.    There  we  shall  see,  as  we  have  not  yet  seen,  how 
des})erate  a  mischief  was  tho  Fall,  into  what  a  horrible  pit  we  fell,  and 
how  fast  we  were  stuck  in  the  miry  clay.     There  shall  we  see  the 
blackness  of  sin  as  we  have  never  seen  it  here,  and  understand  its  hdl 
desert  as  we  could  not  till  we  shall  look  down  from  yonder  itanj 
height  whither  infinite  mercy  shall  bring  us.    When  we  shall  be  sing* 
ing,  '*  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain,"  we  shall  look  at  the  robs 
that  we  have  washed  in  his  blood,  and  see  how  white  they  are.    We 
shall  better  understand  then  than  now  how  much  we  needed  washing- 
how^  crimson  were  the  stains  and  how  precions  was  that  blood  that 
oti'aced  those  scarlet  spots.    There,  too,  shall  we  know  ourselves  on  the 
bright  side  better  than  we  do  now.    We  know  to-day  that  we  are  sared, 
and  there  is  therefore  now  no  condemnation  to  them  that  are  in  Chrirt 
•lesus  ;  but  that  robe  of  righteousness  which  covers  us  now,  as  it  shill 
cover  us  then,  will  be  better  seen  by  us,  and  we  shall  discern  how 
lustrous  it  is,  with  its  needlework  and  wrought  gold — how  much  better 
than  the  pearls  and  gems  that  have  decked  the  robes  of  monarcht  ire 
the  blood  and  righteousness  of  Jehovah  Jesus,  who  has  given  himself  for 
us.     Here  wc  know  that  we  are  ndopted.     We  feel  the  spirit  of  son- 
ship :  *'  we  cry,  Abba,  Father;"  but  there  we  shall  know  better  whit 
it  is  to  be  the  sons  of  (Jod,  for  here  it  doth  not  vet  appear  what  we 
shall  bo;  but  when  we  shall  be  there,  and  when  Christ  shall  appear,  we 
shall  be  like  him,  fur  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is,  and  then  we  shell 
understand  to  the  full  what  sonship  means.    80,  too,  I  know  to-day  thit 
I  am  a  joint-hoir  with  ( -hrist,  but  I  have  a  very  poor  idea  of  what  it  is  I 
am  heir  to ;  but  there  shall  I  see  the  estates  that  belong  to  me;  notooly 
see  them,  but  actually  enjoy  them.    A  part  shall  every  Christian  hiTP 
in  the  inheritance  undefiled  and  that  fadeth  not  away,  that  is  resepred 
in  heaven  for  him,  because  he  is  in  Christ  Jesus  ;  one  with  Christ— hf 
eternal  union  one.     But  I  am  afraid  that  is  very  much  more  a  riddle  to 
us  than  a  matter  of  understanding.    We  see  it  as  an  enigma  now,  bat 
there  our  oneness  with  Christ  will  be  as  conspicuous  to  us  and  as  piiiB 
as  the  letters  of  the  alphabet.    There  shall  we  know  what  it  is  to  be  1 
member  of  his  body,  of  his  flesh,  and  of  his  bones;  there  shall  I  uwfeT' 
stand  the  mystical  marriage   bond  that  knits  the  believer's  sod  ^ 
Christ ;  there  shall  I  sec  how,  as  the  branch  springs  from  the  stem,  nf 
soul  stands  in  union,  vital  union,  with  her  blessed  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
Thus,  one  thing  that  we  see  now  which  we  shall  see  in  a  mncHdeanr 
light  hereafter,  is  **  oni-selves.''  f 


NOW,  AND  THEN.  413 

Here,  too,  we  sec  the  church,  bat  w£  hhall  kke   thk  church 

JCU  MORB  CLEARLY  BY-AND-BY. 

Wc  know  there  is  a  church  of  God.     We  know  that  the  Lord 
IS  %  people   whom  he   hath  chosen    from  before   the    foundation 

tlie  world :  we  believe  that  these  are  scattered  np  and  down 
rough  ont  our  land,  and  many  other  lands.  There  are  many  of 
cm  we  do  not  know,  many  that  we  shonld  not  particularly  like,  I  dare- 
y,  if  wc  did  know  them,  on  account  of  their  outward  characteristics ; 
srsons  of  very  strange  views,  and  very  odd  habits  perhaps ;  and  yet, 
r  all  that,  the  people  of  the  living  God.  Now,  we  know  this  chnrch, 
B  kuow  its  glory,  moved  with  one  life,  qnickened  with  one  Spirit, 
deemed  with  one  blood,  we  believe  in  this  chnrch,  and  we  feel  attach- 
ent  to  it  for  the  sake  of  Jesus  Christ,  who  has  married  the  church  as 
le  Bride.  But,  oh !  when  we  shall  get  to  heaven,  how  much  more  we 
lall  know  of  tlie  church,  and  how  we  shall  see  her  face  to  face,  and  not 
through  a  glass,  darkly.'*  There  we  shall  know  something  more  of  the 
ambers  oi  the  chosen  than  we  do  now,  it  may  be  to  our  intense  surprise, 
'here  we  shall  find  some  amongst  the  company  of  God's  elect,  whom  we 
1  oar  bitterness  of  spirit  had  condemned,  and  there  we  shall  miss  some 
iho,  in  our  charity,  we  have  conceived  to  be  perfectly  secure.  We 
hall  know  better  then  who  are  the  Lord's  and  who  are  not  than  wc 
^ver  can  know  here.  Here  all  our  processes  of  discernment  fail  us. 
lodas  comes  in  with  the  apostles,  and  Demas  takes  his  part  amongst 
h%  saints,  but  there  we  shall  know  the  righteous,  for  we  shall  see 
hm\  there  will  be  one  flock  and  one  Shepherd,  and  he  that  on 
ihe  throne  doth  reign  for  evermore  sliail  be  glorified.  We  shall 
mderstand  then,  what  the  history  of  the  church  has  been  in  all 
iiie  past,  and  why  it  has  been  so  strange  a  history  of  conflict  and 
sonqoest  Probably,  we  shall  know  more  of  the  history  of  the 
iurcli  in  the  future.  From  that  higher  elevation  and  brighter  at- 
Qoipbere  we  shall  understand  better  Avhat  arc  the  Lord's  designs  cou- 
i^ing  his  people  in  the  latter  day ;  and  what  glory  shall  redound  to  his 
wn  name  from  his  redeemed  ones,  when  he  shall  have  gathered  together 
lU  that  are  called  and  chosen  and  faithful  from  among  the  sons  of  men. 
Rut  is  one  of  the  joys  we  are  looking  for,  that  we  shall  come  to  the 
(ttieral  assembly  and  church  of  the  firstborn  whose  names  are  written 
i  heaven;  and  have  fellowship  with  those  who  have  fellowship  with 
lod  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

Thirdly.  Is  it  not  possible,  nay,  is  it  not  certain,  that  in  the  next 
tite  WE  shall  sue  and  know  more  of  the  providence  of  God 
Kan  WE  DO  now  ? 

Here  we  see  the  providence  of  God,  but  it  is  in  a  glass,  darkly.  Tho 
^le  saya  *'  through  "  a  glass.  There  was  glass  in  the  apostles'  days, 
>t  a  substance  snch  as  our  windows  are  now  made  of,  but  thick, 


414  METROPOLITAN  TABfiRNACLE  PULPIT. 

dull  colcured  glass,  not  much  more  transparent  than  that  whidiiBined 
in  the  manufacture  of  common  bottles,  so  that  looking  throngh  a  piece 
of  that  glass  you  would  not  see  much.    That  is  like  what  we  now  see  oC 
divine  providence.    TVe  believe  all  things  work  together  for  good  to 
them  that  love  God ;  we  have  seen  how  they  work  together  for  good  in 
some  cases,  and  experimentally  proved  it  to  be  so.    But  still  it  Is  nther 
a  matter  of  faith  than  a  matter  of  sight  with  us.    We  caimot  tell 
how  "every  dark  and  bending  line  meets  in  the  centre  of  his  loTe,"   Wc 
do  not  yet  perceive  how  he  will  make  those  dark  dispensationB  of 
trials  and  afUictions  that  come  upon  his  people  really  to  sabserre  hit 
glory  and  their  lasting  happiness ;  but  up  there  we  shall  see  providenoe^ 
as  it  were,  face  to  face ;   and  I  8U])pose  it  will  be  amongst  our  gre&tert 
surprises,  the  discovery  of  how  the  Lord  dealt  with  us.    "  Why,"  we  shall 
some  of  us  say,  "we  prayed  against  those  very  circumstances  which  wc» 
the  best  that  could  have  been  appointed  for  us."    **  Ah  ! "  another  wiD 
say,  *'  I  have  fretted  and  troubled  myself  over  what  was,  after  all,  the 
richest  mercy  the  Lord  ever  sent."    Sometimes  I  have  known  person* 
rcfuo  a  letter  at  the  door,  and  it  luis  happened,  in  some  cases,  that 
there  has  been  something  very  valuable  in  it,  and  the  postman  his 
said,  afterwards,  "  You  did  not  know  the  contents,  or  else  yoa  wooU 
not  have  refused  it.'*    And  often  God  has  sent  us,   in  the  blade 
envelope  of  trial,  siicli  a  precious  mass  of  mercy,  that  if  we  had  known 
what  was  in  it,  we  should  have  taken  it  in,  and  been  glad  to  pay  for 
it — glad  to  give  it  house  room,  to  entertain  it;  but  because  it  looked 
black  we  were  prone  to  shut  our  door  against  it.     Now,  up  there  we 
shall  know  not  only  more  of  ourselves,  but  perceive  the  reasons  of  manf 
of  God's  deal  lugs  with  us  (»u  a  larger  scale  ;  and  we  shall  there  perhaps 
discover  thai  wars  that  devastod  nations,  and  pstilences  that  fill  grare?, 
and  eartliquakes  that  make  cities  tremble,  are,  after  all,  necessary  cogs 
in  the  great  wlicel  of  the  divine  machinery ;  and  he  who  sits  upon  the 
throne  at  this  moment,  and  rules  supremely  every  creature  that  is  either 
in  heaven,  or  earth,  or  hell,  will  there  make  it  manifest  to  U8  that 
his  government  was  right.      It  is  good  to  think  in  these  times  when 
evcrvthing  seems  loosening,  that  "the  government  shall  be  upon  his 
shoulder:  and  his  name  shall  be  called  Wonderful,  Counsellor,  The  mighty 
(iod.  The  everlasting  Father,  The  Prince  of  Peace."   It  must  comeoni 
right  in  the  long  run ;  it  must  be  well ;  every  part  and  portion  must  work 
together  with  a  unity  of  design  to  promote  God's  glory  and  the  saintli 
good.    We  shall  see  it  there,  and  we  shall  lift  up  our  song  with  new  «eit 
and  joy,  as  fresh  displays  of  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  God,  who* 
ways  are  past  finding  out,  are  unfolded  to  our  admiring  view.      ; 

Fourthly.  It  is  surely  no  straining  of  the  text  to  say,  that,  f  toogh 
here  we  know  something  of  the  doctrines  of  the  GO&P£L,l|AibT0 
jirrbTEKiES  OF  THE  FAFFH,  by-aud-by,  in  a  few  months  orye  jwitte 


NOW,  AND  THEN.  415 

ODgest;  WB  shall  know  a  great  deal  more  than  we  do  now.     There  aie 
ome  grand  doctrines,  brethren  and  sisters,  we  dearly  love,  bnt  though  we 
ove  them,  our  understanding  is  too  feeble  to  grasp  them  fully.    We 
locoant  them  to  be  mysteries ;  we  reverently  acknowledge  them,  yet  we 
lare  not  attempt  to  explain  them.    They  are  matters  of  faith  to  us.    It 
nay  be  that  in  heaven  there  shall  be  counsels  of  eternal  wisdom  into  which 
10  saints  or  angels  can  peer.  It  is  the  glory  of  God  to  conceal  a  matter. 
Jurely,  no  creature  will  ever  be  able,  even  when  exalted  to  heaven,  to 
comprehend  all  the  thoughts  of  the  Creator.     We  shall  never  be  omni- 
scient— we  cannot  be.    God  alone  knowetli   everything,   and  under- 
standeth    everything.    But  how  much  more  of  authentic  truth  shall 
vre  discern  when  the  mists  and  shadows  have  dissolved ;    and  how  much 
more  shall  we  understand  when  raised  to  that  higher  sphere  and  endowed 
with  brighter  faculties,   none  of  us  can  tell.    Probably,  things  that 
puzzle  us  here  will  be  as  plain  as  possible  there.    We   shall  perhapd 
smile  at  our   own  ignorance.      I   have  fancied  sometimes   that  the 
elucidations  of  learned  doctors  of  divinity,  if  they  could  be  submitted 
to  the  very  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  would  only  cause  them  to 
smile  at  the  learned  ignorance  of  the  sons  of  earth.     Oh  !  how  little 
ve  do  know,  but  how  much  we  shall  know!    I  am  sure  we  shall  know, 
fcr  it  is  written,  "  Then  shall  I  know  even  as  also  I  have  known."    We 
now  see  things  in  a  mist — "  men  as  trees,  walking  " — a  doctrine  here,  and 
a  doctrine  there.    And  Ave  are  often  at  a  loss  to  conjecture  how  one  part 
kannonizes  with  another  part  of  the  same  system,  or  to  make  out  how 
»U  these  doctrines  are  consistent.     This  knot  cannot  be  untied,  that 
gnarl  cannot  be  unravelled,  but — 

"  Then  jshall  I  sei*,  und  hear,  and  know 
All  I  desired  or  witsh'd  below  ; 
And  every  power  find  sweet  employ 
In  ihiit  eternal  world  of  joy." 

Birt,  my  dear  brethren  and  sisters,  having  kept  you  thus  far  in 
tte  outer  courts,  I  would  fain  lead  you  into  the  temple ;  or,  to 
«luMij?c  the  figure,  if  in  the  beginning  I  have  set  forth  good  wine, 
wrtainly  I  am  not  going  to  bring  out  that  which  is  worse  ;  rather 
tould  I  have  you  say,  as  the  ruler  of  the  feast  did  to  the  bridegroom, 
**ftou  has  kept  the  good  wine  until  now."  Here  we  see  Jesus 
Christ,  but  we  do  not  see  him  as  >ve  shall  see  him  soon.  We  have 
•Wn  him  by  faith  in  such  a  way,  that  we  have  beheld  our  burdens  laid 
^  him,  and  our  iniquities  carried  by  him  into  the  wilderness,  where, 
if  they  be  sought  for,  they  shall  not  be  found.  We  have  seen  enough  of 
Jesus  to  know  that  **he  is  altogether  lovely  ;"  we  can  say  of  him,  he 
^'isall  ray  salvation,  and  all  my  desire."  Sometimes,  when  he  throws 
^  the  lattice,  and  shows  himself  through  those  windows  of  agate 

M  gates  of  carbuncle,  in  the  ordinances  of  his  house,  at  the  Lord's 

1^' 


\ 


4J0  MCTKUPOJJTAxN   TABEUKACLE  PULPIT. 

Supper  esijccialiy,  the  King*8  beauty  has  entranced  us  ercn  to  our 
heart's  ravishment;  yet  all  we  have  ever  seen  is  somewhat  like  the 
report  which  the  Queen  of  Hheba  had  of  Solomon's  wisdom.  When  we 
once  get  to  tiie  court  of  the  Great  King  we  shall  declare  that  the  half 
liAS  not  been  told  us.  We  shall  say,  '*  mine  eyes  shall  behold,  and  not 
another."  Bretliren,  is  not  this  the  very  cream  of  lieaven?  There 
liave  been  many  suggestions  of  what  we  shall  do  in  heaven,  and  whit 
we  shall  enjoy,  but  they  all  seem  to  me  to  be  wide  of  the  mark  cont' 
pared  with  this  one,  that  we  shall  be  with  Jesus,  be  likcliim,  and  shall 
behold  his  glory.  Oh,  to  see  the  feet  that  were  nailed,  and  to  tonch 
the  hand  that  was  pierced,  and  to  look  upon  the  head  that  wore  the 
thorns,  and  to  bow  before  him  who  is  ineffable  love,  unspeakable  con- 
descension, inlinite  tenderness !  Oh,  to  bow  before  him,  and  tu  kiss 
that  blessed  face  I  Jesu,  what  better  do  we  \«'ant  than  to  6ce  tiiee 
by  thine  own  light — to  see  thee,  and  speak  with  thee,  as  Avheu  a  man 
speaketh  with  his  friend?  It  is  plcsisant  to  talk  abt)Ul  this,  hut  \rbat 
will  it  be  there  when  the  pearl  gates  open  ?  The  streets  of  gold  will 
have  small  attraction  to  us,  and  the  harps  of  angels  will  but  slightly 
enchant  us,  compared  with  the  King  in  the  midst  of  the  throne.  He  it 
is  who  shall  rivet  our  gaze,  absorb  our  thoughts,  enchain  our  aifectk^n, 
and  move  all  our  sacred  passions  to  their  highest  pitch  of  celestial 
ardour.    We  shall  see  Jesus. 

Once  again  (and  here  we  come  into  the  deep  things),  beyond  a  doubt 
WE  SHAiiL  ALSO  SEE  CiOD.  It  is  Written  that  the  pure  in  heart  shall  «* 
(iod.  God  is  seen  now  in  his  works  and  in  his  word.  Little  indeed 
could  these  eyes  bear  of  the  beatific  vision,  yet  we  have  reason  to  ex- 
pect that,  as  fur  as  creatures  can  bear  the  sight  of  the  inlinite  Creator, 
we  shall  be  permitted  to  see  (iod.  We  read  that  Aaron  and  certain 
chosen  ones  saw  the  throne  of  God,  and  the  brightness  ns  it  were  of  a 
sapphire  stone— light,  pure  as  jasper.  In  heaven  it  is  the  presence  of 
God  that  is  the  light  thereof.  God's  more  immediately  dwelling  iu  the 
midst  of  the  new  Jerusalem  is  its  peerless  glory  and  peculiar  blisB. 
W'e  shall  then  understand  more  of  God  than  we  do  now  ;  we  shall  come 
nearer  to  him,  be  more  familiar  with  him,  be  more  filled  with  him.  The 
love  of  God  shall  be  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts;  we  shall  know  oor 
Father  as  we  yet  know  hifti  not ;  we  shall  know  the  Son  to  a  fuller 
degree  than  he  has  yet  revealed  himself  to  us,  and  we  shall  know  the 
Holy  Spirit  in  his  personal  love  and  tenderness  towards  us,  beyond  all 
tliose  infiuences  and  operations  which  liave  soothed  us  in  our  sorrows 
and  guided  us  in  our  perplexities  here  below.  I  leave  your  thoughU 
and  your  desires  to  follow  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit.  As  for  me,  I 
cower  before  the  thought  while  I  revel  in  it,  I,  who  have  strained  my 
eyes  while  gazing  at  nature,  where  the  things  that  are  made  show  the 
handiwork  of  God ;   I,  whose  conscience   hns  been   awe-struck  as  I 


NOW,   AND  THEN.  417 

ftened  to  the  voice  of  God  proclaiming  his  holy  )iiw  ;  I,  whose  heart 
18  been  melted  while  there  broke  on  mv  ears  the  tender  accents  of 
B  blessed  gospel  in  those  snatches  of  sacred  melody  that  relieve  the 
irden  of  prophecy ;  I,  who  have  recognised  in  the  babe  of  Bethlehem 
le  hope  of  Israel ;  in  the  man  of  Nazareth,  the  Messiah  that  should 
>me;  in  the  victim  of  Calvary,  the  one  Mediator;  in  the  risen 
JSOB,  the  well-beloved  Son— to  me,  verily,  God  incarnate  has  been 
)  palpably  revealed  that  I  have  almost  seen  God,  for  I  have,  as  it 
ere,  seen  him  in  whom  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily  doth 
«rell.  Still  I  "see  through  a  glass,  darkly."  Illumine  these  dark 
uses,  waken  this  drowsy  conscience,  purify  my  heart,  give  me  fellowship 
ith  Christ,  and  then  bear  me  up,  translate  me  to  the  third  heavens; 
1 1  may,  so  I  can,  so  I  shall  see  God.  But  what  that  means,  or  what 
is,  ah  me  !  I  cannot  tell. 
II.  We  proposed  to  enquire,  in  the  second  place,  how  this  very 

8SIARKABLK  CHANOK  SHALL  BE  EFTECTBD?    WhY  IS  IT  THAT  WE  SHALL 

IK  310RB  CLEARLY  THEN  THAN  NOW?  We  Cannot  altogether  answer 
le  question,  but  one  or  two  suggestions  may  help  us.  No  doubt 
any  of  these  things  will  be  more  clearly  revealed  in  the  next  state, 
ere  the  light  is  like  the  dawn  :  it  is  dim  twilight.  In  heaven  it  will 
5  the  blaze  of  noon.  God  has  declared  something  of  himself  by  the 
lOathof  his  holy  prophets  and  apostles.  He  has  been  pleased,  through  the 
ps  of  his  Son,  whom  he  hath  appointed  heir  of  all  things,  to  speak  to  us 
aore  plainly,  to  show  us  more  openly  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  and  the 
mnsel  of  his  will.  These  are  the  lirst  steps  to  knowledge.  But  there 
le  light  will  be  as  the  light  of  seven  days,  and  there  the  manifestation 
fall  the  treasures  of  wisdom  shall  be  brighter  and  clearer  than  it  is 
>w;  for  God,  the  only-wise  God,  shall  unveil  to  us  the  mysteries,  and 
Lhibit  to  us  the  glories  of  his  everlasting  kingdom.  The  revelation  we 
}whave  suits  us  as  men  clad  in  our  poor  mortal  bodies;  the  revelation 
len-will  suit  us  as  immortal  spirits.  When  we  have  been  raised 
om  the  dead,  it  will  be  suitable  to  our  immortal  spiritual  bodies, 
iere,  too,  we  are  at  a  distance  from  many  of  the  things  we  long  to 
aow  something  of,  but  there  we  shall  be  nearer  to  them.  We  shall 
len  be  on  a  vantage  ground,  with  the  entire  horizon  spread  out  before 
(.  Our  Lord  Jesus  is,  as  to  his  personal  presence,  far  away  from  us. 
e  see  him  through  the  telescope  of  faith,  bnt  then  we  shall  see  him 
K  to  face.  His  literal  and  bodily  presence  is  in  heaven,  since  he  was 
ken  up,  and  we  need  to  be  taken  up  likewise  to  be  with  him  where  he  is 
It  we  may  literally  behold  him.  Get  to  the  fountain-head,  and  you  under- 
nd  more ;  stand  in  the  centre,  and  things  seem  regular  and  orderly. 
you  could  stand  in  the  sun  and  see  the  orbits  in  which  the  planets 
'olvc  round  that  central  luminary,  it  would  become  clear  enough  ; 
;  for  many  an  age  astronomers  were  unable  to  discover  anything  of 


418  METROPOLITAN  TABBKNACLB  PULPIT. 

order,  and  spoke  of  the  planets  as  progressive,  retrograde,  and  standiiig 
still.    Let  us  get  to  God,  the  centre,  and  wo  shall  see  how  prondoioe 
in  order  revolves  round  his  sapphire  throne.    We,  onrs^lvesy  too,  whea 
we  get  to  heaven,  shall  be  better  qualified  to  see  than  we  are  now.    h 
would  be  an  inconvenience  for  us  to  know  here  as  much  as  we  shall 
know  in  heaven.    Xo  doubt  we  have  sometimes  thought  that  if  we  had 
better  ears  it  would  be  a  great  blessing.    We  have  wished  weconld  hear 
ten  miles  oft';  but  probably  we  should  be  no  better  off;  we  might  bear 
too  much,  and  the  sounds  might  drown  each  other.    Probably  our  aigfat 
is  not  as  good  as  we  wish  it  were,  but  a  large  increase  of  ocular  power 
might  not  be  of  any  use  to  us.     Our  natural  organs  are  fitted  for  oor 
present  sphere  of  being ;   and  our  mental  faculties  are,  in  the  case  of 
most  of  us,  properly  adapted  to  our  moral  requirements.     If  we  Jawt 
more  of  our  own  sinfulness,  we  might  be  driven  to  despair;  if  we  kner 
more  of  God's  glory,  we  might  die  of  terror  ;  if  we  had  more  under- 
standing, unless  we  had  equivalent  capacity  to  employ  it,  we  might  be 
filled  with  conceit  and  tormented  with  ambition.    But  up  there  we 
shall  have  our  minds  and  our  systems  strengthened  to  receive  more, 
without  the  damage  that  would  come  to  us  here  from  overleaping  the 
l)oundarie8  ©f  order,  supremely  appointed  and  divinely  regulated.    We 
cannot  here  drink  the  wine  of  the  kingdom,  it  is  too  strong  for  us;  bat 
up  there  we  shall  drink  it  new  in  our  heavenly  Father's  kingdom, 
without  fear  of  the  intoxications  of  pride,  or  the  staggeringa  of  passions. 
We    shall  know  even  as  we  are  known.     Besides,  dear  friends,  the 
atmosphere  of  heaven  is  so  much  clearer  than  this,  that  I  do  not 
wonder  we  can  see  better  there.    Here  there  is  the  smoke  of  daily 
care  ;  the  constant  dust  of  toil ;  the  mist  of  trouble  perpetually  rising. 
We  cannot  be  expected  to  see  much  in  such  a  smoky  atmosphere  aB 
this  ;  bnt  when  we  shall  pass  beyond,  wo  shall  find  no  clouds  ever  gather 
round  the  sun  to  hide  his  everlasting  brightness.     There  all  is  clear. 
The  daylight  is  serene  as  the  noonday.    We  shall  be  in  a  clearer  atmoe^ 
phere  and  brighter  light. 

III.  The  practical  lessons  we  may  learn  from  this  subject  danand 
your  attention  before  I  close.  Methinks  there  is  an  appeal  to  our 
t/raiiiuiie.  Let  us  be  very  thankful  for  all  we  do  see.  Those  who  do 
not  see  now — ah,  not  even  **  through  a  glass,  darkly  *' — shall  nerer  eee 
face  to  face.  The  eyes  that  never  see  Christ  by  faith  shall  never  sff 
him  with  joy  in  heaven.  If  thou  hast  never  seen  thyself  a  leper,  detiled 
with  sin  and  abashed  with  penitence,  thou  shalt  never  see  thyself 
redeemed  from  sin,  renewed  by  grace,  a  whit«-robed  spirit.  If  thpfl 
hast  no  sense  of  God's  presence  here,  constraining  thee  to  worship  ani 
love  him,  thou  shalt  have  no  sight  of  his  glory  hereafter,  introdndng 
thee  to  the  fnlness  of  joy  and  pleasure  for  evermore.  Oh !  Ixj  glad  fof 
the  sight  Tou  have,  dear  brother,  dear  sister.     It  is  God  that  gsjei^^ 


i 


NOW,  AND  THEN.  419 

thee.  Thon  art  one  born  blind;  and  '* Since  the  world  began  was  it 
not  beard  that  any  man  opened  the  eyes  of  one  that  was  bom  blind." 
This  miracle  has  been  wrought  on  thee;  thon  canst  see,  and  thou  canst 
say  :  **  One  thing  I  know,  that  whereas  T  was  blind,  now  I  see." 

Our  text  teaches  us  that  this  feeble  vision  is  very  hopeful,  Yau  shall 
see  better  btf-and-by.  Oh,  yon  know  not  how  soon — it  may  be  a  day  or 
two  hence — that  we  shall  be  in  glory !  God  may  so  have  ordained  it, 
that  betwixt  us  and  heaven  there  may  be  but  a  step. 

Another  lesson  is  that  of  forbearance  one  with  another.  Let  the 
matters  we  have  spoken  of  soften  the  asperity  of  our  debates ;  let  us 
feel  when  we  are  disputing  about  points  of  difficulty,  that  we  need  not 
get  cross  about  them,  because  after  all  there  are  limits  to  our  present 
eapacity  as  well  as  to  our  actual  knowledge.  Our  disputes  are  often 
childish.  We  might  as  well  leave  some  questions  in  abeyance  for  a 
little  while.  Two  persons  in  the  dark  have  difiPered  about  a  colour,  and 
they  are  wrangling  about  it.  If  we  brought  candles  in  and  held  them 
to  the  colour,  the  candles  would  not  show  what  it  was  ;  but  if  we  look 
at  it  to-morrow  morning,  when  the  sun  shines,  we  shall  be  able  to  tell. 
How  many  difficulties  in  the  word  of  God  are  like  this  !  Not  yet  can 
they  be  justly  discriminated ;  till  the  day  dawn,  the  apocalyptic  symbols 
will  not  be  all  transparent  to  our  own  understanding.  Besides,  we  have  no 
time  to  waste  while  there  is  so  much  work  to  do.  Much  time  is  already 
spent.  Sailing  is  dangerous ;  the  winds  are  high  ;  the  sea  is  rough. 
Trim  the  ship;  keep  the  sails  in  good  order  ;  manage  her  and  keep  her 
off  quicksands.  As  to  certain  other  matters,  we  must  wait  till  we  get 
into  the  fair  haven,  and  are  able  to  talk  with  some  of  the  bright  spirits 
now  before  the  throne.  When  some  of  the  things  they  know  shall  be 
opened  unto  us,  we  shall  confess  the  mistakes  we  made,  and  rejoice  in 
the  light  we  shall  receive. 

Should  not  this  happy  prospect  excite  our  aspiration  and  make  us 

very  desirous  to  be  there  ?     It  is  natural  for  us  to  want  to  know,  but 

we  shall  not  know  as  we  are  known  till  we  are  present  with  the  Lord. 

We  are  at  school  now — children  at  school.    We  shall  go  to  the  college 

soon — the  great  University  of  Heaven — and  take  our  degree  there. 

Yet  some  of  us,  instead  of  being  anxious  to  go,   are  shuddering   at 

the  thought  of  death — the  gate  of  endless  joy  we  dread  to  enter! 

Theie  are  many  persons  who  die  suddenly ;  some  die  in  their  sleep,  and 

many  have  passed  out  of  time  into  eternity  when  it  has  scarcely  been 

known  by  those  who  have  been  sitting  at  their  bedsides.    Depend  upon 

it,  there  is  no  pain  in  dying  ;  the  pain  is  in  living.     When  they  leave 

<^  living  here,  they  have  done  with  pain.    Do  not  blame  death  for 

what  it  does  not  deserve;  it  is  life  that  lingers  on  in  pain :  death  is  the 

^  of  it.      The  man  that  is  afraid  of  dying  ought  to  be  afraid  of 

^^ujg.    Be  content  to  die  whenever  the  Master's  will  shall  bid  thee. 


I' 


410  METJIOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

mnch  of  Dr.  Arnold's  success,  as  a  schoolmaster,  was  due  to  thehMMT 
in  which  he  held  a  good  boy  in  preference  to  a  clever  boy?  Hoiteff- 
tainly  Paul  could  discern  in  the  church  many  jealousies  to  which  th 
sui^erior  abilities  of  those  who  could  speak  foreign  tongues,  andtiwifl  T 
who  could  prophecy  or  preach  well,  gave  rise.  So,  then,  while  k  Bm 
extols  the  grace  of  love,  he  seems  rather  to  disparage  knowledge ;  t  ■ci' 
least,  he  uses  an  illustration  which  tends  to  show  that  the  kind  of  knot'  W^ 
ledge  we  pride  ourselves  in,  is  not  the  most  reliable  thing  in  the  woA  §tt 
Paul  remembered  that  he  was  once  a  child.  A  very  good  thing  for  v^ 
of  us  to  bear  in  mind.  If  we  forget  it,  our  sympathies  are  soondrM 
up,  our  temper  is  apt  to  get  churlish,  our  opinions  may  be  rather  onr- 
bearing,  and  our  selfishness  very  repulsive.  The  foremost  man  of  li 
day  in  the  Christian  church,  and  exerting  tlie  widest  influence  anuoi 
the  converts  to  Christ,  Paul  thought  of  the  little  while  agowhwifce 
was  a  young  child,  and  he  thought  of  it  very  opportunely  too.  Thoagk 
he  might  have  hinted  at  the  attainments  he  had  made  or  the  high  oioe 
he  lield,  and  laid  claim  to  some  degree  of  respect,  he  rather  looks  bick 
at  his  humble  beginnings.  If  there  is  wisdom  in  his  reflection,  theie 
is  to  my  mind  a  vein  of  pleasantry  in  his  manner  of  expressing  it 
''When  I  was  a  child  I  spake  as  a  child,  I  understood  as  a  chiU, 
I  thouj;ht  as  a  child :  but  when  I  became  a  man,  I  put  away  chiMish 
things.'*  Thus  he  compares  two  stages  of  his  natural  life,  and  it 
serves  him  for  a  parable.  In  spiritual  Icnowledge  he  felt  himself 
to  be  then  in  his  infancy.  His  maturity,  his  thorough  manhood, 
lay  before  him  in  prospect.  He  could  easily  imagine  a  future  in 
which  he  should  look  bacjc  on  his  present  self  as  a  mere  tyro,  groping 
his  way  amidst  the  shadows  of  his  own  fancy.  **For  now,*' he 
says,  "we  see  through  a  glass,  darkly;  but  then  face  to  face:  not 
I  know  in  part;  but  then  shall  I  know  even  as  also  I  am  known.*' 
Here  he  employs  one  or  two  fresh  figures.  "  Through  a  gla^  P*  What 
kind  of  a  glass  he  alluded  to,  we  may  not  be  able  exactly  to  determine; 
Well ;  we  will  leave  that  (juestion  for  the  critics  to  disagree  about-.  It 
is  enough  for  us  that  the  meaning  is  obvious.  There  is  all  the  dif- 
ference between  viewing  an  object  through  an  obscure  medium,  and 
closely  inspecting  it  with  the  naked  eye.  We  must  have  the  power  of 
vision  in  either  case,  but  in  the  latter  case  we  can  use  it  to  more 
advantage.  "  Now  we  see  through  a  glass,  darkly,^*  Darkly — in  a 
riddle !  So  weak  are  our  perceptions  of  mind,  that  plain  truths  often 
puzzle  ns.  The  words  that  teach  us  are  pictures  which  need  explanar 
tion.  The  thoughts  that  stir  us  are  visions  which  float  in  our  brains 
and  want  rectifying.  Oh,  for  clearer  vision !  Oh,  for  more  perfect 
knowledge  I  Mark  you,  brethren,  it  is  a  matter  of  congratulation  that 
we  do  see ;  though  we  have  much  cause  for  diffidence,  because  we  do 
but  *'  see  through  a  glass,  darkly.**    Thank  God  we  do  know;  but  let  it 


NOW,  AND  THEN.  411 

:  our  conceit,  we  know  only  in  part.  Beloved,  the  objects  we  look 
I  distant,  and  we  are  near-sighted.  The  revelation  of  God  is  ample 
profound,  but  our  understanding  is  weak  and  shallow, 
ere  are  some  things  which  we  count  very  precious  now,  which  will 
be  of  no  value  to  ns  whatever.  There  are  some  things  that  we 
,  or  think  we  know,  and  we  pride  ourselves  a  good  deal  upon  our 
ledge  ;  but  when  we  shall  become  men  we  shall  set  no  more  value 
that  knowledge  than  a  child  does  upon  his  toys  when  he  grows  up 
a  man.  Our  spiritual  manhood  in  heaven  will  discard  mauy  things 
1  we  now  count  precious,  as  a  full  grown  man  discards  the 
tres  of  his  childhood.  And  there  are  many  things  that  we  have 
iccustomed  to  see  that,  after  this  transient  life  has  passed,  we  shall 
)  more.    Though  we  delighted  in  them,  and  they  pleased  our  eyes 

sojourning  on  earth,  they  will  pass  away  as  a  dream  when  one 
ith ;  we  shall  never  see  them  again,  and  never  want  to  see  them ; 
ir  eyes  in  clearer  light,  anointed  with  eye-salve,  shall  see  brighter 
8,  and  we  shall  never  regret  what  we  have  lost,  in  the  presence  of 
scenes  we  shall  have  found.  Other  things  there  are  that  we  know 
ind  shall  never  forget ;  we  shall  know  them  for  ever,  only  in  a 
r  degree,  because  no  longer  with  a  partial  knowledge  ;  and  there 
me  things  that  we  see  now  that  we  shall  see  in  eternity,  only  we 
see  them  there  in  a  clearer  light. 

we  shall  speak  upon  some  things  that  we  do  see  now,  which  we  are  to 
)re  fully  and  more  distinctly  hereafter;  then  enquire  how  it  is 
%ll  see  them  more  clearly;  and  finish  up  by  considering  what  this 
aches  us. 

\.mong  the  things  that  we  see  now,  as  many  of  us  as  have  had 
res  enlightened  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  is  oursblves. 
see  ourselves  is  one  of  the  first  steps  in  true  religion.     The  mass 
n  have  never  seen  themselves.     They  have  seen  the  flattering 

of  themselves,  and  they  fancy  that  to  be  their  own  fac-simile,  but 
ot.  You  and  I  have  been  taught  of  God's  Holy  Spirit  to  see  our 
n  the  fall ;  we  have  bemoaned  ourselves  on  account  of  that  fall ; 
kve  been  made  conscious  of  our  own  natural  depravity ;  we  have 
ground  to  the  very  dust  by  the  discovery ;  we  have  been  shown 
;tual  sinfulness  and  how  we  have  transgressed  against  the  Most 
We  have  repented  for  this,  and  have  fled  for  refuge  to  the  hope  pet 

us  in  the  gospel.  Day  by  day  we  see  a  little  more  of  ourselves — 
ig  very  pleasing,  I  grant  you — but  something  very  profitable,  for  it 
reat  thing  for  us  to  know  our  emptiness.  It  is  a  step  towards  re« 
g  his  fulness.  It  is  something  to  discover  our  weakness  ;  it  is  a 
Bsential  towards  our  participation  of  divine  strength.  I  suppose 
)nger  we  live  the  more  we  shall  see  ourselves;  and  we  shall 
)ly  come  to  this  conclusion :  "  Vanity  of  vanities;  all  is  vanity:" 


•112  .MKTi:o|'«»|.n'AN    TAUKUXArhn   IM  I.PIT. 

(ind  cry  out  with  Job,  *'  J  am  \  ilc."  The  nioi-c  we  shall  dieoover  of  oo^ 
Helves,  the  more  we  shall  be  sick  of  ourselves.  Bnt  in  hcayen,  I  doabinoi, 
we  shall  fiml  out  that  we  never  saw  even  ourselves  in  the  clearest  light, 
but  only  us  ''  through  a  glass,  darkly,*'  only  as  an  unriddled  thing, »»  a 
deep  enigma  ;  tor  we  shall  understand  more  about  ourselves  in  hearei 
than  we  do  now.  There  we  shall  Fee,  as  we  have  not  yet  seen,  how 
des|)erate  a  mischief  was  the  Fall,  into  what  a  horrible  pit  we  fell,  and 
how  fast  we  were  stuck  in  the  miry  clay.  There  shall  we  see  the 
blackness  of  sin  as  we  have  never  seen  it  here,  and  understand  its  hdl 
desert  as  we  could  not  till  we  shall  look  down  from  yonder  itanj 
height  whither  infinite  mercy  shall  bring  us.  When  we  shall  be  sink- 
ing, ''  Woithy  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain,"  we  shall  look  at  the  robes 
that  we  have  washed  in  his  blood,  and  see  how  white  they  are.  We 
shall  better  understand  then  than  now  how  much  we  needed  washmg^ 
how  crimson  were  the  stains  and  how  precious  was  that  blood  tint 
oil'aced  those  scarlet  spots.  There,  too,  shall  we  know  ourselves  on  the 
bright  side  better  than  we  do  now.  We  know  to-day  that  we  are  saved, 
and  there  is  therefore  now  no  condemnation  to  them  that  are  in  Christ 
•lesus  :  but  that  robe  of  righteousness  which  covers  us  now,  as  it  shtU 
cover  us  then,  will  be  better  seen  by  us,  and  we  shall  discern  hot 
lustrous  it  is,  with  its  needlework  and  wrought  gold — how  mnch  bettff 
than  the  ])earls  and  gems  that  have  decked  the  robes  of  monarchs  are 
the  blood  and  righteousness  of  Jehovah  Jesus,  who  has  given  himself  for 
US.  Hero  wc  know  that  we  are  adopted.  We  feel  the  spirit  of  wo- 
ship:  *'  we  cry,  Abba,  Father;'*  but  there  we  shall  know  better  whtt 
it  is  to  be  the  pons  of  (iod,  for  here  it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  ire 
shall  1)0 ;  but  when  wo  shall  bo  there,  and  when  Christ  shall  appear,  we 
shall  b(^  like  him,  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is,  and  then  we  ebail 
understand  to  the  full  what  sonship  means.  So,  too,  I  know  to-day  that 
I  am  a  joint-heir  with  Ohrist,  but  I  have  a  very  poor  idea  of  what  it  is  I 
am  heir  to ;  but  there  shall  I  see  the  estates  that  belong  to  me;  notonlf 
see  thorn,  but  aotually  enjoy  them.  A  part  shall  every  Christian  hare 
in  the  inheritance  undefiled  and  that  fadeth  not  away,  that  is  reserred 
in  heaven  for  him,  because  he  is  in  Christ  Jesus  ;  one  with  Christ— by 
eternal  union  one.  But  I  am  afraid  that  is  very  much  more  a  riddle  to 
us  than  a  matter  of  understanding.  We  sec  it  as  an  enigma  now,  bat 
there  our  oneness  with  Christ  will  be  as  conspicuous  to  ns  and  as  plain 
as  the  letters  of  the  alphabet.  There  shall  we  know  what  it  is  to  be  a 
member  of  his  body,  of  his  flesh,  and  of  his  bones ;  there  shall  I  under- 
stand the  mystical  marriage  bond  that  knits  the  believer's  soul  to 
Christ ;  there  shall  I  see  how,  as  the  branch  springs  from  the  stem,  nj 
soul  stands  in  union,  vital  union,  with  her  blessed  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
Thus,  one  thing  that  we  see  now  which  we  shall  see  in  a  much  ckanr 
light  hereafter,  is  **  ourselves."  f 

? 


NOW,  AND  THKN.  413 

Here,  too,  we  8ee  the  church,  bat  we  shall  see  the  church 

MUCH  MORE  CLEARLY  BY-AND-BY. 

We  know  there  is  a  church  of  God.  We  know  that  the  Lord 
has  H  people  whom  he  hath  chosen  from  before  the  foundation 
of  the  world :  we  believe  that  these  are  scattered  up  and  down 
tliroughont  our  land,  and  many  other  lands.  There  are  many  of 
tlicm  we  do  not  know,  many  that  we  should  not  particularly  like,  I  dare- 
say, if  we  did  know  them,  on  account  of  their  outward  characteristics ; 
persons  of  very  strange  views,  and  very  odd  habits  perhaps ;  and  yet, 
for  all  that,  the  people  of  the  living  God.  Now,  we  know  this  church, 
we  know  its  glory,  moved  with  one  life,  quickened  with  one  Spirit, 
redeemed  with  one  blood,  we  believe  in  this  church,  and  we  feel  attach- 
ment to  it  for  the  sake  of  Jesus  Christ,  who  has  married  the  church  as 
tlie  Bride.  But,  oh !  when  we  shall  get  to  heaven,  how  much  more  we 
sliall  know  of  tlic  church,  and  how  we  shall  see  her  face  to  face,  and  not 
'*  througli  a  glass,  darkly.**  There  we  shall  know  something  more  of  the 
numbers  oi  the  chosen  than  we  do  now,  it  may  be  to  our  intense  surprise. 
There  we  shall  find  some  amongst  the  company  of  God's  elect,  whom  we 
in  our  bitterness  of  spirit  had  condemned,  and  there  we  shall  miss  some 
who,  in  our  charity,  we  have  conceived  to  be  perfectly  secure.  We 
ftball  know  better  then  who  are  the  Lord*8  and  who  are  not  than  we 
ever  can  know  here.  Here  all  our  processes  of  discernment  fail  us. 
Jodas  comes  in  with  the  apostles,  and  Demas  takes  his  pai-t  amongst 
tlie  saints,  but  there  we  shall  know  the  righteous,  for  we  shall  see 
them;  there  will  be  one  flock  and  one  Shepherd,  and  he  that  on 
the  throne  doth  reign  for  evermore  shall  be  glorified.  We  shall 
understand  then,  what  the  history  of  the  church  has  been  in  all 
the  past,  and  why  it  hiis  been  so  strange  a  history  of  conflict  and 
conquest.  Probably,  we  shall  know  more  of  the  history  of  the 
duirch  in  the  future.  From  that  higher  elevation  and  brighter  at- 
mosphere we  shall  understand  better  what  are  the  Lord*s  designs  con- 
oeming  his  people  in  the  latter  day ;  and  what  glory  shall  i*edouud  to  his 
own  name  from  his  redeemed  ones,  when  he  shall  have  gathered  together 
all  that  are  called  and  chosen  and  faithful  from  among  the  sons  of  men. 
Thia  is  one  of  the  joys  we  are  looking  for,  that  we  shall  come  to  the 
general  assembly  and  church  of  the  firstborn  whose  names  are  written 
iR  heaven;  and  have  fellowship  with  those  who  have  fellowship  with 
Qod  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

Thirdly.    Is  it  not  possible,  nay,  is  it  not  certain,  that  in  the  next 

state    WE  SHALL  SEE  AND    KNOW  MORE    OF    THE  PROVIDENCE  OF    GOD 
THAN  WE  DO  NOW? 

Here  we  sec  the  providence  of  God,  but  it  is  in  a  glass,  darkly.  The 
pottle  saya  **  through  **  a  glass.  .  There  was  glass  in  the  apostles*  days. 
Hot  a  substance  snch  as  our  windows  are  now  made  of,  but  thick, 


414  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

dull  colcnrcd  glass,  not  much  more  transparent  than  that  whidiisniei 
in  the  manufacture  of  common  bottles,  bo  that  looking  through  a  pieoe 
of  that  glass  you  would  not  see  much.  That  is  like  what  we  now  see  oC 
divine  providence.  "We  believe  all  things  work  together  for  good  to 
them  that  love  God ;  we  have  seen  how  they  work  together  for  good  in 
some  cases,  and  experimentally  proved  it  to  be  so.  But  still  it  is  rather 
a  matter  of  faith  than  a  matter  of  sight  with  us.  We  cannot  td 
how  "every  dark  and  bending  line  meets  in  the  centre  of  his  loTe,"  We 
do  not  yet  perceive  how  he  will  make  those  dark  dispensations  of 
trials  and  afflictions  that  come  upon  his  people  really  to  subserve  hii 
gloiy  and  their  lasting  happiness;  but  up  there  we  shall  see  proridenoe^ 
as  it  were,  face  to  face ;  and  I  suppose  it  will  be  amongst  our  greateit 
surprises,  the  discovery  of  how  the  Lord  dealt  with  us.  "  Why,"  we  shsD 
some  of  us  say,  "we  prayed  against  those  veiy  circumstances  which  wew 
the  best  that  could  have  been  appointed  for  us."  **  Ah  ! "  another  iriD 
say,  "  I  have  fretted  and  troubled  myself  over  what  was,  after  all,  the 
richest  mercy  the  Lord  ever  sent."  Sometimes  I  have  known  penooi 
rcfii-e  a  letter  at  the  door,  and  it  lias  happened,  in  some  cases,  that 
there  has  been  something  very  valuable  in  it,  and  the  postman  hn 
said,  afterwards,  "  You  did  not  know  the  contents,  or  else  you  would 
not  have  refused  it."  And  often  God  has  sent  us,  in  the  blad 
envelope  of  trial,  such  a  j>recious  mass  of  mercy,  that  if  we  had  known 
what  was  in  it,  we  should  have  taken  it  in,  and  been  glad  to  pay  tot 
it — ghid  to  give  it  house  room,  to  entertain  it ;  but  becaune  it  looked 
black  we  were  prone  to  shut  our  door  against  it.  Now,  up  there  le 
shall  know  not  only  more  of  ourselves,  but  perceive  the  reasons  of  many 
of  G(>d's  dealings  with  us  on  a  larger  scale  ;  and  we  shall  there  perbapi 
discover  that  wars  that  devasted  nations,  and  pestilences  that  fill  grafe?, 
and  eartluiuakes  that  make  cities  tremble,  are,  after  all,  necessar}'  cogi 
iu  the  great  wheel  of  the  divine  machinery;  and  he  who  sits  upon  tbe 
throne  at  this  moment,  and  rules  supremely  ever}'  creature  that  is  cithtf 
in  heaven,  or  earth,  or  hell,  will  there  make  it  manifest  to  us  that 
his  government  was  right.  It  is  good  to  think  in  these  times  when 
everything  seems  loosening,  that  "the  government  shall  be  upon  Ml 
shoulder:  and  his  name  shall  be  called  Wonderful,  Counsellor,  The  migh^ 
Goii,  The  everlasting  Father,  The  Prince  of  Peace."  It  must  comeoot 
right  in  the  long  run ;  it  must  be  well ;  every  part  and  portion  must  work 
together  with  a  unity  of  design  to  promote  God's  glory  and  the  sainft 
good.  We  shall  see  it  there,  and  we  shall  lift  up  our  song  with  newMt 
and  joy,  as  fresh  displays  of  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  God,  wl«* 
ways  are  past  finding  out,  are  unfolded  to  our  admiring  view. 

Fourthly.     It  is  surely  no  straining  of  tlie  te.xt  to  say,  that, 
here  we  know  something  of  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel, 
AfiVrERlES  OF  THE  FAITH,  by-aud-by,  in  a  few  months  or  y< 


NOW,  AND  THEN.  415 

longest;  tVB  alidll  Jcnoia  a  ffreat  deal  more  than  we  do  now.     There  are 

some  grand  doctrines,  brethren  and  sisters,  we  dearly  love,  but  though  we 

love  them,  our  understanding  is  too  feeble  to  grasp  them  fully.    We 

account  them  to  be  mysteries ;  we  reverently  acknowledge  them,  yet  we 

dare  not  attempt  to  explain  them.    They  are  matters  of  faith  to  us.    It 

may  be  that  in  heaven  there  shall  be  counsels  of  eternal  wisdom  into  which 

no  saints  or  angels  can  peer.  It  is  the  glory  of  God  to  conceal  a  matter. 

Surely,  no  creature  will  ever  be  able,  even  when  exalted  to  heaven,  to 

comprehend  all  the  thoughts  of  the  Creator.     We  shall  never  be  omni- 

Bcien( — we  cannot  be.    God  alone  knoweth   everything,   and  under- 

standeth    everything.    But  how  much  more  of  authentic  truth  shall 

we  discern  when  the  mists  and  shadows  have  dissolved ;    and  how  much 

more  shall  we  understand  when  raised  to  that  higher  sphere  smd  endowed 

with   brighter  faculties,   none  of  us  can  tell.     Probably,  things  that 

puzzle  us  here  will  be  as  plain  as  possible  there.     We  shall  perhaps 

smile  at  our   own  ignorance.      I   have  fancied  sometimes   that  the 

elucidations  of  leanied  doctors  of  divinity,  if  they  could  be  submitted 

to  the  very  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  would  only  cause  them  to 

smile  at  the  learned  ignorance  of  the  sons  of  earth.     Oh  !  how  little 

we  do  know,  but  how  much  we  shall  know!    I  am  sure  we  shall  know, 

for  it  is  written,  "  Then  shall  I  know  even  as  also  I  have  known."    We 

now  see  things  in  a  mist — '*  men  as  trees,  walking  " — a  doctrine  here,  and 

a  doctrine  there.    And  we  are  often  at  a  loss  to  conjecture  how  one  part 

harmonizes  with  another  part  of  the  same  system,  or  to  make  out  how 

all  these  doctrines  are  consistent.     This  knot  cannot  be  untied,  that 

gnarl  cannot  be  unravelled,  but — 

"  Then  .shall  I  see,  aiid  hear,  and  know 
All  I  desired  or  wisli'd  below  : 
And  every  power  find  tsweet  employ 
In  that  eternal  world  of  jo}/* 

Birt,  my   dear  brethren  and  sisters,  having  kept  you  thus  far  in 

the  outer  courts,   I   would  fain   lead  you   into   the   temple ;    or,  to 

€han;ic  the  figure,  if  in  the  beginning  I  have  set  forth  good  wine, 

certainly  I  am  not  going  to  bring  out  that  which  is  worse  ;  rather 

would  I  have  you  say,  as  the  ruler  of  the  feast  did  to  the  bridegroom, 

"thou  has  kept  the  good  wine  until  now."    Here  we  see  Jesus 

Christ,  but  we  do  not  see  him  as  we  shall  see  him  soon.    We  have 

teen  him  by  faith  in  such  a  way,  that  we  have  beheld  our  burdens  laid 

oa  him,  and  our  iniquities  carried  by  him  into  the  wilderness,  where, 

J:  if  they  be  sought  for,  they  shall  not  be  found.    We  have  seen  enougli  of 

Jesus  to  know  that  "he  is  altogether  lovely  ;"   we  can  say  of  him,  he 

[fis  all  ray  salvation,  and  all  my  desire."     Sometimes,  when  he  throws 

the  lattice,  and  shows  himself  through  those  windows  of  agate 

gates  of  carbuncle,  in  the  ordinances  of  his  house,  at  the  Lord's 


41 G  MI-rrUOl'ULlTAN   TABKHNACLE  rULPlT. 

Slipper  eBpccially,  the  King's  beaut}'  has  cntruiiced  us  even  to  onr 
heart's  ravishment;  yet  all  we  liave  ever  seen  is  somewhat  like  the 
report  which  the  Queen  of  Sheba  had  of  Solomon's  wisdom.  When  we 
once  get  to  the  court  of  the  Great  King  we  shall  declare  that  the  half 
1)08  not  been  told  us.  We  shall  say,  ''  mine  eyes  shall  behold,  and  not 
another."  Brethren,  is  not  this  the  very  cream  of  heaven  ?  There 
have  been  many  suggestions  of  what  we  shall  do  in  heaven,  and  what 
we  shall  enjoy,  but  they  all  seem  to  me  to  be  wide  of  the  mark  com- 
pared with  this  one,  that  we  shall  be  with  Jesus,  be  like  him,  and  shall 
behold  his  glory.  Oh,  to  see  the  feet  that  were  nailed,  and  to  tench 
the  hand  that  was  pierced,  and  to  look  upon  the  head  that  wore  the 
thorns,  and  to  bow  before  him  who  is  ineffable  love,  unspeakable  con- 
descension, inlinit^i  tenderness  I  Oh,  to  bow  before  him,  and  tu  kiss 
that  blessed  face!  Jesu,  what  better  do  we  \^'ant  than  to  see  thee 
by  thine  own  light — to  see  thee,  and  speak  with  thee,  as  when  a  man 
speaketh  with  his  friend?  It  is  pleasant  to  talk  about  this,  hut  wbat 
will  it  be  there  when  the  (Kiarl  gates  open  ?  The  streets  of  gold  will 
have  small  attraction  to  us,  and  the  harps  of  angels  will  but  slightly 
enchant  us,  compared  with  the  King  in  the  midst  of  the  throne.  He  it 
is  who  shall  rivet  our  gaze,  absorb  our  thoughts,  enchain  our  affection, 
and  move  all  our  sacred  passions  to  their  highest  pitch  of  c*elestial 
ardour.    We  shall  see  Jesus. 

Once  again  (and  here  we  come  into  the  deep  things),  beyond  a  doubli 
WE  SHAiJj  ALSO  SEE  GoD.  It  is  Written  that  the  pure  in  heart  shall  see 
God.  God  is  seen  now  in  his  works  and  in  his  word.  Little  indeed 
could  these  eyes  bear  of  the  beatific  vision,  yet  we  have  reason  to  ex- 
pect that,  as  far  as  creatures  can  bear  the  sight  of  the  infinite  Creator, 
we  shall  be  permitted  to  see  God.  We  read  that  Aaron  and  ccrlain 
chosen  ones  saw  the  throne  of  God,  and  the  brightness  as  it  were  of  a 
sapphire  stone— light,  pure  as  jasper.  In  heaven  it  is  the  i)resencc  of 
God  that  is  the  light  thereof.  God's  more  immediately  dwelling  iu  the 
nudst  of  the  new  Jerusalem  is  its  peerless  glory  and  pocnliai'  bliss. 
We  shall  then  understand  more  of  God  than  we  do  now  ;  we  shall  come 
nearer  to  him,  be  more  familiar  with  him,  be  more  filled  with  him.  The 
love  of  God  shall  be  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts;  we  shall  knew  onr 
Father  as  we  yet  know  hifti  not ;  we  shall  know  the  Son  to  a  fuller 
degree  than  he  has  yet  revealed  himself  to  us,  and  we  shall  know  tl»e 
Holy  Spirit  in  his  personal  love  and  tenderness  towards  us,  beyond  all 
those  inttuences  and  operations  which  have  soothed  us  in  our  sorrows 
and  guided  us  in  our  perplexities  here  below.  I  leave  your  thoughts 
and  your  desires  to  follow  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit.  As  for  me,  I 
cower  before  the  thought  while  I  revel  in  it.  I,  who  have  strained  my 
eyes  while  gazing  at  nature,  where  the  things  that  are  mj\de  show  the 
handiwork  of  God ;   I,  whose  conscience   has  been   awe-struck  as  I 


NOW,   AND  THEN.  417 

listened  to  the  voice  of  God  proclaiming  his  holy  law  ;  I,  whose  heart 
has  been  melted  while  there  broke  on  mv  ears  the  tender  accents  of 
hie  blessed  gospel  in  those  snatches  of  sacred  melody  that  relieve  the 
harden  of  prophecy ;  I,  who  have  recognised  in  the  babe  of  Bethlehem 
tiie  hope  of  Israel ;  in  the  man  of  Nazareth,  the  Messiah  that  should 
come;  in  the  victim  of  Calvary,  the  one  Mediator;  in  the  risen 
JesQs,  the  well-beloved  Son— to  me,  verily,  God  incarnate  has  been 
80  palpably  revealed  that  I  have  almost  seen  God,  for  I  have,  as  it 
were,  seen  him  in  whom  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily  doth 
dwell.  Still  I  "see  through  a  glass,  darkly."  Illumine  these  dark 
senses),  waken  this  drowsy  conscience,  purify  my  heart,  give  me  fellowship 
with  Christ,  and  then  bear  me  up,  translate  me  to  the  third  heavens ; 
so  I  may,  so  I  can,  so  I  shall  see  God.  But  what  that  means,  or  what 
it  is,  ah  me  !   I  cannot  tell. 

II.  We  proposed  to  enquire,  in  the  second  place,  how  this  very 

(IKMAIUCABLK  CHANGE  SHALL  BE  EVFE&TEDl    WhY  18  IT  THAT  WE  SHALL 

sffiE  MORE  CLEARLY  THEN  THAN  NOW?  We  Cannot  altogether  answer 
the  question,  but  one  or  two  suggestions  may  help  us.  No  doubt 
many  of  these  things  will  be  more  clearly  revealed  in  the  next  state. 
Here  the  light  is  like  the  dawn  :  it  is  dim  twilight.  In  heaven  it  will 
be  the  blaze  of  noon.  God  has  declared  something  of  himself  by  the 
mouth  of  his  holy  prophets  and  apostles.  He  has  been  pleased,  through  the 
lips  of  his  Son,  whom  he  hath  appointed  heir  of  all  things,  to  speak  to  us 
more  plainly,  to  show  us  more  openly  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  and  the 
counsel  of  his  will.  These  are  the  lirst  steps  to  knowledge.  But  there 
the  light  will  be  as  the  light  of  seven  days,  and  there  the  mnuitestution 
of  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  shall  be  brighter  and  clearer  than  it  is 
now ;  for  God,  the  only- wise  God,  shall  unveil  to  us  the  mysteries,  and 
exhibit  to  us  the  glories  of  his  everlasting  kingdom.  The  revelation  we 
now  have  suits  us  as  men  clad  in  our  poor  mortal  bodies;  the  revelation 
then  will  suit  us  as  immortal  spirits.  When  we  have  been  raised 
from  the  dead,  it  will  be  suitable  to  our  immortal  spiritual  bodies. 
Here,  too,  wo  are  at  a  distance  from  many  of  the  things  we  long  to 
know  something  of,  but  there  we  shall  be  nearer  to  them.  We  shall 
then  be  on  a  vantage  ground,  with  the  entire  horizon  spread  out  before 
US.  Onr  Lord  Jesus  is,  as  to  his  personal  jpresence,  far  away  from  us. 
Yfe  see  him  through  the  telescope  of  faith,  bnt  then  we  shall  see  him 
face  to  face.  His  literal  and  bodily  presence  is  in  heaven,  since  he  was 
taken  up,  and  we  need  to  be  taken  up  likewise  to  be  with  him  where  he  is 
that  we  may  literally  behold  him.  Get  to  the  fountain-head,  and  you  under- 
Hand  more ;  stand  in  the  centre,  and  things  seem  regular  and  orderly, 
tf  you  could  stand  in  the  sun  and  see  the  orbits  in  which  the  planets 
devolve  round  that  central  luminary,  it  would  l^ecome  clear  enough  ; 
)ut  for  many  un  age  astronomers  were  unable  to  discover  anything  of 


418  METROPOLITAN  TABBKNACLB  PULPIT. 

order,  and  spoke  of  the  planets  as  progressive,  retrograde,  and  standini; 
still.  Let  us  get  to  God,  the  centre,  and  wo  shall  see  how  proTidenn 
in  order  revolves  round  his  sapphire  throne.  We,  oars^lTeSy  too,  when 
wfi  get  to  heaven,  shall  be  better  qualiiied  to  see  than  we  are  now.  It 
would  be  an  inconvenience  for  ns  to  know  here  as  much  as  we  shall 
know  in  heaven.  No  doubt  we  have  sometimes  thour;ht  that  if  we  hid 
better  ears  it  would  be  a  great  blessing.  We  have  wished  weconld  hev 
ten  miles  oti*;  but  probably  we  should  be  no  better  oif ;  we  might  heir 
too  much,  and  the  sounds  might  drown  each  other.  Probably  our  sight 
is  not  as  good  as  we  wish  it  were,  but  a  large  increase  of  ocalar  power 
might  not  be  of  any  use  to  us.  Our  natural  organs  are  fitted  for  oor 
present  sphere  of  being ;  and  our  mental  faculties  are,  in  the  case  of 
most  of  us,  properly  adapted  to  our  moral  requirements.  If  we  knet 
more  of  our  own  sinfulness,  we  might  be  driven  to  despair;  if  we  kner 
more  of  God's  glory,  we  might  die  of  terror  ;  if  we  had  moreund^- 
standing,  unless  we  had  equivalent  capacity  to  employ  it,  we  might  be 
filled  with  conceit  and  tormented  with  ambition.  Bat  up  there  we 
shall  have  our  minds  and  our  systems  strengthened  to  receive  more, 
without  the  damage  that  would  come  to  us  here  from  overleaping  the 
lx)undarie8  ©f  order,  supremely  appointed  and  divinely  regulated.  We 
I'unnot  here  drink  the  wine  of  the  kingdom,  it  is  too  strong  for  us;  hot 
up  there  we  shall  drink  it  new  in  our  heavenly  Father's  kingdom, 
without  feiir  of  the  intoxications  of  pride,  or  the  staggerings  of  passioM. 
We  shall  know  even  as  we  aie  known.  Besides,  dear  friends,  the 
utmosphere  of  heaven  is  so  much  clearer  than  this,  that  I  do  not 
wonder  we  ctm  see  better  there.  Here  there  is  the  smoke  of  daily 
care  ;  the  constant  dust  of  toil ;  the  mist  of  trouble  perpetually  rising. 
We  cannot  be  expected  to  see  much  in  such  a  smoky  atmosphere  is 
this  ;  but  when  we  shall  pass  beyond,  we  shall  find  no  clouds  ever  gather 
round  the  sun  to  hide  his  everlasting  brightness.  There  all  is  clear. 
The  daylight  is  serene  as  the  noonday.  We  shall  be  in  a  clearer  atmos- 
phere and  brighter  light. 

III.  The  practical  lessons  we  may  learn  Irom  this  subject  demand 
your  attention  before  I  close.  Methinks  there  is  an  appeal  to  our 
(jratitude.  Let  us  be  very  thankful  for  all  we  do  see.  Those  who  do 
not  see  now — ah,  not  even  "  through  a  glass,  darkly  ^ — shall  never  see 
face  to  face.  The  eyes  that  never  see  Christ  by  faith  shall  never  see 
him  with  joy  in  heaven.  If  thou  hast  never  seen  thyself  a  leper»  defiled 
with  sin  and  abashed  with  penitence,  thou  shalt  never  see  thyself 
redeemed  from  sin,  renewed  by  grace,  a  white-robed  spirit.  If  thgn 
hast  no  sense  of  God's  presence  here,  constraining  thee  to  worship  and 
love  him,  thou  shalt  have  no  sight  of  his  glory  hereafter,  introdncing 
thee  to  the  fulness  of  joy  and  pleasure  for  evermore.  Oh  I  l>e  glad  for 
the  sight  you  have,  dear  brother,  dear  sister.     It  is  God  that  gave  it  to 


J 


NOW,  AND  THEN.  419 

thee.  Thon  art  one  bom  blind;  and  '* Since  the  world  began  was  it 
not  beard  that  any  man  opened  the  eyes  of  one  that  was  bom  blind." 
This  miracle  has  been  wrought  on  thee;  thon  canst  see,  and  thon  canst 
say  :  '*  One  thing  I  know,  that  whereas  T  was  blind,  now  I  see." 

Our  text  teaches  us  that  this  feeble  vision  is  very  hopeful  You  shall 
see  better  hy-and-ly.  Oh,  yon  know  not  how  soon — it  may  be  a  day  or 
two  hence — that  we  shall  be  in  glory !  God  may  so  have  ordained  it, 
that  betwixt  us  and  heaven  there  may  be  but  a  step. 

Another  lesson  is  that  of  forbearance  one  with  another.  Let  the 
matters  we  have  spoken  of  soften  the  asperity  of  our  debates ;  let  us 
feel  when  we  are  disputing  about  points  of  difficulty,  that  we  need  not 
get  cross  about  them,  because  after  all  there  are  limits  to  onr  present 
capacity  as  well  as  to  our  actual  knowledge.  Onr  disputes  are  often 
childish.  We  might  as  well  leave  some  questions  in  abeyance  for  u 
little  while.  Two  persons  in  the  dark  have  difiPered  about  a  colour,  and 
they  are  wrangling  about  it.  If  we  brought  candles  in  and  held  them 
to  the  colour,  the  candles  would  not  show  what  it  was  ;  but  if  we  look 
at  it  to-morrow  morning,  when  the  sun  shines,  we  shall  be  able  to  tell. 
flow  many  difficulties  in  the  word  of  God  are  like  this  !  Not  yet  can 
they  be  justly  discriminated ;  till  the  day  dawn,  the  apocalyptic  symbols 
will  not  be  all  transparent  to  our  own  understanding.  Besides,  we  have  no 
time  to  waste  while  there  is  so  much  work  to  do.  Much  time  is  already 
spent.  Sailing  is  dangerous ;  the  winds  are  high  ;  the  sea  is  rough. 
Trim  the  ship;  keep  the  sails  in  good  order  ;  manage  her  and  keep  her 
off  quicksands.  As  to  certain  other  matters,  we  must  wait  till  we  get 
into  the  fair  haven,  and  are  able  to  talk  with  some  of  the  bright  spirits 
now  before  the  throne.  When  some  of  the  things  they  know  shall  be 
opened  unto  us,  we  shall  confess  the  mistakes  we  made,  and  rejoice  in 
the  light  we  shall  receive. 

Should  not  this  happy  prospect  excite  our  aspiration  and  make  us 
very  desirous  to  be  there  ?  It  is  natural  for  us  to  want  to  know,  but 
we  shall  not  know  as  we  are  known  till  we  are  present  with  the  Lord. 
We  are  at  school  now — children  at  school.  We  shall  go  to  the  college 
soon — the  great  University  of  Heaven — and  take  our  degree  there. 
Yet  some  of  us,  instead  of  being  anxious  to  go,  are  shuddering  at 
the  thought  of  death — the  gate  of  endless  joy  we  dread  to  enter! 
There  are  many  persons  who  die  suddenly ;  some  die  in  their  sleep,  and 
many  have  passed  out  of  time  into  eternity  when  it  has  scarcely  been 
known  by  those  who  have  been  sitting  at  their  bedsides.  Depend  upon 
it,  there  is  no  pain  in  dying  ;  the  pain  is  in  living.  When  they  leave 
off  living  here,  they  have  done  with  pain.  Do  not  blame  death  for 
what  it  does  not  deserve;  it  is  life  that  lingers  on  in  pain :  death  is  the 
Jod  of  it.  The  man  that  is  a^aid  of  dying  ought  to  be  a^aid  of 
living.     Be  content  to  die  whenever  the  Master's  will  shall  bid  thee. 


420  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Commit  thy  spirit  to  his  keeping.   Who  that  hath  seen  but  the  glin^Mei 
of  his  beaming  countenance  doth  not  long  to  see  his  face,  that  is  u 
the  sun  shining  in  his   strength  ?     0  Lord !  thy  will  be  done.    Let 
us  speedily  behold  thee,  if  so  it  may  be — only  this  one  word,  if  so  it 
may  be.     Do  we  now  see,  and  do  we  expect  to  see  better  ?    Let  us  blea 
the  name  of  the  Lord,  who  hath  chosen  us  of  his  mercy  and  of  his 
infinite  lovingkindness.     On  the  other  hand,  let  it  cause  us  great  anii^j 
if  we  have  not  believed  in  Jesus,  for  he  that  hath  not  belieTed  in 
him,  dying  as  he  is,  will  never  see  the  face  of  God  with  joy.    Oh! 
unbeliever,  be  concerned  about  your  soul,  and  seek  thou  after  him, 
repair  thou  to  him.    Oh !  that  God  would  open  thy  eyes  now  in  tliin 
very  house  of  prayer.     Blessed  for  thee  to  know  in  part.     Thrice- 
blessed,  I  say ;  for  as  surely  as  thou  knowcst  in  part  now,  thou  shalt 
fully  know  hereafter.    Be  it  your  happy  lot  to  know  him,  whom  to 
know  is  life  eternal.    God  grant  it,  for  Jesus'  sake.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  bei'X)re  Sermon — 2  Corinthians  t. 


SoMK  of  the  Scriiiun  readers  may  not  be  aware  that  we  issue  a  monthly  magaziii«5-» 
entitled  The  Sico/xl  and  the  Trouel^  price  3<I.  In  it  will  be  found  interestira^ 
dcbcription.s  of  holy  works  in  nil  denominations,  theological  arUcleti,  at*** 
periodical  information  as  to  the  various  institutions  connected  with  the  Tabe*'*' 
nacle.  It  is  believed  that  The  Svcord  and  the  TrotrelhAs  tlio  largest  circulitic**' 
of  any  magazine  of  its  class,  with  the  exception  of  those  which  attract 
by  religious  novels  ;  such  a  mode  of  gaining  popularity  the  Editor  wfll  ner 
emi)loj. 

The  volume  entitled  Feathers  /or  Arrows  was  compiled  by  us  with  the  vic^ 
of   I'unjishing  fresh   illustrations  to  religious  teachers.     The   first  editioa  o^ 
ten  thousand  was  sold  at  once,  and  we  went  to  press  with  a  second  ten  tlirn- 
sand.      It  is  a  beautifully  bound  volume,  and  a  very  cheap  half-crowu^s  woiiA. 
^as^more  «t  Alabaster  are  the  publishers. 


r< 


iT. 


•4 


pfletr^pliten  i^nkntarie  §vi\i^\i 


"YOTJR  OWN  SALVATION." 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morninq,  July  SOth,  1871,  by 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT     THE     METROPOLITAN     TABERNACLE,     NEWINGTON. 


*' Your  own  salvation." — Philippians  ii.  12. 

^B  Belect  the  words,  "  your  own  salvation,^^  as  our  text  this  morning, 
t>fc  out  of  any  singularity,  or  from  the  slightest  wish  tliat  the  brevity  of 
le  text  should  surprise  you ;  but  because  our  subject  will  be  the  more 
early  before  you  if  only  these  three  words  are  announced.  If  I  had 
>niin'«lly  taken  the  whole  verse  I  could  not  have  attempted  to  expound 
without  distractinjr  your  attention  from  the  topic  which  now  weighs 
on  ray  heart.    0  that  the  divine  Spirit  may  bring  home  to  each  one 

Sour  minds  the  unspeakable  importance  of  "your  own  salvation  "! 
^e  have  heard  it  said  by  hearers  that  they  come  to  listen  to  us,  and 
talk  to  them  upon  subjects  in  which  they  have  no  interest.    You\ 
^  not  be  able  to  make  this  complaint  to-day,  for  we  shall  speak  only 

*  ^our  own  salvation  ;  '*  and  nothing  can  more  concern  you.    It  hak. 
'^times  been  said  that  preachers  frequently  select  very  unpractical 
fxxes.    No  such  objection  can  be  raised  to-day,  for  nothing  can  be 
'^  practical  than  this  ;  nothing  more  needful  than  to  urge  you  to  see 

*  Tour  own  salvation."  We  have  even  heard  it  said  that  ministers 
^^nt  in  abstruse  subjects,  paradoxical  doprmas,  and  mysteries 
passing  comprehension  ;  but,  assuredly,  we  will  keep  to  plain  sailing 
^  morning.  No  sublime  doctrines,  no  profound  questions  shall 
'plex  you  ;  you  shall  only  be  called  on  to  consider  "  your  own 
▼ation  :  "  a  very  homely  theme,  and  a  very  simple  one,  but  for  all 
^t,  the  most  weighty  that  can  be  brought  before  you.  I  shall  seek 
^r  simple  words  also,  and  plain  sentences,  to  suit  the  simplicity  and 
ftinness  of  the  subject,  that  there  may  be  no  thought  whatever  about 
10  speaker's  language,  but  only  concerning  this  one,  sole,  only  topic, 
your  own  salvation."  I  ask  you  all,  as  reasonable  men  who  woulc^ 
^  injure  or  neglect  yourselves,  to  lend  me  your  most  serious  attention, 
base  away  the  swaiming  vanities  which  buzz  around  vou,  and  let  each 
an  think  for  himself  upon  his  '^  own  salvation.'*  0  may  the  Spirit 
'  God  set  each  one  of  yon  apart  in  a  mental  solitude,  and  constrain 
Nos.  1,003. 


422  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

you  each  one,  Bin^lj,  to  face  the  truth  concerQing  his  own  state  1    Eidi 
man  apart,  each  woman  apart;  the  father  apart,  and  the  child  apart: 
may  you  now  come  before  the  Lord  in  solemn  thought^  and  may 
nothing:  occupy  your  attention  but  tliis  :  "  your  own  salvation^" 
I.  We  will  begin  this  morninj;'s  meditation  by  noting  the  matter 

LENDER  OOSQlDERATIOlf—Salvafiafl  / 

Salvation  I  a  great  word,  not  always  understood,  often  narrowed  down* 
and  its  very  marrow  overlooked.  Salvation  !  This  concerns  every  one 
here  present.  We  all  fell  in  our  first  parent;  we  have  all  sinned 
personally ;  we  shall  all  perish  unless  we  find  salvation.  The  word 
salvation  contains  within  it  deliverance  from  the  guilt  of  our  past  mi 
We  have  broken  God's  law  each  one  of  us,  more  or  less  flagrantly;  we 
have  all  wandered  the  downward  road,  though  each  has  cbofien  a 
different  way.  Salvation  brings  to  us  the  blotting  out  of  the  trans- 
gressions of  the  past,  acquital  from  criminality,  purging  from  all 
guiltiness,  that  we  may  stand  accepted  before  the  great  Juc^.  Wliat 
man  in  his  sober  senses  will  deny  that  forgiveness  is  an  nnspeakablj 
desirable  blessing! 

But  salvation  means  more  than  that :  it  includes  deliverofice  from  th$ 
power  of  s%n.  Naturally  we  are  all  fond  of  evil,  and  we  mn  after  it 
greedily  ;  we  are  the  bondslaves  of  iniquity,  and  we  love  the  b(»dag^ 
This  last  is  the  worst  feature  of  the  case.  But  when  salvation  comes  it 
delivers  the  man  from  the  power  of  sin.  He  learns  that  it  is  evil,  and  be 
regards  it  as  such,  loatlics  it,  repents  that  he  has  ever  been  in  bve  witk 
it,  turns  his  back  upon  it,  becomes,  through  God's  Spirit,  the  master  of 
his  lusts,  puts  the  flesh  beneath  his  feet,  and  rises  into  the  liberty  of  tltt 
children  of  God.  Alas  I  there  are  many  who  do  not  care  for  this :  if  thie 
be  salvation  they  would  not  give  a  farthing  for  it.  They  love  their  aim; 
they  rejoice  to  follow  the  devices  and  imaginations  of  their  own  corrapt 
hearts.  Yet  be  assured,  this  emancipation  from  bad  habita»  unclean 
desires,  and  carnal  passions  is  the  main  point  in  salvation,  and  if  it  be  not 
ours,  salvation  in  its  other  branches  is  not  and  cannot  be  enjoyed  bynL 
Dear  liearer,  dost  thou  possess  salvation  from  sin  ?  hast  thou  escaped 
the  corruption  wliich  is  in  the  world  through  lust?  If  not,  what  halt 
thou  to  do  with  salvation  ?  To  any  right-minded  man  deliverance  from 
unholy  principles  is  regarded  as  the  greatest  of  all  blessings.  What 
thinkest  thou  of  it  ? 

Salvation  includes  deliverance  frmn  the  present  toraih  of  Qod  which 
abides  upon  the  unsaved  man  every  moment  of  his  life*  Every  peraoD 
who  is  unforgiven  is  the  object  of  divine  wrath.  **Qod  is  angry  with 
the  wicked  every  day.  If  he  turn  not,  he  will  whet  his  swont"  **He 
that  believeth  not  is  condemned  already,  because  he  hath  not  believed 
in  the  name  of  the  only  begotten  Sun  of  God."  I  frequently  hear  the 
statement  that  this  is  a  state  of  probation.  This  is  a  great  mistake 
for  our  probation  has  long  since  passed.  Sinners  have  been  proved 
and  found  to  be  unworthy ;  they  have  been  *'  wei<.'hed  in  the  balanoeiy'' 
and  "found  wanting."  If  you  have  not  believed  in  Jesus,  condemnir 
tion  already  rests  upon  you:  you  are  reprieved  awhile,  but  yoar 
condemnation  is  recorded.  Salvation  takes  a  man  from  under  the 
cloud  of  divine  wrath,  and  reveals  to  him  the  divine  love.  He  oaa 
then  say,    ''0  God,   I   will  praise  thee,  though  thoa  waet  mffi 


'*  YOUB  OWN  SALVATION."  423 

with  me,  thine  anger  is  turned  away,  and  thoa  comfortest  me." 
Oh,  it  is  not  hell  hereafter  which  is  tne  only  thing  a  sinner  has  to 
fear,  it  is  the  wrath  of  God  which  rests  upon  him  now.  To  be  un- 
reconciled to  God  now  is  an  awful  thing  :  to  have  God's  arrow  pointed 
at  you  as  it  is  at  this  moment,  even  though  it  fly  not  from  the  string  as 
yet,  is  a  terrible  thing.  It  is  enough  to  make  you  tremble  from  head 
to  foot  when  you  learn  that  you  are  the  target  of  Jehovah's  wrath  :  "  he 
hath  bent  his  bow,  and  made  it  rcadjr."  Every  soul  that  is  unreconciled 
to  God  by  the  blood  of  his  Son  is  in  the  gall  of  bitterness.  Sal- 
vation at  once  sets  us  free  from  this  state  of  danger  and  alienation. 
We  are  no  longer  the  "  children  of  wrath,  even  as  others,"  but  are  made 
children  of  God  and  joint  heirs  with  Christ  Jesus.  What  can  be  con- 
ceived more  precious  than  this  ? 

And  then,  we  lastly  receive  that  part  of  salvation  which  ignorant  persons 
put  first,  and  make  to  be  the  whole  of  salvation.  In  consequence  of 
our  being  delivered  from  the  guilt  of  sin,  and  from  the  power  of  sin, 
and  from  the  present  wrath  of  God,  we  are  delivered  from  ike  future 
ivrath  of  God.  Unto  the  uttermost  will  that  wrath  descend  upon  the 
souls  of  men  when  they  leave  the  body  and  stand  before  their  Maker's 
bar,  if  they  depart  this  life  unsaved.  To  die  without  salvation  is  to 
enter  into  damnation.  Where  death  leaves  us  there  judgment  finds  us; 
and  where  judgment  finds  us  eternity  will  hold  us  for  ever  and  ever. 
"  He  which  is  filthy,  let  him  be  filthy  still,"  and  he  that  is  wretched  as  a 
punishment  for  being  filthy,  shall  be  hopelessly  wretched  still.  Salvation 
delivers  the  soul  from  going  down  into  the  pit  of  hell.  We,  being  justi- 
fied, are  no  longer  liable  to  punishment,  because  we  are  no  longer 
chargeable  with  guilt  Christ  Jesus  bore  the  wrath  of  God  that 
we  might  never  bear  it.  He  has  made  a  full  atonement  to  the  justice 
of  God  for  the  sins  of  all  believers.  Against  him  that  believelh 
there  remaineth  no  record  of  guilt ;  his  transgressioni^  are  blotted  out, 
for  Christ  Jesus  hath  finished  transgression,  made  an  end  of  sin,  and 
brought  in  everlasting  righteousness.  What  a  comprehensive  word 
then  is  this — "  salvation  "!  It  is  a  triumphant  deliverance  from  the 
guilt  of  sin,  from  the  dominion  of  it,  from  the  curse  of  it,  from  th(» 
punishment  of  it,  and  ultimately  from  the  very  existence  of  it.  Salvutioiv 
is  the  death  of  sin,  its  burial,  its  annihilation,  yea,  and  the  verj^  ob- 
literation of  its  memory;  for  thus  saith  the  Lord  :  "their  sins  and  their 
iniquities  will  I  remember  no  more." 

Beloved  hearers,  I  am  sure  that  this  is  the  weightiest  theme  I  can 
bring  before  you,  and  therefore  I  cannot  be  content  unless  I  see  that 
it  giiisps  jou  and  holds  you  fast  I  pray  you  give  earnest  heed  to  this 
most  pressing  of  all  subjects.  If  my  voice  and  words  cannot  com- 
mand your  fullest  attention,  I  could  wish  to  be  dumb,  that  some  other 
pleader  might  with  wiser  speech  draw  you  to  a  close  consideration  of 
this  matter.  Salvation  appears  to  me  to  be  of  the  first  importance, 
when  I  think  of  what  it  is  in  itself,  and  for  this  reason  I  have  at  the 
outset  set  it  forth  before  your  eyes;  but  you  may  be  helped  to  remember 
its  value  if  you  consider  that  God  the  Father  thinks  hignly  of  salvation. 
[t  was  on  his  mind  or  ever  the  earth  was.  He  thinks  salvation  a  lofty 
imsiness,  for  he  gave  his  Son  that  he  might  save  rebellious  sinners. 
FesQS  Christ,  the  only  Begotten,  thinks  salvation  most  important,  for  he 


424  Ml-ri'IiOPOLITAK  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

bled,  he  died  lu  aucoiuplish  it.  Shall  I  trifle  with  that  which  cost  him 
his  life?  If  he  came  from  heaven  to  earth,  shall  I  be  slow  to  look 
from  earth  to  heaven  ?  Shall  that  which  cost  the  Saviour  a  life  of 
zeal,  and  a  death  of  agony,  be  of  small  account  with  me?  By  the 
bloody  sweat  of  Gethsemane,  by  the  wounds  of  Calvary,  I  beseech  yon, 
be  assured  that  salvation  must  be  worthy  of  your  highest  and  most 
anxious  thoujrlits.  It  could  not  be  that  God  the  Father,  and  God  the 
Sou,  should  tlius  make  a  common  sacrifice  :  the  one  giving  his  Son  and 
the  other  givinfi:  himself  for  salvation,  and  yet  salvation  should  be  a 
light  and  trivial  thing.  The  Holy  Ghost  tiiinks  it  no  trifle,  for  he 
condescends  to  work  continually  in  the  new  creation  that  he  may  bring 
about  salvation.  lie  is  often  vexed  and  grieved,  yet  he  continacs  Btill 
)iis  abiding  labours  that  he  may  bring  many  sons  unto  glory.  Despise 
not  what  the  Holy  (J host  esteems,  lest  thou  despise  the  Holy  Ghost 
himself.  Tiie  sacred  Trinity  think  much  of  salvation;  let  us  not 
neglect  it.  I  beseech  you  who  have  gone  on  trifling  with  salvation, 
to  remember  that  we  who  have  to  preach  to  you  dare  not  trifle  with  it 
The  longer  I  live  the  more  I  feci  that  if  God  do  not  make  me  faithful 
as  a  minister,  it  had  been  better  for  me  never  to  have  been  bom.  What 
a  thought  that  I  am  set  as  a  watchman  to  warn  your  souls,  and  if  I 
warn  you  not  aright,  your  blood  will  be  laid  at  my  door  !  My  own 
damnation  will  be  terrible  enough,  but  to  hare  your  blood  upon  mj 
skirts  as  well — !  God  save  any  one  of  his  ministers  from  being  fonnd 
guilty  of  the  souls  of  men.  Every  preacher  of  the  gospel  may  cry 
with  David,  '*  Deliver  me  from  bloodguiltiness,  0  God,  thou  God  of  my 
salvation." 

Bethink  you,  0  careless  hearers,  that  God's  church  docs  not  consider 
salvation  to  be  a  little  matter?  Earnest  men  and  women,  by  thousands, 
are  praying  day  and  night  for  the  salvation  of  others,  and  arc  labouring, 
too,  and  making  great  sacrifices,  and  are  willing  to  make  many  more, 
if  they  may  by  any  means  bring  some  to  Jesus  and  his  salvation. 
Surely,  if  gracious  men,  and  wise  men,  think  salvation  to  be  so  im- 
portant, yon  who  have  hitherto  neglected  it  ought  to  change  your  minds 
upon  the  matter,  and  act  with  greater  care  for  your  own  interests. 

Tlie  angels  think  it  a  weighty  business.  Bowing  from  their  thrones, 
they  watch  fur  repenting  sinners ;  and  when  they  hear  that  a  sinner  has 
returned  to  his  God,  they  waken  anew  their  golden  harps  and  pour  forth 
fresh  music  before  the  throne,  for  "  there  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the 
angels  of  God  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth."  It  is  certain  also  that 
devils  think  salvation  to  be  a  great  matter,  for  their  arch-Icadergoetb 
about  seeking  whom  he  may  devour.  They  never  tire  in  seeking 
men's  destruction.  They  know  how  much  salvation  glorifies  God,  ana 
how  terrible  the  ruin  of  &ouls  is ;  and  therefore  they  compass  sea  and 
land,  if  they  may  destroy  the  sons  of  men.  Oh,  I  pray  you,  careless 
hearer,  be  wise  enough  to  dread  that  fate  which  your  cruel  enemy,  the 
devil,  would  fain  secure  for  you  I  Remember,  too,  that  lost  souls  think 
salvation  important.  The  nch  man,  when  he  was  in  this  world,  thonght 
highly  of  nothing  but  his  bams,  and  the  housing  of  his  produce;  bat 
when  he  came  into  the  place  of  torment,  then  he  said :  "  Father 
Abraham,  send  Tinzarus  to  my  father's  house:  for  I  have  five  brethren; 
that  ho  may  testify  unto  them,  lest  they  also  they  come  into  this  place 


"  YOUR  OWN   SALVATION.  *  425 

)f  torment."  Lost  bouIb  see  things  in  another  light  than  that  which 
lazzled  them  here  below ;  they  value  things  at  a  different  rate  from 
ffhst  we  do  here,  where  sinful  pleasures  and  earthly  treasures  dim  the 
nental  eye.  I  pray  you  then,  by  the  blessed  Trinity,  by  the  tears  and 
>rayers  of  holy  men,  by  the  joy  of  angels  and  glorified  spirits,  by  the 
mdice  of  devils  and  the  despair  of  the  lost,  arouse  yourselves  from 
dumber,  and  neglect  not  this  great  Balvation  ! 

I  shall  not  depreciate  anything  that  concerns  your  welfare,  but  I  shall 
steadfastly  assert  that  nothing  so  much  concerns  any  one  of  you  as  sal- 
ration.  Your  health  by  all  means.  Let  the  pliysician  be  fetched  if 
^ou  be  sick  ;  care  well  for  diet  and  exercise,  and  all  sanitary  laws. 
Liook  wisely  to  your  constitution  and  its  peculiarities ;  bub  what  matters 
t,  after  all,  to  nave  possessed  a  healthy  body,  if  you  have  a  perishing 
soul?  Wealth,  yes,  if  you  must  have  it,  though  you  shall  find  it  an 
»mpty  thing  if  you  set  your  heart  upon  it.  Prosperity  in  this 
RTorld,  cam  it  if  you  can  do  so  fairly,  but  *^  what  shall  it  profit  a  man,  if 
be  shall  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose  his  own  soul  ?  "  A  golden  coffin 
vrill  be  a  poor  compensation  for  a  damned  soul.  To  be  cast  away  from 
Qod's  presence,  can  that  misery  be  assuaged  by  mountains  of  treasure  ? 
Can  the  bitterness  of  the  second  death  be  sweetened  by  the  thought  that 
the  wretch  was  once  a  millionaire,  and  that  his  wealth  could  affect  the 
politics  of  nations?  No,  there  is  nothing  in  health  or  wealth  comparable 
to  salvation.  Nor  can  honour  and  reputation  bear  a  comparison  there- 
with. Truly  they  are  but  baubles,  and  yet  for  all  that  they  have  a  strange 
fascination  for  the  sons  of  men.  Oh,  sirs,  if  every  harpstring  in  the  world 
should  resound  your  glories,  and  every  trumpet  should  proclaim  your  fame, 
what  would  it  matter  if  a  louder  voice. should  say,  **  Depart  from  me, 
ve  cursed,  into  everlasting  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels"? 
Salvation  !  salvation  !  salvation  !  Nothing  on  earth  can  match  it,  for 
the  mei^chandise  of  it  is  better  than  silver,  and  the  gain  thereof  than  fine 
gold.  The  possession  of  the  whole  universe  would  be  no  equivalent 
to  a  lost  soul  for  the  awful  damage  it  has  sustained  and  must  sustain  for 
ever.  Pile  up  the  worlds,  and  let  them  fill  the  balance :  ay,  bring  as  many 
worlds  as  there  are  stars,  and  heap  up  the  scale  on  the  one  side; 
then  in  this  other  scale  place  a  single  soul  endowed  with  immortality, 
and  it  outweighs  the  whole.  Salvation  1  nothing  can  be  likened  unto  it. 
May  we  feel  its  unutterable  value,  and  therefore  seek  it  till  we  possess 
it  in  its  fulness ! 

II.  But  now  we  must  advance  to  a  second  point  of  consideration,  and 
I  pray  God  the  Hohr  Spirit  to  press  it  upon  us,  and  that  is,  whose. 
ICATTKK  IS  IT  ?  Wc  havc  sccu  what  the  matter  is — salvation ;  now^ 
consider  whose  is  it.  **  Your  own  salvation."  At  this  hour  nothing 
else  is  to  occupy  your  tlioughts  but  this  intensely  personal  matter,  and  I 
beseech  the  Holy  Spirit  to  hold  your  minds  fast  to  this  one  point. 

If  you  are  saved  it  will  be  *'your  own  salvation/'  and  you  yourself  will 
enjoy  it.  If  you  are  not  saved,  the  sin  you  now  commit  is  your  own  sin, 
the  guilt  your  own  guilt.  The  condemnation  under  winch  you  live, 
with  all  its  disquietude  and  fear,  or  with  all  its  callousness  and  neglect, 
Ib  your  own — all  your  own.  You  may  share  in  other  men's  sins,  and 
other  men  may  become  pai'ticipators  in  yours,  but  a  burden  lies  on  your 
own  back  which  no  one  besides  can  touch  with  one  of  his  fingers. 


426  MEmOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

There  is  a  page  in  God's  Book  where  your  sins  are  recorded  unmingled 
with  the  transgressions  of  your  fellows.  Now,  beloved,  you  must  obtain 
for  all  this  sin  a  personal  pardon,  or  you  are  undone  for  ever.  No  otto 
can  be  washed  in  Christ's  blood  for  you  ;  no  one  can  believe  and  let  his 
faith  stand  instead  of  your  faith.  The  very  supposition  of  humaa 
sponsorship  in  religion  is  monstrous.  You  must  yourself  repent,  yoor- 
self  believe,  yourself  be  washed  in  the  blood,  or  else  for  you  there  is  no 
forgiveness,  no  acceptance,  no  adoption,  no  regeneration.  It  is  all  a 
personal  matter  through  and  through:  "your  own  salvation**  it  must  be, 
or  it  will  be  your  own  eternal  ruin. 

Reflect  anxiously  that  you  must  personally  die.  No  cue  imaginefl 
that  another  can  die  for  him.  No  man  can  redeem  his  brother  or  pre 
to  God  a  ransom.  Through  that  iron  gate  I  must  pass  alone,  ana  so 
must  you.  Dying  will  have  to  be  our  own  personal  business  ;  and  in 
that  dying  we  shall  have  cither  personal  comfort  or  personal  dismay. 
When  death  is  past,  salvation  is  still  our  "  own  salvation ;  "  for  if  I  am 
saved,  77ivw  **  eyes  shall  see  the  king  in  his  beauty :  they  shall  behold  the 
land  that  is  very  far  off."  Mine  eyes  shall  see  him,  and  not  another  on  my 
behalf.  No  brother's  head  is  to  wear  your  crown ;  no  stranger's  hand 
to  wave  your  palm ;  no  sister's  eye  to  gaze  for  you  upon  the  beatific 
vision,  and  no  sponsor's  heart  to  be  filled  as  your  proxy  with  the  ecstatic 
bliss.  There  is  a  personal  heaven  for  the  personal  believer  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  It  must  be  if  you  possess  it,  "  your  own  salvation."  Bat 
if  you  have  it  not,  reflect  again,  that  it  will  be  your  own  damnation. 
No  one  will  be  condemned  for  you  ;  no  other  can  bear  the  hot  thunder 
bolts  of  Jehovah's  wrath  on  your  behalf.  When  you  shall  say,  "  Hide 
me,  vo  rocks !  Conceal  me,  0-  mountains  I "  no  one  will  spring  for- 
ward, and  say,  ''Tou  can  cease  to  be  accursed,  and  I  will  become  a 
curse  for  you."  A  substitute  there  is  to-day  for  every  one  that 
believeth — God's  appointed  substitute,  the  Christ  of  God;  but  if  that 
substitution  be  not  accepted  by  you,  there  can  never  be  another ;  bnt 
there  remains  only  for  you  a  personal  casting  away  to  suffer  personal 
pangs  in  your  own  soul  and  in  your  own  body  for  ever.  This,  then, 
makes  it  a  most  solemn  business.  0  be  wise,  and  look  well  to  "  your 
own  salvation." 

You  may  be  tempted  to-day,  and  very  likely  you  are  to  forget  your 
own  salvation  by  thoughts  of  other  people.  We  are  all  so  apt  to  look 
abroad  in  this  matter,  and  not  to  look  at  home.  Let  me  pray  you  to 
i-eversc  the  ])roccss,  and  let  everything  which  has  made  you  neglect 
your  own  vineyard  be  turned  to  the  opposite  account,  and  lead  you  to 
i>egin  at  home,  and  see  to  "  your  own  salvation."  Perhaps  you  dwell 
aiiiong  the  saints  of  God,  and  you  have  been  rather  apt  to  find  fault 
with  them,  though  for  my  part,  I  can  say  these  are  the  people  I  desire 
to  live  with  and  desire  to  die  with  :  "thy  people  shall  be  my  people, 
and  thy  God  my  God."  But,  0  if  you  live  among  the  saints,  ought 
it  not  to  be  your  business  to  see  to  "your  own  salvation"?  Sec 
that  you  are  truly  one  of  them,  not  written  in  their  church-book  merely, 
but  really  graven  upon  the  palms  of  Christ's  hands ;  not  a  false  professor, 
but  a  real  possessor;  not  a  mere  wearer  of  the  name  of  Christ,  but  a 
bcaierof  the  nature  of  Christ.  If  you  live  in  a  gracious  family  he 
afraid  lest  you  should  be  divided  from  them  for  ever.     How  could  yoB 


"  YOUB  OWN  SALVATION/*  427 

mdare  to  go  from  a  Christian  household  to  the  place  of  torment  ?  Let 
;he  anxieties  of  saints  lead  yon  to  be  anxious.  Let  their  prayers  drive 
roQ  to  prayer.  Let  their  example  rebuke  your  sin,  and  their  joys  entice 
rou  to  their  Saviour.  0  see  to  this !  But  perhaps  you  live  most  amon<c 
ingodly  men,  and  the  tendency  of  your  converse  with  the  ungodly  is  to 
nake  you  think  as  they  do  of  the  trifles  and  vanities,  and  wickednesses 
>f  this  life.  Do  not  let  it  be  so;  but,  on  the  contrary,  say,  "  0  God, 
hough  I  am  placed  among  these  people,  yet  gather  not  my  soul  with 
dnners,  nor  my  life  with  bloody  men.  Let  me  avoid  the  sins  into  whicli 
:hey  fall,  and  the  impenitence  of  which  they  are  guilty.  Save  me,  I 
3ray  thee,  0  my  God,  save  me  from  the  transgi'essions  which  they 
jommit." 

Perhaps  to-day  some  of  your  minds  are  occupied  with  thoughts  of 
the  dead  who  have  lately  fallen  asleep.  There  is  a  little  one  unburied 
at  home,  or  there  is  a  father  not  yet  laid  in  the  grave.  Oh,  when  you 
weep  for  those  who  have  gone  to  heaven,  think  of  **  your  own  salvation," 
and  weep  for  yourselves,  for  you  have  parted  with  them  for  ever  unless 
you  are  saved.  You  have  said,  "  Farewell "  to  those  beloved  ones, 
eternally  farewell,  unless  you  yourselves  believe  in  Jesus.  And  if  any 
of  you  have  heard  of  pereons  who  have  lived  in  sin  and  died  in  blas- 
phemy, and  are  lost,  1  pray  you  think  not  of  them  carelessly  lest  you 
also  snffer  the  same  doom :  for  what  saith  the  Saviour :  *^  Suppose  ye 
that  these  were  sinners  above  all  the  sinners ? "  "I  tell  you,  Nay :  but, 
except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all  likewise  perish."  It  seems  to  me  as  if 
everything  on  earth  and  everything  in  heaven,  and  everything  in  hell, 
yea,  and  God  himself,  calls  upon  you  to  seek  "  your  own  salvation,"  first, 
and  foremost,  and  above  all  other  things. 

It  may  be  profitable  to  mention  some  persons  upon  whom  this  theme 
needs  much  pressing.  I  will  begin  at  home.  There  is  great  need  to 
urge  this  matter  upon  official  Christians,  such  as  I  am,  such  as  my 
brethren,  the  deacons  and  elders,  are.  If  there  are  any  persons  who 
are  likely  to  be  deceived,  it  is  those  who  are  called  by  their  office  to  act 
as  shepherds  to  the  souls  of  others.  Oh,  my  brethren  I  it  is  so  easy 
for  me  to  imagine  because  I  am  a  minister,  and  have  to  deal  with  holy 
things,  that  therefore  I  am  safe.  I  pray  I  may  never  fall  into  that  delusion, 
but  may  always  cling  to  the  cross,  as  a  poor,  needy  sinner  resting  in  the 
blood  of  Jesus.  Brother  ministera,  co-workers,  and  officials  of  the 
church,  do  not  imagine  that  office  can  save  you.  The  son  of  perdition 
was  an  apostle,  greater  than  we  are  in  office,  and  yet  at  this  hour  he  is 
greater  in  destruction.  See  to  it,  ye  that  are  numbered  amongst  the 
leaders  of  Israel,  that  you  yourselves  be  saved. 

Unpractical  doctrinalists  are  another  class  of  persons  who  need  to  be 
warned  to  see  to  their  own  salvation.  When  they  hear  a  sermon,  they 
ait  with  their  mouths  open,  ready  to  snap  at  half  a  mistake.  Tliey 
make  a  man  an  oflPender  for  a  word,  for  they  conclude  themelves  to  be 
the  standards  of  orthodoxy,  and  they  weigh  up  the  preacher  as  he  speaks, 
with  as  much  coolness  as  if  they  had  been  appointed  deputy  judges  for 
the  Great  King  himself.  Oh,  sir,  weigh  yourself!  It  may  be  a  great 
thing  to  be  sound  in  the  head,  in  the  faith,  but  it  is  a  greater  thing 
to  be  sound  in  the  heart.  I  may  be  able  to  split  a  hair  between  ortho- 
doxy and  heterodoxy,  and  yet  may  have  no  part  nor  lot  in  the  matter. 


428  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

You  may  bo  a  very  soDiid  Calvinist,  or  you  may  happen  to  think 
bouiidncss  lies  in  another  direction ;  but,  oh,  it  is  nought,  it  is  less  this 
iioujiht,  except  your  souls  feel  the  power  of  the  trath,  and  ye  your- 
fielves  arc  bora  again.  Sec  to  "your  own  salvation,"  O  ye  wise  men 
in  Ll.e  letter,  who  have  not  the  Spirit. 

S<),  too,  certain  persons  who  arc  always  given  to  cnrioas  specnlatioiu 
neod  warning.  When  they  read  the  Bible  it  is  not  to  find  whether  thw 
are  saved  or  no,  but  to  know  whether  we  are  under  the  third  or  fonrth 
vial,  when  tiie  millcnium  is  going  to  be,  or  what  is  the  battle  of 
Armageddon.  Ah,  sir,  search  out  all  these  things  if  thoa  hast  time  and 
Fskill,  but  look  to  thine  own  salvation  first.  The  book  of  Berelatiofl, 
blet>.sed  is  he  that  understands  it,  but  not  unless,  first  of  all,  he  imder- 
stands  this,  ^*  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptised  shall  be  sared.*'  The 
greatest  doctor  in  the  symbols  and  mysteries  of  tlic  Apocalypse  shall  be 
as  certainly  cast  away  as  the  most  ignorant,  unless  he  nas  come  to 
Christ,  and  rested  his  soul  in  the  atoning  work  of  our  great  substihifie. 

I  know  some  who  greatly  need  to  look  to  their  own  salTation.  I 
refer  to  those  who  arc  always  criticising  others.  They  can  hardly  go  to 
a  place  of  wori=hip  but  what  they  are  observing  their  neighbour's  dress 
or  conduct.  Nobody  is  safe  from  their  remarks,  they  are  such  keen 
judges,  aud  make  such  shrewd  observations.  Ye  faultfinders  and 
talebearers,  look  to  **  your  own  salvation."  You  condemned  a  minister 
the  other  day  for  a  supposed  fault,  and  yet  he  is  a  dear  servant  of 
God,  who  lives  near  his  Master;  who  are  you,  sir,  to  use  your  tongue 
against  such  a  one  as  he?  The  other  day  a  poor  humble  Christian 
was  the  object  of  your  gossip  and  your  slander,  to  the  wounding  of 
her  heart.  Oh,  see  to  yourself,  see  to  yourself.  If  those  eyes  which 
look  outward  so  piercingly  would  sometimes  look  inward  they  might 
see  a  sight  which  would  blind  them  with  horror.  Blessed  horror  if  it 
led  them  to  turn  to  the  Saviour  who  would  oi)en  those  eyes  afresh,  and 
grant  them  to  sec  his  salvation. 

T  might  also  say  that  in  this  matter  of  looking  to  personal  salvation, 
it  is  necessary  to  speak  to  some  who  have  espoused  certain  great  pabhc 
designs.  I  trust  1  am  as  ardent  a  Protestant  as  any  man  living,  but  I 
know  too  many  red-hot  Protestants  who  are  but  little  l>ettcr  than 
Romanists,  for  though  the  liomanists  of  old  migiit  have  burnt  them, 
tluy  would  certainly  withhold  toleration  from  Romanists  to-day,  if  they 
could ;  and  therein  1  see  not  a  pin  to  choose  between  the  two  bigots. 
Zealous  Protestants,  I  agree  with  you,  but  yet  1  warn  you  that  your 
zeal  in  this  matter  will  not  save  you,  or  stand  in  the  stead  of  personal 
godliness.  Many  an  orthodox  Protestant  will  be  found  at  the  left  hand  of 
the  Great  Judge.  And  you,  too,  who  are  for  ever  agitating  this  and  that 
public  question,  I  would  say  to  you,  *•  Let  jiolitics  alone  till  your  own 
mward  politics  are  settled  on  a  good  foundation."  Yon  are  a  Radical 
Reformer,  you  could  show  us  a  system  of  political  economy  which  would 
right  all  our  wrongs  and  give  to  cveiy  man  his  due  ;  then  I  pray  yoo 
right  you  own  wrongs,  reform  yourself,  yield  yourself  to  the  love  of 
Jesus  Christ,  or  what  will  it  signify  to  you,  though  you  knew  how  to 
balance  the  allairs  of  nations,  and  to  regulate  the  arrangement  of  «U 
classes  of  society,  if  you  yourself  shall  be  blown  away  like  chaff 
belbre  the  wiimowing  fan  of  the  Lord.     God  grant  us  grace,  then, 


"  YOUR  OWN  BALVATION.'*  420 

(vhatever  else  we  take  up  with,  to  keep  it  in  its  proper  place,  and  make 
>nr  calling  and  election  sure. 

III.  And  now,  thirdly,  and  0  for  grace  to  speak  aright,  I  shall  try 
to  ANSWER  CERTAIN  OBJECTIONS.  I  think  I  hear  somebody  say,  "  Well, 
Imt  don't  you  believe  in  predestination  ?  What  have  we  to  do  with 
looking  to  our  own  salvation  ?  Is  it  not  all  fixed  ?'*  Thou  fool,  for  I 
3an  scarce  answer  thee  till  I  have  given  thee  thy  right  title;  was  it  not 
ixed  whether  thou  shouldst  get  wet  or  not  in  coming  to  this  place  ? 
8Thy  then  did  jou  bring  your  umbrella  ?  Is  it  not  fixed  whether  you 
jhall  be  nourished  with  food  to-day  or  shall  go  hungry  ?  Why  then 
viU  you  go  home  and  eat  your  dinner  ?  Is  it  not  fixed  whether  you 
■hall  live  or  not  to-morrow ;  will  you,  therefore,  cut  your  throat  ? 
H"©,  you  do  not  reason  so  wickedly,  so  foolishly  from  destiny  in  reference 
o  anything  but  "  your  own  salvation,*'  and  you  know  it  is  not  reasoning, 
t  just  mere  talk.  Here  is  all  the  answer  I  will  give  you,  and  all  you 
leserve. 

Another  says,  **  I  have  a  difficulty  about  this  looking  to  our  own 
Alvation.  Do  you  not  believe  in  full  assurance  f  Are  there  not  some 
rho  know  that  they  are  saved  beyond  all  doubt?"  Yes,  blessed  be  God, 
[  hope  there  are  many  such  now  present.  But  let  me  tell  you  who 
iheae  are  not.  These  are  not  persons  who  are  afraid  to  examine  them- 
selves. If  I  meet  with  any  man  who  savs,  "  I  have  no  need  to  examine 
Bjself  any  more,  I  know  I  am  saved,  and  therefore  have  no  need  to  take  any 
hrtber  care,**  I  would  venture  to  say  to  him,  "  Sir,  you  are  lost  already. 
Phis  strong  delusion  of  yours  has  led  you  to  believe  a  lie."  There  are 
lone  so  cautious  as  those  who  possess  full  assurance,  and  there  are  none 
irbo  have  so  much  holy  fear  of  sinning  against  Qod,  nor  who  walk  so 
benderly  and  carefully  as  those  who  possess  the  full  assurance  of  faith. 
Presumption  is  not  assurance,  though,  alas  I  many  think  so.  No  fully 
Bssnred  believer  will  ever  object  to  being  reminded  of  the  importance 
of  his  own  salvation. 

But  a  third  objection  arises.  '*  This  is  very  selfish,*'  says  one.  "  You 
have  been  exhorting  us  to  look  to  ourselves,  and  that  is  sheer  selfish- 
ness." Yes,  so  you  say ;  but  let  me  tell  you  it  is  a  kind  of  selfishness 
that  is  absolutely  needfiil  before  you  can  be  unselfish.  A  part  of  sal- 
vation is  to  be  aelivercd  from  selfishness,  and  I  am  selfish  enough  to 
desire  to  be  delivered  from  selfishness.  How  can  you  be  of  any  service 
to  others  if  you  are  not  savei  yourself?  A  man  is  drowning.  I  am  on 
[london  Bridge.  If  I  spring  from  the  parapet  and  can  swim,  I  can  save 
iiim ;  but  suppose  I  cannot  swim,  can  Irender  any  service  by  leaping  into 
mdden  and  certain  death  with  the  sinking  man  ?  I  am  disqualified 
*rom  helping  him  till  I  have  the  ability  to  do  so.  There  is  a  school  over 
ronder.  Well,  the  first  enquiry  of  him  who  is  to  be  the  master  must  be, 

*  Do  I  know  myself  that  which  I  profess  to  teach  ?"  Do  you  call  that 
mquiry  selfish?  Surely  it  a  most  unselfish  selfishness,  grounded  upon 
K>mmon  sense.   Indeed,  the  man  who  is  not  so  selfish  as  to  ask  himself, 

*  Am  I  qualified  to  act  as  a  teacher?"  would  be  guilty  of  gross  selfishness 
n  putting  himself  into  an  office  which  he  was  not  qualified  to  fill.  I  will 
nppose  an  illiterate  person  going  into  the  school,  and  saying,  "  I  will  be 
nftster  here,  and  take  the  pay,"  and  yet  he  cannot  teach  the  children  to 
i^ead  or  write.    Would  he  not  be  very  selfish  in  not  seeing  to  his  own 


430  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

fitness  ?  But  surely  it  it  is  not  selfishneBS  that  would  make  a 
stand  back  and  say,  *'  No,  I  must  first  go  to  school  myself,  ocherwinit 
is  but  a  mockery  of  the  children  for  me  to  attempt  to  teach  them  anj- 
thing."  This  is  no  selfishness,  then,  when  looked  at  aright^  which  mafai 
us  see  to  our  own  salvation,  for  it  is  the  basis  from  which  we  operate  ibr 
the  good  of  others. 

1 V.  Having  answered  these  objections,  I  shall  for  a  minute  attempt 
to  RENDER  SOME  ASSISTANCE  to  those  who  would  fain  be  ri^t  in  tbe 
best  things. 

Has  the  Holy  Spirit  been  pleased  to  make  any  one  here  earnest  abou 
his  own  salvation?  Friend,  I  will  help  you  to  answer  two  qnestioni. 
Ask  yourself,  first,  "  Am  I  saved  ?  *'  I  would  help  thee  to  reply  to  thtt 
very  quickly.  If  you  are  saved  this  morning,  you  are  the  subject 
of  a  work  within  you,  as  saith  the  text,  **  Work  out  your  own  salft- 
tion ;  for  it  is  God  which  worketh  in  you."  Yon  cannot  work  it  Mybni 
when  God  works  it  in  you  work  it  out.  Have  you  a  work  of  the  Holj 
Gliust  in  vour  soul  ?  Do  you  feel  something  more  than  unaided  human 
nature  can  attain  unto  ?  Have  you  a  change  wrought  in  you  from  above? 
If  80,  you  are  saved.  Again,  does  your  salvation  rest  wholly  upon  Christ  ? 
He  who  hangs  anywhere  but  upon  the  cross,  hangs  upon  that  whidi 
will  deceive  him.  If  thou  standest  upon  Christ,  thou  art  on  a  rock; 
but  if  thou  trustest  in  the  merits  of  Christ  in  part,  and  thy  own  merits 
in  part,  then  thou  hast  one  foot  on  a  rock  but  another  on  the  quick- 
Rand;  and  thou  mightest  as  well  have  both  feet  on  the  quicksand,  for 
the  result  will  be  the  same. 

*'  None  but  Jcaus,  none  but  Jesus 
Can  do  helpless  sinners  good." 

Thou  an  not  saved  unless  Christ  be  all  in  all  in  thy  soul,  Alpha  and 
Omega,  beginning  and  ending,  first  and  last.  Judt^c  by  this,  again:  if 
you  are  saved,  you  have  turned  your  back  on  sin.  You  have  not  left  off 
sinning — would  to  God  we  could  do  so — but  you  have  left  oif  loTing 
gin ;  you  sin  not  wilfully,  but  from  infirmity  ;  and  you  are  eamestlj 
socking  after  God  and  holiness.  You  have  respect  to  God,  you  desire 
to  be  like  him,  you  are  longing  to  be  with  him.  Your  face  is  towards 
heaven.  You  arc  as  a  man  who  journeys  to  the  Equator.  You  are 
feeling  more  and  more  the  warm  influence  of  the  heavenly  heat  and 
light.  Now,  if  such  be  your  course  of  life,  that  you  walk  not  afker 
the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit,  and  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  holiness, 
then  you  are  saved.  May  your  answer  to  that  question  be  given  in 
great  honesty  and  candour  to  your  own  soul.  Be  not  tooi)artiala 
judge.  Conclude  not  that  all  is  right  because  outward  appearances  are 
fair.  Delil)erate  before  you  return  a  favourable  verdict.  Judge  your- 
selves that  ye  be  not  judged.  It  were  better  to  condemn  yourself  and 
be  accepted  of  God,  than  to  acquit  yourself  and  find  your  mist4ike.*i( 
the  last. 

But  suppose  that  question  should  have  to  be  answered  by  any  here 
in  the  negative  (and  1  am  afniid  it  must  be),  then  let  those  who  confess 
that  they  are  not  saved,  hear  the  answer  to  another  enquiry :  **  How  can 
I  bo  saved  ? ''  Ah,  dear  hearer,  I  have  not  to  bring  a  nug^yolome  nor 
a  whole  armful  of  folios  to  you,  and  to  say,  "  It  will  take  ijou  months 


\ 


"rOUE  OWN   BALVATICW."  431 

ad  years  to  understand  the  plan  of  salyation."  No,  the  way  is  plain, 
be  method  simple.  Thou  shalt  ie  saved  within  the  next  moment  if 
boa  believest.  God's  work  of  salvation  is,  as  far  as  its  commencement 
nd  essence  is  oonoerned,  instantaneous.  If  thou  believest  that  Jesus  is 
lie  Christ,  thou  art  bom  of  Giid  now.  If  thou  dost  uow  stand  in  spirit 
t  the  foot  of  the  cross,  and  view  the  incarnate  Ood  suffering,  bleeding, 
nd  dying  there,  and  if  as  thou  dost  look  at  him,  thy  soul  consents  to 
are  him  for  her  Saviour,  and  casts  herself  wholly  on  him,  thou  art 
ftved.  How  vividly  there  comes  before  my  memory  this  morning  the 
loroent  when  I  first  believed  in  Jesus!  It  was  the  simplest  act  rov 
lind  ever^  perfc^med,  and  yet  the  most  wonderful,  for  the  Holy  Spirit 
rrought  it  in  me.  Simply  to  have  done  with  reliance  upon  myself, 
nd  nave  done  with  confidence  in  all  but  Jesus,  and  to  rest  alone,  my 
ndivided  confidence  m  him,  and  in  what  he  had  done.  My  sin  was  in 
liat  moment  forgiven  me,  and  I  was  saved,  and  may  it  all  be  so  with  yon, 
17  friend,  even  with  yon  if  you  also  trust  the  Iiord  Jesus.  *'  Your 
wn  salvation "  shall  be  secured  by  that  one  simple  act  of  faith ;  and 
enceforward,  kept  by  the  power  of  Ood  through  faith  unto  salva- 
ion,  yon  shall  tread  the  way  of  holiness,  till  you  come  to  be  where 
^Qsns  is  in  everlasting  bUss.  Ood  grant  that  not  a  soul  may  go  out  of 
his  place  unsaved.  Even  you,  little  children,  who  are  here,  you  young- 
ters,  you  young  boys  and  girls,  I  pray  that  you  may  in  early  life  attend 

0  '*yonr  own  salvation.**  Faith  is  not  a  grace  for  old  people  only,  nor 
(>r  your  fathers  and  mothers  only;  if  your  little  hearts  shall  look  to 
dm  who  was  the  holy  child  Jesus,  if  you  know  but  little  yet,  if  you 
rast  him,  salvation  shall  be  yours.  I  pray  that  to  you  who  are  young, 
'  your  own  salvation"  may  become,  while  you  are  yet  in  your  youth, 

1  matter  of  joy,  because  you  have  trusted  it  in  the  hands  of  your 
tedeemer. 

Now  I  must  close :  but  one  or  two  thoughts  press  me.  I  must  utter 
hem  ere  I  sit  down.  I  would  anxiously  urge  each  person  here  to  see  to 
his  matter  of  his  own  salvation.  Do  it,  I  pray  you,  and  in  earnest,  for 
10  one  can  do  it  for  you.  I  have  asked  Ood  for  your  ^oul,  my  hearer, 
md  I  pray  I  may  have  an  answer  of  peace  concerning  you.  Bub  unless 
on  also  pray,  vain  are  my  prayers,  xou  remember  your  mother's  tears. 
\h  I  yon  have  crossed  t\\e  ocean  since  those  days,  and  you  have  gone 
ato  the  deeps  of  sin,  but  you  recollect  when  you  used  to  say  your 
>rayers  at  her  knee,  and  when  she  would  lovingly  say  "Amen,"  and  kiss 
or  boy  and  blt'ss  him,  and  pray  that  he  might  know  his  mother's  God. 
?ho8e  prayers  are  ringing  in  the  ears  of  God  for  you,  but  it  is  impossible 
bat  you  can  ever  be  saved  unless  it  is  said  of  you, "  Behold,  he  prwyeth." 
Tonr  mother's  holiness  can  only  rise  up  in  judtrment  to  condemn  your 
rilful  wickedness  unless  yon  imitate  it.  Your  father's  eai  nest  exhorta- 
ions  ("hall  but  confirm  the  just  sentence  of  the  Judge  unless  you  hearken 
0  them,  and  yourselves  consider  and  put  your  trust  in  Jesus.  Oh  I  bethink 
on  each  one  of  yon,  there  is  but  one  hope,  and  that  one  hope  lost, 
t  is  gone  for  ever.  Defeated  in  one  battle,  a  commander  attempts 
mother,  and  hopes  that  he  may  yet  win  the  campaign.  Your  life  is 
'onr  one  fight,  and  if  it  be  lost  it  is  lost  for  aye.  The  man  who  was 
Mnkrupt  yesterday  commences  again  in  business  with  good  heart, 
nd  hopes  that  he  may  yet  succeed ;    but  in  the  business  of  this 


432  .\1>TR0P0UTAN  TABERNACLE  FUI^ETT. 

mortal  life,  if  yon  are  found  bankrupt,  yon  are  bankrupt  for  ever  and 
ever.  I  do  therefore  charge  you  by  the  living  God,  before  whom  I  standi 
and  before  whom  I  may  have  to  give  an  account  of  this  day's  preaching 
ere  another  day*B  sun  shall  shine,  I  charge  you  see  to  your  own  salvation. 
God  help  you,  that  you  may  never  cease  to  seek  unto  God  till  you  knov 
by  the  witness  of  the  Spirit  that  you  have  indeed  passed  from  death 
unto  life.  See  to  it  now,  noWy  now,  now.  This  very  day  the  voice  of 
warning  comes  to  certain  of  yon  from  God,  with  special  emphasis,  becaose 
you  greatly  need  it^  for  your  time  is  short.  How  many  have  passed  into 
eternity  during  this  week !  Ton  may  yourself  be  gone  from  the  land 
of  the  living  before  next  Sabbath-day.  I  suppose,  according  to  the 
calculation  of  probabilities,  out  of  this  audience  there  are|6everal  who  will 
die  within  a  month.  I  am  not  conjecturing  now,  but  according  to  all 
probabilities  these  thousands  cannot  all  meet  again,  if  ail  have  a  mind 
to  do  so.  Who  then  among  us  will  be  summoned  to  the  unknown  land? 
Will  it  be  you,  young  woman,  who  have  been  laughing  at  the  thiugs  of 
God?  Shall  it  be  yonder  merchant,  who  has  not  time  enough  for 
religion  ?  Shall  it  be  you,  my  foreign  friend,  who  have  crossed  the 
ocean  to  take  a  holiday?  Will  you  be  carried  back  a  corpse?  I  do  con- 
jure you  bethink  yourselves,  all  of  you.  You  who  dwell  in  London  will 
remember  years  ago  when  the  cholera  swept  through  our  streets,  some 
of  us  were  in  the  midst  of  it,  and  saw  many  drop  around  us,  as  tiionsfa 
smitten  with  an  invisible  but  deadly  arrow.  That  disease  is  said  to  be 
on  its  way  hither  again ;  it  is  said  to  be  rapidly  sweeping  from  Poland 
arcoss  the  Continent,  and  if  it  come  and  seize  some  of  you,  are  yon 
ready  to  depart  ?  Even  if  that  form  of  death  do  not  af9ict  our  city,  as 
I  pray  it  may  not,  yet  is  death  ever  within  our  gates,  and  the  pestilence 
walketh  in  darkness  every  night,  therefore  consider  your  ways.  Thus 
saith  the  Lord,  and  with  his  word  I  conclude  this  discourse : ''  Prepare 
to  meet  thy  God,  0  Israel." 


Portion  op  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Hebrews  x.  2S— 39. 


<P^tr0pIitan  iJahrnad^  pulpit. 


"BOUGHT   WITH    A    PRICE." 


91   ^ermoit 


Delivekbo  on  Lobd's-day  MoRNQto,  August  Cth,  1871,  by 

C.  II.  SPUKGEON, 

AT     THE     METROPOIilTAN     TABERNACLE,     XEWINGTON. 


**Yo  are  not  your  own:  for  yc  are  bought  with  a  price:  therefore  glorify  God 
in  your  body,  and  in  your  spirit  which  are  God's." — 1  Cor.  vi.  19,  20. 

Our  beloved  brother,  Thomas  Cook,  who  has  for  so  long  a  time  served 
this  church  as  an  honoured  deacon,  has  fallen  asleep  in  Christ.  We 
have  laid  his  earthly  remains  in  the  tomb :  his  spirit  rejoices  before 
the  throne  of  God.  This  day  wc  thank  God  for  his  useful  life,  and  ask 
for  grace  to  imitate  it.  Before  he  closed  his  eyes  in  death  he  left  a 
text  of  Scripture  for  the  pastors :  "  Christ  is  all,  and  in  all; "  and  he  left 
another  for  his  fellow  church  members,  for  all  of  you  this  day  who  are 
menibcrs  of  the  body  of  Christ ;  and  this  is  the  legacy,  which  now,  as  a 
spiritual  executor,  I  present  to  you :  **  Ye  are  not  your  own  :  for  ye  are 
bought  with  a  price :  therefore  glorify  God  in  your  body,  and  in  your 
spirit,  which  are  God's."  I  have  no  doubt  the  intention  of  our  departed 
brother  was  to  promote  God's  glory  by  speaking  to  us  even  after  he  was 
dead  concerning  our  sanctification,  that  so  we  might  be  stirred  up  to  a 
greater  consecration  to  the  Lord  our  Saviour. 

You  will  notice  that  in  this  chapter  the  apostle  Paul  has  been  dealing 
with  sins  of  the  flesh,  with  fornication  and  adultery.  Now,  it  is  at  all 
times  exceedingly  difficult  for  the  preacher  either  to  speak  or  to  write 
upon  this  subject;  it  demands  the  strictest  care  to  keep  the  language 
guarded,  so  that  while  we  are  denouncing  a  detestable  evil  wo  do  not 
ourselves  promote  it  by  a  single  expression  that  should  be  otherwise 
than  chaste  and  pure.  Observe  how  well  the  apostle  Paul  succeeds,  for 
though  he  does  not  mask  the  sin,  but  tears  the  veil  from  it,  and  lets  us 
know  well  what  it  is  that  he  is  aiming  at,  yet  there  is  no  sentence  which 
^e  could  wish  to  alter.  Herein  he  is  a  model  for  all  ministers,  both  in 
£delity  and  prudence. 

Be  sure  also  to  note  that  the  apostle,  when  he  is  exposing  sin,  does 
not  trifle  with  it,  but  like  a  mighty  hunter  before  the  Lord,  pursues  it 
with  all  his  might ;  his  hatred  to  it  is  intense  ;  he  drags  it  forth  to  the 
light;  he  bids  us  mark  its  hideous  deformity;  he  hunts  it  through  all 
its  purlieus,  hotfoot,  as  we  say.    He  never  leaves  it  breathing  time; 

No.  1,004. 


434  MKTItOPOIJTAN'  TADKUNACLE   PITLIUT. 

jirpamcnt  after  arjmmont  lie  hurls  like  javelins  upon  it;  he  will  bjr 
uo  niciins  6])arc  the  lilthy  thing.  Ho  who  above  all  othors  speab 
most  positively  of  salvation  bv  praee,  and  is  raost  clear  upon  tbe 
fact  that  Kalvation  is  not  bv  the  works  of  the  lavr,  is  at  the  same 
time  most  intenfiely  earnest  for  the  holiness  of  Christians,  and  mofit 
zealously  iloiiounceH  those  who  would  sav.  "  Let  ns  do  e?iL  that 
j^ood  may  come."  In  this  particular  instance  he  sets  the  sin  of  foni- 
cutiofi  in  the  lijrht  of  the  Holy  Spirit;  he  holds  up,  as  it  were,  the 
seven-hranched  candlestick  before  it,  and  lets  us  see  what  a  filthy  tbiog 
it  is.  He  tells  us  that  the  body  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
therefore  ought  not  to  be  profaned ;  he  declares  that  bodily  nnchastitjis 
a  sacrilegious  desecration  of  our  manhood,  a  violation  of  the  sacred  shrine 
wherein  the  Spirit  takes  up  its  dwelling-place;  and  then,  as  if  thisvere 
not  enough,  he  seizes  the  sin  and  drags  it  to  the  foot  of  thecroas, 
and  there  nails  it  hand  and  foot,  that  it  may  die  as  a  criminal;  for 
these  are  his  words :  "  Ye  arc  not  your  own :  for  je  are  bought  with  a 
price :"  the  price  being  the  blood  of  .Jesus.  He  finds  no  sharper  weapon, 
no  keener  instrument  of  destruction  than  this.  The  redemption 
wrought  on  Calvary  by  the  death  of  Jesus  must  be  the  death  of  th^ 
sin,  and  of  all  other  ains,  wherever  the  Spirit  of  Ood  naes  it  » hii 
sword  of  execution.  Brethren  and  sisters,  it  is  no  slight  thing  to  be 
holy.  A  man  must  not  say,  ^'  I  have  faith,"  and  then  fall  into  Hit 
ains  of  an  unbeliever ;  for,  after  all,  our  outer  life  is  the  test  of  our  inner 
life  ;  and  if  the  outer  life  be  not  purified,  rest  assured  the  heart  is  not 
changed.  That  faith  which  does  not  bring  forth  the  fruit  of  hdioeft 
is  the  faith  of  devils.  The  devils  believe  and  tremble.  Let  as  aeyar 
be  content  with  a  faith  which  can  live  in  hell,  but  riae  to  that  which 
will  save  us — the  faith  of  God's  elect,  which  purifies  the  soul,  casting 
down  the  power  of  evil,  and  setting  up  the  throne  of  Jesus  Christ,  the 
throne  of  holiness  within  the  spirit. 

Noticing  this  as  being  the  run  of  the  chapter,  we  now  come  to  the 
text  itself,  and  in  order  to  discuss  it  we  must  take  it  to  pieces,  and  I 
think  we  shall  sec  in  it  at  once  three  things  very  clearly.  The  first  is 
a  blessed  fact,  "  Ye  are/'  or  as  it  should  he  rendered,  "  Ye  were  bought 
with  a  price  ;  '*  then  comes  a  plain  consequence  from  that  fiact^  a  con- 
sequence of  a  double  character,  negative  and  positive:  **  Ye  are  not 
your  own ;"  "  your  body  and  your  spirit  ai*e  God's;  "  and  out  of  that  there 
springs  inevitably  a  mtural  concUtsimi :  "  Therefore,  glorily  God  in  yoor 
todv,  and  in  your  spirit.'' 

\\  Let  us  begin,  then,  first  of  all,  with  this  bij^ssed  fact—"  Ye  m 
Ixmghtmth  a2yricey  Paul  might,  if  his  object  were  to  prove  that  we 
are  not  our  own,  have  said :  *'  Yo  did  not  make  yourselves."  Creation 
may  well  furnish  motives  for  obedience  to  the  great  Lawgiver.  He 
might  also  have  said,  "Ye  do  not  preserve  y(.urselve8:  it  is  God  who 
keeps  you  in  life  ;  you  would  die  if  he  withdrew  his  power."  The  pre- 
servation of  divine  providence  mi^ht  furnish  abundHot  arguments  ftf 
holiness.  Surely  he  who  feeds,  nourishes,  and  upholds  our  life  shoiU 
have  our  service.  But  he  prefers,  for  reasons  known  to  himself,  which 
it  would  not  be  hard  to  guess,  to  plead  the  tenderer  theme,  redemp(iofr 
He  sounds  that  note,  which  if  it  do  not  thunder  with  that  oraah  of 
power  which  marked  the  six  days*  labour  of  Omaipvienoei  yet  Imb  * 


*"  BOU0HT  WITH  A  PBICE."  4^ 

soft,  piercing,  subdning  tone  in  it,  which,  like  the  still  small  voice  to 
which  Elias  listened,  has  in  it  the  presence  of  God. 

'Hie  most  potent  plea  for  sanctity  is  not  *'  Te  were  made,"  or,  '*  Te  are 
nourished,"  bnt  '*  Ye  are  bought."  This  the  apostle  selects  as  a  convincing 
proof  of  our  duty,  and  as  a  means  to  make  that  duty  our  delight.  And 
tnily,  beloved,  it  is  so.  If  we  have  indeed  experienced  the  power  of 
redemption  we  fully  admit  that  it  is  so.  Look  ye  back  to  the  day  when  ye 
were  bought,  when  ye  were  bondslaves  to  your  sins,  when  ye  were 
under  the  just  sentence  of  divine  justice,  when  it  was  inevitable  that 
fvod  should  punish  your  transgressions ;  remember  how  the  Son  of  God 
became  your  substitute,  how  he  bared  his  back  to  the  lash  that  should 
have  fallen  upon  you,  and  laid  his  soul  beneath  the  sword  which  should 
have  quenched  its  fury  in  your  blood.  Tou  were  redeemed  then, 
redeemed  from  the  punishment  that  was  due  to  you,  redeemed  from  the 
wrath  of  God,  redeemed  unto  Christ  to  be  his  for  ever. 

You  will  notice  the  text  says,  **  Ye  were  bought  ivUh  a  price  J*  It  is 
a  common  classical  expression  to  signify  that  the  purchase  was  expensive. 
Of  course,  the  very  expression,  "  xe  were  bought,"  implies  a  price,  but 
the  words  '*  with  a  prke  "  are  added,  as  if  to  show  that  it  was  not  for 
nothing  that  ye  were  purchased.  There  was  a  something  inestimably 
precious  paid  for  you ;  and  ye  need  scarcely  that  I  remind  you  that 
''ve  were  not  redeemed  with  corruptible  things,  as  silver  and  gold;" 
'*  but  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  as  of  a  lamb  without  blemish  and 
without  spot."  Ah !  those  words  slip  over  our  tongue  verv  glibly,  but 
we  may  well  chide  ourselves  that  we  can  speak  of  i^emption  wiUi  dnr 
eyes.  That  the  blood  of  Christ  was  shed  to  buy  our  souls  irom  death 
and  hell  is  a  wonder  of  compassion  which  fills  angels  with  amazement, 
and  it  ought  to  overwhelm  us  with  adoring  love  whenever  we  think  of 
it,  glance  our  eye  over  the  recording  pages,  or  even  utter  the 
word  "  i-edemption."  What  meant  this  purchasing  us  with  blood  ?  It 
.signified  pain.  Have  any  of  you  lately  been  racked  with  pain?  Have 
you  suifered  acutely?  Ah!  then  at  such  times  you  know  to  some  degree 
what  the  price  was  which  the  Saviour  paid.  His  bodily  pains  were 
jy^eat,  hands  and  feet  nailed  to  the  wood,  and  the  iron  breaking  through 
the  tenderest  nerves.  His  soul-pains  were  greater  still,  his  heart  was 
melted  like  wax,  he  was  very  heavy,  his  heart  was  broken  with  reproach, 
he  was  deserted  of  God,  and  left  beneath  the  black  thunder-clouds  of 
divine  wrath,  his  soul  was  exceeding  sorrowful,  even  unto  death.  It 
was  pain  that  bought  you.  We  speak  of  the  drops  of  blood,  but  we 
roust  uot  confine  our  thoughts  to  the  crimson  life-floods  which  distilled 
from  the  Saviom'^s  veins ;  we  must  think  of  the  pangs  which  he  en- 
dured, which  were  the  equivalent  for  what  we  ought  to  have  suffered, 
what  we  must  have  suffered  had  we  endured  the  punishment  of  our 
guilt  for  ever  in  the  flames  of  hell.  But  pain  alone  could  not  have 
redeemed  us ;  it  was  by  death  that  the  Saviour  paid  the  ransom.  Death 
is  a  word  of  horror  to  the  ungodly.  The  righteous  hath  hope  in  his 
death ;  but  as  Christ*s  death  was  the  substitute  for  the  deatn  of  the 
ungodly,  he  was  made  a  curse  for  us,  aod  the  presence  of  God  was 
denied  him.  His  death  was  attended  wjth  unusual  darkness  ;  he  cried, 
**  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me? "  0  think  ye 
Boraestly  on  this.    The  Ever-living  died  to  redeem  us;   the  Only 


436  M£rnU)FOLITAN  TAtmiffAfll.l  rULPIT. 

Begotten  liowod  his  head  in  agony,  and  was  laid  in  the  gtwrt  that  «i 
migii  1 1)e  saved.  Ye  are  bought  then  ^'  with  a  price  *' — a  price  incakulabK 
atnpendoas,  infinite,  and  this  is  the  plea  which  the  apoBtle  naea  to  urge 
upon  ns  that  we  should  '^  be  holiness  to  the  Lord." 

I  desire  npon  this  theme,  which  is  a  very  simple  and  everj-daj  oik, 
but  which  is  nevertheless  of  the  weightiest  consideration,  to  remind 
jon,  dearly  beloved,  who  profess  to  be  followers  of  Christ,  that  this 
matter  of  yonr  being  '*  bought  with  a  price"  is  an  indispiUabU  fad  to 
every  Christian.  To  every  person  here  pi?esent  it  either  is  a  foct  or  not. 
I  scarcely  need  to  ask  whether  any  of  you  are  prepared  to  abjare  jour 
redemption ;  and  yet,  professor  of  the  faith  of  Christ,  I  shall  pnt  it  to 
yon  now :  Are  you  willing  to  have  the  negative  put  npon  this  ?  will  yoQ 
deny  that  you  were  **  bought  with  a  price  ?  "  Will  you  now  confess  that 
you  were  not  redeemed  on  Calvary  ?  You  dare  not,  I  am  sure.  Yoa 
would  sooner  die  than  abjure  your  belief  of  it.  Well,  then,  as  certain 
as  is  your  redemption,  so  certain  is  it  that  yon  "  are  not  your  own."  but 
belong  to  God,  and  should  glorify  him.  It  is  inevitable  that  if  yoa  be 
**  bought  with  a  price,"  you  have  ceased  to  be  your  own  property,  and 
belong  to  him  who  bought  yon.  Holiness,  therefore,  is  necessary  to  all 
the  redeemed.  Tf  you  cast' off  your  responsibility  to  be  holy,  you  at 
the  same  time  cast  away  the  benefit  of  redemption.  Will  yon  do  this? 
As  I  am  sure  yon  could  not  renounce  your  salvation,  and  cast  avay 
your  only  hope,  so  I  charge  you  by  the  living  God  be  not  so  in- 
consistent as  to  say :  *'  I  am  redeemed,  and  yet  I  will  live  as  I  list.** 
As  redeemed  men,  let  the  inevitable  consequences  follow  from  the  fact, 
and  be  ye  evidently  the  servants  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 

Remember,  too.  that  f his  fad  is  Dm  most  important  one  in  all  yotir  fiii- 
ton/.  That  you  were  redeemed  "  with  a  price  "  is  the  greatest  event  in  your 
biography.  Even  your  birth,  what  was  it  unless  a  second  birth  had  been 
yours  ?  Might  you  not  say :  "  Tjet  the  day  perish  wherein  I  was  bom, 
and  the  night  in  which  it  was  said,  there  is  a  man  child  conceived''? 
Would  it  not  have  been  to  you  the  direst  calamity  to  be  bom  into  the 
world  if  you  had  not  been  rescued  from  the  wrath  of  which  yon 
were  the  heir?  You  left  your  father's  house,  and  it  was  an  im- 
portant stop  in  life ;  perhaps  you  crossed  the  great  and  wide  sea ;  it 
may  be  you  aspired  to  high  otfice  in  the  state  and  you  obtained  it;  it 
is  possible  you  have  been  sore  sick,  or  it  may  be  you  have  sunk  from 
affluence  to  poverty.  Such  events  leave  their  impress  upon  thememon; 
men  cannot  forget  those  p:reat  changes  in  their  lives:  but  they  all 
shrivel  into  lesa  than  nothing  compared  with  this  fact  that  you  were 
**  bought  with  a  price."  Your  connection  with  Calvary  is  the  most  im- 
portant thing  about  you.  Oh,  I  do  beseech  you  then,  if  it  be  so,  prove 
it;  and  re?nember  the  just  and  righteous  proof  is  by  your  not  being 
your  own,  but  consecrated  unto  God.  If  it  be  the  most  iipportant  thing 
in  the  world  to  you,  that  you  were  '*  bought  with  a  price,"  let  it 
exercise  the  most  prominent  influence  over  your  entire  career.  Be  a 
man,  bo  an  Englishman,  hut  be  most  of  all  Christ's  man.  A  citizen,  a 
fiiend,  a  philanthropist,  a  patriot :  ail  these  you  may  be,  hut  be  most  of 
all  a  saint  redeemed  by  blood.    . 

Recollect,  again,  that  your  being  "bought  with  a  i^vice*'  will belhf 
most  imfH>rtant  ford  in  all  yotir  fiUuro  mstsncn.   What  say  they  inheavea 


•'  BOUGHT  WITH  A  PKICE."  487 

when  thvy  sin^  ?     They  would  naturally  select  the  noblesfc  topic  and 

that  which  most  ensrospes  their  minHi?,  Jind  yet  in  the  whole  ran<re  of 

their  memory  they  find  no  theme  so  absorbinn:aBtlii8:  *'Thou  wast  slain, 

and  hast  redeemed  ns  to  God  by  thy  blood."    Redeeming  love  is  the 

tlieme  of  heaven.    When  you  reach  the  U})per  realms  your  most  irapor- 

tnnt  memory  will  not  be  that  you  were  wealthy  or  poor  in  this  life,  nor 

the  fact  that  you  sickened  and  died,  but  that  you  were  "  bouijht  with 

n  price."     We  do  tiot  know  all  that  may  occur  in  this  world  before  the 

<:lo?o  of  its  history,  but  certainly  it  will  be  burnt  up  with  fire,  and  you 

in  yonder  clouds  with  Christ  may  witness  the  awful  conflagration.    You 

will  never  forjret  it.    There  will  be  new  heavens  and  new  earth,  and 

von  with  Christ  may  see  the  new-born  heavens  and  earth,  laughing; 

in  the  bright  sunlight  of  God's  p:ood  pleasure;  you  will  never  forgot 

that  joyous  day.     And  you  will  be  caught  up  to  dwell  with  Jesus 

for  ever  and  ever;  and  there  will  come  a  time  when  he  shall  deliver  up 

the  kin,2rdom  to  God,  even  the  Father  and  God  shall  be  all  in  all.    You 

will  never  forget  the  time  of  which  the  poet  sings — 

"  Then  the  end,  beneath  his  rod 

Mnn*8  last  enemy  shall  fall. 

Hallelujah,  Christ  in  God, 

God  iu  Christ  is  all  in  all.** 

All  these  divinely  glorious  events  will  impress  themselves  upon  jou, 
but  not  one  of  them  will  make  an  impression  so  lasting,  so  clear,  so  aeep 
as  this,  that  you  were ''  bought  with  a  price."  High  over  all  the  moontaia 
lops,  Calvary,  that  was  but  a  little  mount  in  human  estimation,  shall 
rise ;  stars  shall  the  events  of  history  be ;  but  this  event  shall  be  the 
sun  in  whose  presence  all  othei's  hide  their  diminished  heads.  *^Thoa 
wast  slain,"  the  full  chorus  of  heaven  shall  roll  it  forth  in  thunder^ 
ing  accents  of  grateful  zeal.  ^^  Thou  wa/^t  slain,  and  hast  redeemed  us 
to  God  by  thy  blood;  **  the  saints  shall  remember  this  first  and 
foremost;  and  amidst  the  cycles  of  eternity  this  shall  have  the  chief 
place  in  every  glorified  memory.  What  then,  Injloved  ?  Shall  it  not  have 
the  chief  place  with  you  now  ?  It  has  been  ihejatt  of  your  life  hitherto, 
it  will  be  the  fact  of  your  entire  eternal  existence  :  let  it  saturate  your 
soul,  let  it  penetrate  your  spirit,  let  it  subdue  your  faculties,  let  it  take 
the  reins  of  all  your  powers  and  guide  you  whither  it  will;  let  the 
Redeemer,  he  whose  hands  were  ))ierced  lor  you,  sway  the  sceptre  of 
your  spirit  and  rule  over  you  this  day,  and  world  without  end. 

If  I  had  the  power  to  do  it,  how  would  I  seek  to  refresh  in  your  souls 
a  sense  of  this  fact  that  you  are  *'  bought  with  a  j)rice."  There,  in  the 
midnight  hour,  amidst  the  olives  of  Gethsemanc,  kneels  Immanuel  the 
Sou  of  God ;  he  groans,  he  pleads  in  prayer,  he  wrestles ;  see  the  beady 
drops  stand  on  his  brow,  drops  of  sweat,  but  not  of  such  sweat  as 
pours  from  men  when  they  earn  the  bread  of  life,  but  the  sweat  of 
nim  who  is  procuring  life  itself  for  us.  It  is  blood,  it  is  crimson  blood ; 
p.'i'eat  gouts  of  it  are  falling  to  the  ground.  0  soul,  thy  Saviour  speaks 
to  thee  from  out  Gethsemane  at  this  hour,  and  he  says:  "Here  and  thus 
I  bosa^^ht  thee  with  a  price."  Come,  stand  and  view  him  in  the  agony 
of  the  olive  garden,  and  understand  at  what  a  cost  he  ])rocured  thy 
deliverance.  Track  him  in  all  his  path  of  shame  and  sorrow  till  you 
eee  him  on  the   Pavement;    maik  how  they    bind  his  hands  and 


V6^  iM  WROPOLITAK  TABKUNACLE  PULPIT. 

fasten  him  to  the  whippingj-post;  see,  they  brinjr  the  scour^'cs  and 
the  cruel  Komaii  whips  ;  they  tear  his  flesh  ;  the  ploughcra  make 
deep  furrows  on  his  blessed  body,  and  the  blood  gushes  forth  in 
streams,  while  rivulets  from  his  temples,  where  the  crown  of  thorns 
has  pierced  them,  join  to  swell  the  purple  stream.  From  beneath 
the  scour<jes  he  speaks  to  you  with  accents  soft  and  low,  and  he  sajs, 
*•  My  child,  it  is  here  and  thus  1  bought  thee  wiUi  a  price.'*  But 
see  him  on  the  cross  itself  when  the  consumfnation  of  all  has 
come ;  his  handf  and  feet  arc  fountains  of  blood :  his  soul  is  full 
of  anguish  eren  to  heartbreak  ;  and  there,  ere  the  soldier  pierces  wth 
a  spear  his  side,  bowing  down  he  whispers  to  thee  and  to  me,  **  It  was  here, 
and  thus,  I  bought  thee  with  a  price."  Oh,  by  Gethscmanc,  by  Gabbatha, 
by  Golgotha,  by  every  sacred  name  connected  with  the  passion  of  out 
Lord,  by  sponge  and  vinegar,  and  nail  and  spear,  and  everything  that 
helped  the  pang  and  increased  the  anguish  of  his  death,  I  conjure  you, 
my  beloved  brethren,  to  remember  that  ye  were  "  bought  with  a  pnce," 
and  **  are  not  your  o\mi."  I  push  you  to  this ;  you  either  were  or  were 
not  so  bought ;  if  you  were,  it  is  the  grand  fact  of  your  life ;  if  you  were, 
it  is  the  greatest  fact  that  ever  will  occur  to  you  :  let  it  operate  upon 
you,  let  it  dominate  your  entire  nature,  let  it  govern  your  body,  your 
soul,  your  spirit,  and  from  this  day  let  it  be  said  of  you  not  onlj 
that  you  are  a  man,  a  man  of  good  morals  and  respectable  conduct,  but 
this,  above  all  things,  that  you  are  a  man  filled  with  love  to  him 
who  bought  you,  a  man  who  lives  for  Christ,  and  knows  no  other 
passion.  Would  God  that  redemption  would  become  the  paramount 
influence,  the  lord  of  our  soul,  and  dictator  of  our  being ;  then  were  we 
indeed  true  to  our  obligations :  short  of  this  we  are  not  what  love 
and  justice  both  demand. 

II.  Now,  let  us  pass  on  to  the  second  point.  Here  is  A  plaijs 
OONSEQUENOK  arising  from  the  blessed  fact.  Ye  were  "  bought  mth  a 
price."  Then  first  it  is  clear  as  a  negatire,  that  "  Ye  are  not  your  own;  *' 
and  secondiv,  it  is  clear  as  a  posifivcj  that  •*  vour  bodv  and  spirit  are 
God's." 

Take  first  ////»  7ieiftttire :  if  bought,  you  are  not  your  own.  No 
argument  is  needed  ior  this,  and  indeed  it  is  so  great  a  boon  in  itself 
that  none  of  us  could  find  it  in  our  hearts  to  demur  tc»  it.  It  is  a  great 
privilege  not  to  be  one's  own.  A  vessel  is  drifting  on  the  Atlantic 
hither  and  thither,  and  its  end  no  man  knoweth.  It  is  derelict,  de- 
serted by  all  its  crow ;  it  is  the  property  of  no  man  ;  it  is  the  prey  of 
every  storm,  and  the  sport  of  every  wind  :  rocks,  quicksiinds,  and  shuals 
wait  to  destroy  it :  the  ocean  yearns  to  engulf  it.  It  drifts  onward  to 
no  man's  land,  and  no  man  will  mourn  its  shipwreck.  But  mark  well 
yonder  barque  in  the  Thames  which  its  owner  surveys  with  pleasure. 
In  its  attempt  to  reach  the  sea,  it  may  run  ashore,  or  come  into  collision 
with  other  vessels  ;  or  in  a  thousand  ways  suiFcr  damage;  but  there ifi 
no  fear,  it  will  pass  through  the  flouting  forest  of  **  the  Pool;"  it  will 
thread  the  winding  channel,  and  reach  the  Nore  because  its  owner  will 
secure  it  pilotage,  skilful  and  apt.  How  thankful  you  and  I  should  be 
that  we  are  not  derelict  to-day!  we  are  not  our' own,  not  left  on  the 
wild  waste  of  chance  to  be  tossed  to  nnd  fro  by  fortuitous  circunistanceSi 
but  there  is  a  hand  upon  our  hehn ;  we  have  on  board  a  pilot  who  owns  as, 


•*  BOUGHT  WITH  A  PRICE."  439 

md  will  surely  steer  us  into  the  Fair  Havens  of  eternal  rest.  The  shee]» 
R  on  the  mountiiin  side,  and  the  winter  is  coming  on ;  it  may  be  buried 
ill  the  snow:  perhaps  the  wolf  may  seize  it,  or  by-and-b}',  when  the 
summer  crops  have  been  eaten,  there  may  be  little  fodder  for  it,  and  it 
Tiay  starve ;  but  the  sheep's  comfort,  if  it  could  think  at  all,  would  be 
this:  it  is  not  its  own,  it  belongeth  to  the  shepherd,  who  will  not 
willingly  lose  his  property ;  it  bears  the  mark  of  its  owner,  and  is  the 
object  of  his  care.  0  happy  sheep  of  God's  pasture,  what  a  bliss  it  is  to 
j^on  that  you  are  not  your  own !  Does  any  man  here  think  it  would  be  a 
pleasure  to  be  his  own  ?  Let  me  assure  him  that  there  is  no  niler  so  tyran- 
nical as  self.  He  that  is  his  own  master,  has  a  fool  and  a  tyrant  to  behis 
lord.  No  man  ever  yet  governed  himself  after  the  will  of  the  flesh  but 
what  he  by  degrees  found  the  yoke  heavy  and  the  burden  crushing.  Helf 
is  a  fierce  dictator,  a  terrible  oppressor  ;  imperious  lusts  are  cruel  slave- 
drivers.  But  Christ,  who  says  we  are  not  our  o^vn,  would  have  us  view 
that  truth  in  the  light  in  which  a  loving  wife  would  view  it.  She,  too, 
is  not  her  own.  She  gave  herself  away  on  a  right  memorable  day,  of 
which  she  bears  the  golden  token  on  her  finger.  She  did  not  weep  when 
she  surrendered  herself  and  became  her  husband's  ;  nor  did  they  mufile 
the  bells,  or  bid  the  organ  play  the  "  Dead  March  "  in  Saul :  it  was  a 
happy  day  for  her;  she  remembers  it  at  this  moment  with  glowing  joy. 
Slie  is  not  her  own,  but  she  has  not  regretted  the  giving  herself  away  : 
she  would  make  the  same  surrender  again  to  the  self-same  beloved  owner, 
if  it  were  to  be  done.  That  she  is  her  husband's  does  not  bespeak 
her  slavery,  but  her  happiness  ;  she  has  found  rest  in  her  husband's  house, 
and  to-day,  when  the  Unristian  confesses  that  he  is  not  his  own,  he  does 
not  wish  that  he  were.  He  is  married  to  the  Saviour ;  he  has  given  him- 
self up,  body,  soul,  and  spirit,  to  the  blessed  Bridegroom  of  his  heart ;  it 
was  the  marrii^e-day  of  his  true  life  when  he  became  a  Christian, 
and  he  looks  back  to  it  with  joy  and  transport.  Oh,  it  is  a  blissful  thing 
not  to  be  our  own,  so  I  shall  not  want  arguments  to  prove  that  to 
which  every  gracious  spirit  gives  a  blissful  consent. 

Now,  if  it  be  true  that  we  are  not  our  own,  and  I  hope  it  is  true  to 
many  hiere  present,  then  the  inference  from  it  is,  "  I  have  no  right  to 
mftire  myself  in  any  way.'  My  body  is  not  my  own,  I  have  no  right 
then,  as  a  Christian  man,  to  do  anything  with  it  that  would  defile  it. 
The  apostle  is  mainly  arguing  against  sins  of  the  flesh,  and  he  says, 
*  the  body  is  not  for  fornication,  but  for  the  Lord ;  and  the  Lord  for  the 
Ix)dy."  We  have  no  right  to  commit  uncleanness,  because  our  bodies 
ire  the  members  of  Christ  and  not  our  own.  He  would  say  the  same 
of  drunkenness,  gluttony,  idle  sleep,  and  even  of  such  excessive  anxiety 
after  wealth  as  injures  health  with  carking  care.  We  have  no  right  to 
profane  or  injui-e  the  flesh  and  blood  which  are  consecrated  to  God; 
^very  limb  of  our  frame  belongs  to  God;  it  is  his  property;  he  has 
lx)Ught  it  "Avith  n  price."  Any  honest  man  will  be  more  concerned 
;)bout  an  injury  done  to  another's  property  placed  under  his  care,  than 
if  it  were  his  own.  When  the  son  of  the  prophet  was  hewing  wood 
»'ith  Elisha,  you  remember  how  he  said,  when  the  axe  head  flew  oft* 
into  the  water,  "Alas  !  master,  for  it  was  borrowed.''  It  would  be  bad 
inough  to  lose  my  own  axe,  but  it  is  not  my  own,  therefore  I  doubly 
Jeplore  the  accident.     T  know  this  would  not  operate  upon  thievish 


440  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT, 

minds.  There  are  some  who,  if  ib  was  another  man's,  &nd  they  bad 
borrowed  it,  w<iuld  have  no  further  care  about  it:  *"  Let  the  lender 
jijet  it  back,  if  he  can.*'  But  we  spealc  to  honest  men,  and  with  them  it 
is  always  a  Ptroni;  arfrnment :  Your  body  is  another's,  do  it  no  injury. 
As  for  onr  spirit  too,  ihai  is  (jlod's,  f.nd  how  careful  we  should  be  o\ 
it.  I  am  asked  irometiincs  to  read  un  heretical  book :  well,  if  1 
believed  my  rearlin<^  it  would  help  its  refutation,  and  ra'^bt  be  an 
assistance  to  others  in  keeping  them  out  of  error,  I  mi^ht  do  it  as  k 
hard  matter  of  duty,  but  1  shall  not  do  it  unless  I  sec  some  <rood  will 
come  from  it.  I  am  not  poini,'  to  drat?  my  S})irit  throuji;li  a  ditch  for  tin* 
sake  of  havinjr  it  washed  afierwards,  for  it  is  not  my  own.  It  may  be 
that  f?ood  medicine  would  restore  me  if  I  poisoned  myself  with  putrid 
meat,  but  I  am  not  ^oin^  to  try  it:  1  dare  noi  e.\|)eriment  on  a  mind 
which  no  longer  belon<{s  to  me.  There  is  a  mother  and  a  child,  aod 
the  child  has  a  book  to  play  with,  and  a  blncklead  pencil.  It  is  making 
diawings  and  marks  upon  the  book,  and  the  mother  takes  no  notice. 
It  lavs  down  one  book  and  snatches  another  from  the  table,  and  at 
once  the  mother  rises  from  her  seat,  and  hurriedly  takes  the  book  awaj. 
saying :  ''  No,  my  dear,  yon  mnst  not  niark  that,  for  it  is  not  ours.^ 
So  with  my  mind,  intellect,  and  spirit;  if  it  belonged  to  me  I  might  or 
might  not  play  tomfool  with  it,  and  go  to  hear  Socinians,  Eitnalifits, 
Universalists,  and  Fuch  like  preach,  but  as  it  is  not  my  own,  I  wDl 
preserve  it  from  such  fooleries,  and  the  pure  woi*d  shall  not  be  mingled 
with  the  errors  of  men.  Here  is  the  drill  of  the  apostle's  argument— 
I  have  no  right  to  injure  that  which  does  not  belong  to  me,  and  as  1 
urn  not  my  own,  I  have  no  right  to  injure  myself. 

But,  further,  I  have  no  right  to  let  myself  lie  intslii.  The  man  wba 
had  a  talent,  and  went  and  dug  in  the  earth  and  hid  it,  had  not 
lie  a  right  lo  do  so  ?  Yes,  of  course,  if  ii  was  his  own  talent,  and 
his  own  napkin.  If  any  of  you  have  money  and  do  not  put  it  out  to 
interest,  if  it  is  all  your  own,  nobody  complains.  But  this  ialeai 
belonged  to  the  man's  master,  it  was  only  inuusted  to  him  as  a  steward, 
ujid  he  ought  not  to  have  let  it  rust  in  the  ground.  So  I  have  no  righi 
to  let  my  faculties  run  to  waste  since  they  do  not  belong  to  me.  If  1 
am  a  Christian  1  have  no  right  to  be  idle.  1  saw  the  other  dar  meu 
using  picks  in  the  road  in  laying  down  new  gas-pipes;  they  hacl  becu 
renting,  and  just  as  I  passed  the  clock  struck  one,  and  the  foreman  gave 
a  signal.  I  think  he  said,  *^  Blow  up  ;**  and  straightway  each  man  tooL 
his  pick  or  his  shovel,  and  they  were  all  at  it  in  earnest.  Close  to  thee: 
stood  a  fellow  with  a  pijjc  in  his  mouth,  who  did  not  join  in  the  work, 
hut  stood  in  a  free-and-oasy  posture.  It  did  not  make  any  diflercnccto 
him  whether  it  was  one  o'clock  or  six.  Why  not?  Becaase  he  washiR 
own  :  the  other  men  were  the  master's  for  the  time  being.  Ha  as  an 
independent  gentlemen  mipht  do  as  he  liked,  Imt  those  who  were  not 
their  own  fell  to  labour.  If  any  of  you  idle  proiessors  can  really  prow* 
that  yeu  belong  to  yourselves,  I  have  nothing  more  to  say  to  you,  but  if 
you  profess  to  have  a  share  in  the  redeeming  sacrifice  of  Christ,  I  am 
ashamed  of  you  if  you  do  not  go  to  work  ihe  very  moment  the  signal  is 
given.  You  have  no  right  to  waste  what  Jesus  Christ  has  buughi 
**  with  a  price." 

Fuilher  than  ihat^if  we  are  not  our  own,  but  **are  bought  with  a  pricc^"* 


^SODQHT  WITH  ▲  PRm."  441 

we  have  no  right  to  exercise  any  capricious  ffovemnient of  onrselves.  A 
man  who  is  his  own  may  saj,  **  I  shall  go  whither  I  will,  and  do  what  I 
will ;"  but  if  I  am  not  my  own  bat  belong  to  God  who  has  bought  me, 
then  I  must  submit  to  his  gorernment ;  his  will  must  be  my  will,  and 
his  directions  must  be  my  law.  I  desire  to  enter  a  certain  garden,  find 
I  ask  the  gardener  at  the  gate  if  I  may  come  in.  "  You  should  be  very 
welcome,  sir,  indeed,"  says  he,  "  if  it  were  mine,  but  my  master  has  told 
me  not  to  admit  strangers  here,  and  therefore  I  must  refuse  you/' 
Sometimes  the  devil  would  come  into  the  garden  of  our  souls.  We  tell 
him  that  our  flesh  might  consent,  but  the  garden  is  not  ours,  and  we 
cannot  give  him  space.  Worldly  ambition,  covetonsness,  and  so  forth, 
might  claim  to  walk  through  our  soul,  but  we  say,  *'  No,  it  is  not  our 
own ;  we  cannot,  therefore,  do  what  oar  old  will  would  do,  but  we 
desire  to  be  obedient  to  the  will  of  our  Father  who  is  in  heaven."  Thy 
will  be  done,  my  God,  in  me,  for  so  should  it  be  done  where  all  is  thine 
own  by  purchase. 

Yet,  again,  if  we  are  not  our  own,  then  we  have  no  right  h  serve 
mtrselves.  The  man  who  is  living  entirely  for  himself,  whose  object 
is  his  own  ease,  comfort,  honour,  or  wealth,  what  knows  he  concern- 
ing redemption  by  Chiist?  If  our  aims  rise  no  higher  than  our 
liersonal  advantages,  we  are  false  to  the  fact  that  we  "  are  bought  with  a 
price,"  we  are  treacherous  to  him  in  whose  redemption  we  pretend  to 
share. 

But  time  would  fail  me  if  I  dwelt  upon  this,  or,  indeed,  at  any  Icngtii 

upon  the  posilive  side  of  this  blessed  fact :  I  will  therefore  only  say  a 

word  or  two  concerning  it.     Our  body  and  our  spirit  are  God's ;  and. 

Christian,  this  is  certainly  a  very  high  honour  to  you.     Your  body  will 

rise  again  from  the  dead  at  the  first  resurrection,  because  it  is  not  an 

ordinary  body,  it  belongs  to  God :  your  spirit  is  distinguished  from  the 

souls  of  other  men  ;  it  is  God's  spirit,  and  he  has  set  his  mark  upon  it, 

and  honoured  you  in  so  doing.    You  are  God's,  because  a  price  has 

been  paid  for  you.    According  to  some,  the  allusion  price  here  is  to 

the  dowry  that  was  paid  by  a  husband  for  his  wife  in  ancient  dnys. 

According  to  the  Rabbis  there  were  three  ways  by  which  a  woman 

l>ecame  the  wife  of  a  man,  and  one  of  these  was  by  the  payment  of  a 

dowry.     This  was  always  held  good  in  Jewish  law  ;  the  woman  was 

not  her  own  ftom  the  moment  when  the  husband  had  paid  to  her  father 

or  Datural  guardian  the  stipulated  price  for  her.     Now,  at  this  day. 

yon  and  I  rejoice  that  Jesus  Christ  has  espoused  us  unto  him.^clf  m 

righteousness  or  ever  the  earth  was  ;  we  rejoice  in  that  language  wl;ich 

ke   uses   by  the  prophet  Hosea,  "I  will  betroth  thee  unto  me  lV»r 

ever;"  but  here  is  our  comfort,  the  dowry  money  has  been  paid,  Christ 

has  redeemed  us  unto  himself,  and  Christ's  we  are,  Christ's  for  ever  atid 

ever. 

Remember  that  our  Lord  has  paid  all  the  price  for  us;  there  is 
no  mortgage  or  lien  upon  us ;  we  have  therefore  no  right  to  give  .\ 
portion  of  ourselves  to  Satan.  And  he  has  bought  us  entirely  frcin 
head  to  foot,  every  power,  every  passion,  and  every  faculty,  all  our 
time,  all  our  goods,  all  that  we  call  our  o\ni,  all  that  makes  uj)  onr- 
i^lves  in  the  largest  sense  of  that  term;  we  are  altogether  God's 
Ah !  it  is  very  easy  for  people  to  say  this,  but  how  very  difficult  it  is  to 


442  METAOPOLITAN  TABERNlijlifi  PULPIT. 

feci  it  true  and  to  act  as  each !  I  have  no  doubt  there  are  manj 
perBons  here  who  profess  to  be  willing  to  give  God  all  they  have,  who 
would  not  actually  give  him  five  shillings.    We  can  sing — 

"  Here,  Lord,  I  give  myself  away ; " 
and  yet  if  it  comes  to  yielding  only  a  part  of  ourselves,  if  it  rocjpizes  self- 
denial,  or  self-sacrifice,  straightway  there  is  a  drawing  back,  !Now,  w«s 
the  cross  a  fiction  ?  Was  the  death  of  Christ  a  fable  ?  Were  you  onlj 
fancifully  "  bought  with  a  price,"  and  not  in  deed  and  in  tnith  ?  If  re- 
demption be  a  fable,  then  i*eturn  a  fabled  consecration ;  if  yonrpnichase 
be  a  fiction,  then  lead  the  fictitious  lives  that  some  of  joa  do  lead  with 
regard  to  consecration  to  Christ.  If  it  be  only  an  idea,  a  pretty  wme- 
thing  that  we  read  of  in  books,  then  let  our  belonging  nnto  God  be  a 
mere  idea  and  a  piece  of  sentiment ;  but  a  real  r^cmption  demands 
real  holiness.  A  true  price,  most  certainly  paid,  demands  from  us  t 
practical  surrendering  of  ourselves  to  the  service  of  God.  From  thi< 
day  forth  even  for  ever,  **  ye  are  not  your  own,"  ye  are  the  Lord's. 

111.  And  now  I  must  close,  and  oh,  may  God  give  power  to  his  worf 
while  I  beg  to  speak  ui)on  the  last  point,  namely,  the  jtatural  cok- 
CLUsroN,  **  Therefore  glorify  God  in  your  body,  and  in  your  spirit."  1 
am  not  clear  that  the  last  few  words' are  in  the  original.  A  large  num- 
ber of  the  old  manuscripts  and  versions,  and  some  of  the  more  important 
of  them,  finish  the  vorse  at  the  word  "  body  " — **  Therefore  glorify  God 
in  your  body.*'  It  was  the  body  the  apostle  was  speaking  about,  and 
not  the  spirit,  and  there  is  no  necessity  for  the  last  words  :  still  wc  will 
not  further  rai.se  the  <|UC8tion,  but  take  them  as  being  the  inspired  word 
of  God :  but  still,  1  must  make  the  remark,  that  according  to  the 
coniioc.tion  tin;  force  of  the  apostle's  language  falls  upon  the  body;  and 
jierhaps  it  is  .so,  betuusc  we  are  so  apt  to  forget  the  truth,  that  the  body 
IS  redeemed  and  is  the  Lord's,  and  should  be  made  to  glorify  God. 

The  Christian  man's  lx)dy  should  glorify  God  by  ite  chastity.  Pure 
as  the  lily  should  wc  be  from  every  taint  of  uncleanneas.  The  bodj 
should  glorify  God  by  temperance  also ;  in  all  things,  in  eatingr,  drinking, 
sleeping,  in  everything  that  has  to  do  with  the  flesh.  *' Whether  yc 
eat  or  drink,  or  whatsoever  yc  do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God,"  or  as 
the  apostlo  puts  it  elsewhere,  "whatsoever  ye  do  in  word  or  deed,  do  all 
in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  giving  thanks  to  God  and  the  Father 
by  him. '  The  Christian  man  can  make  every  meal  a  sacrament,  and 
his  ordinary  avocations  the  exercise  of  his  spiritual  priesthood.  The 
body  ought  to  glorify  (Joil  by  its  industry.  A  lazy  servant  is  a  bad 
(Christian.  A  working  man  who  is  always  looking  for  Saturday  night, 
a  ninn  who  never  s})onds  a  drop  of  sweat  except  when  the  master  is 
looking  on,  does  not  glorify  God  in  his  body.  The  best  Christian  is 
the  man  who  is  not  afraid  of  hard  work  when  it  is  due,  who  works  not 
as  an  eye-servant  or  man  plcaser,  but  in  singleness  of  heart  seeks  to 
i^lorify  God.  Our  l)odics  used  to  work  hard  enough  for  the  devil ;  now 
they  belong  to  God  we  will  make  them  work  for  him.  Your  legs  uaed 
to  carry  you  to  the  theatre ;  be  not  too  lazy  to  come  out  on  a  Thursday 
night  to  the  house  of  God.  Your  eyes  have  been  often  open  upon 
iniquity,  keep  them  open  during  the  sermon :  do  not  drop  asleep !  Your 
ears  have  been  sharp  enough  to  catch  the  word  of  a  lascivious  song, 
let  them  be  quick  to  observe  the  word  of  God.    Those  hands  have  often 


"BOUGHT  WITH  A  PRICE/'  448 

quandered  your  efiniinjrs  in  sinfulness,  let  them  pire  freely  to  the 
anRe  of  Christ.  Yonr  body  was  a  willin<!^  horse  when  it  was  in  the 
BTvice  of  the  devil,  let  it  not  be  a  sluggish  hack  now  that  it  draws  the 
hariot  of  Oljrist.  Make  the  tongue  speak  his  praises,  make  the 
nonth  sing  of  his  glory,  make  the  whole  man  bow  in  willing  subser- 
ience  to  the  will  of  him  who  boujrht  it 

As  for  your  spirit,  let  that  glorify  God  too.  Let  your  private  medita- 
ions  magnify  God  ;  let  your  songs  be  to  him  when  no  one  heara  you  but 
limself,  and  let  your  public  zeal,  let  the  purity  of  your  conversation, 
9t  the  earnestness  of  your  life,  let  the  universal  holiness  of  your 
faaracter,  glorify  God  with  your  body  and  with  your  spirit. 

Beloved  Christian  friends,  I  want  to  say  these  few  things  and  have 
kme.  Because  you  are  God's,  you  will  be  looked  at  more  than  others, 
hcrefore,  glorify  him.  You  kuow  it  is  not  always  the  thing  itself,  but 
he  ownership  that  caases  curiosity.  If  you  were  to  go  to  a  cattle-show, 
nd  it  were  said  **  such  and  such  a  bullock  belongs  to  Her  Majesty," 
t  may  be  it  is  no  better  than  another,  but  it  would  be  of  interest  to 
honsnnds  as  belonging  to  royalty.  See  here,  then,  such  and  such  a 
nan  belongs  to  God ;  what  manner  of  person  ought  he  to  be  ?  If 
here  be  any  one  in  this  world  who  will  not  be  criticised,  depend  upon 
t,  Christian,  it  is  not  the  Christian ;  sharp  eyes  will  be  upon  him,  and 
rorldly  men  will  find  faults  in  him  which  they  would  not  see  if  he  were 
lot  a  professor.  For  my  part  I  am  very  glad  of  the  Ivnx  eyes  of  the 
forldlings.  Let  them  watch  if  they  will.  I  have  heard  of  one  who  was 
i  great  caviller  at  Christian  people,  and  after  having  annoyed  a  church 
i  long  time,  he  was  about  to  leave,  and.therefore,  as  a  parting  jest  with 
he  minister,  he  said,  "  I  have  no  doubt  you  will  be  very  glad  to  know 
hat  I  am  going  a  hundred  miles  away  ?  "  "  No,"  said  the  pastor,  **  I 
hall  be  soriy  to  lose  you."  "  How  ?  I  never  did  you  any  good."  "  I 
bn't  know  ihat,  for  I  am  sure  that  never  one  of  my  fiock  put  half  a 
bot  through  the  hedge  but  what  you  began  to  yelp  at  him,  and  so  you 
lave  been  a  famous  sheep-dog  for  me."  I  am  glad  the  world  observes 
18.  It  has  a  right  to  do  so.  If  a  man  says,  "  I  am  God's,'*  he  sets 
imself  up  for  public  observation.  Ye  are  lights  in  the  world,  and  what 
re  lights  intended  for  but  to  be  looked  at  ?  A  city  set  on  a  hill  can- 
ot  be  hid. 

Moreover,  the  world  has  a  right  to  expect  more  from  a  Christian  than 
rom  anybody  else.  He  says  he  is  **  bought  with  a  price,"  he  says  he  is 
kxl's,  he  therefore  claims  more  than  others,  and  he  ought  to  render 
lore.  S  and  in  fancy  in  one  of  the  fights  of  the  old  civil  war.  The 
loyalists  are  fighting  despei-ately  and  are  winning  apace,  but  I  hear  a 
ry  from  the  otlier  side  that  Cromwell's  Ironsides  are  coming.  Now  we 
lall  sec  some  fighting.  Oliver  and  his  men  are  lions.  But,  lo  !  I  see 
lat  the  fellows  wlio  come  up  hnng  fire,  and  are  afraid  to  rush  into  the 
lick  of  the  fight;  surely  these  are  not  Cromweirs  Ironsides,  and  yonder 
iptain  is  not  old  Noll  ?  I  do  not  believe  it:  it  cannot  be.  Why,  if 
ley  were  what  ihey  profess  to  be,  they  would  have  broken  the  lanks  of 
lose  perfumed  cavaliei's  ioui  a^o,  and  have  made  them  fly  before  them 
ke  chaff  before  the  wind.  So  when  I  hear  men  say,  '^  Here  is  a  body 
r  Christians."  What  I  those  Christians?  Those  cowardiv  people,  who 
irdly  dare  speak  a  word  for  Jesus  I    Those  covetous  people  who  give  a 


444  H£TROPOUTAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

few  cheese-parings  to  his  cause !  Those  inconsistent  people  wbom  yoa 
would  not  know  to  be  Christian  professors  if  they  did  not  label  them- 
selves I  What !  such  beings  followers  of  a  crucified  Saviour  ?  The  world 
sneers  at  such  pretensions ;  and  well  it  may.  With  such  a  leader  lei  ns 
follow  bravely;  and  bought  with  such  a  price,  and  being  owned  hy 
such  a  ^Master,  let  us  glorify  him  who  condescends  to  call  such  poor 
creatures  as  we  are  his  portion,  whom  he  hath  set  apart  for  himself. 

And  let  us  remember  that  by  men  who  profess  to  be  **  bought  with  a 
price,"  the  name  of  Christ  is  compromised  if  their  behaviour  is  un- 
seemly. If  we  are  not  holy  and  gracious,  ungodly  men  are  sure  to  say, 
**  That  is  one  of  your  believers  in  God;  that  is  one  of  your  Christians.** 
Do  not  let  it  be  so.  Every  soldier  in  a  regiment  ought  to  feel  that  tk 
renown  of  the  whole  army  depends  upon  him,  and  he  must  fight  as  if 
the  winning  of  the  Imttle  rested  uix)n  himself.  This  will  cause  every 
man  to  be  a  hero.  Oh,  that  every  Christian  felt  as  if  the  honour  of  God 
and  the  chui-ch  rested  upon  him,  for  in  a  measure  it  certainly  does ! 

!May  wo  so  seek  God,  that  when  we  come  to  die  we  may  feel  that  wc 
have  lived  for  something;  that  although  our  hope  has  rested  alone 
in  what  Jesus  did,  yet  we  have  not  made  that  an  excuse  for  doing 
nothing  ourselves.  Though  we  shall  have  no  good  works  in  which 
to  glory,  yet  may  we  bring  forth  fruit  that  shall  be  for  the  glory  of 
our  Lord.  I  feel  I  so  desire  to  glorify  God,  body,  soul,  and  spirit 
while  I  breathe,  that  I  would  even  do  so  on  earth  after  I  am  dead. 
[  would  still  urge  my  brethren  on  in  our  Lord*8  cause.  Old  Zizka,  the 
Hussite  leader,  when  about  to  die,  said  to  his  soldiers :  ''  Our  enemies 
have  always  been  afraid  of  my  name  in  the  time  of  battle,  and  what 
1  am  dead  take  my  skin,  and  make  a  drum -head  of  it,  and  beat  it 
whenever  you  go  to  battle.  When  the  foemen  hear  the  sound  they  will 
tremble,  and  you  will  remember  that  Zizka  calls  on  his  brethren  to  fight 
valiantly."  Let  us  so  live  that  when  we  die,  we  live  on,  like  Abed,  Tirho 
being  dead  yet  speaketh.  The  only  way  to  do  this  is  to  live  in  tJw 
power  of  the  Immortal  God,  under  the  influence  of  his  Holy  Spirit: 
I  hen  out  of  our  graves  we  shall  speak  to  future  generations.  When 
Doctor  Payson  died,  he  desired  that  his  body  should  be  placed  in  a 
coilin,  and  that  his  hearers  should  be  invited  to  come  and  see  it.  Across 
his  breast  was  placed  a  paper  bearing  these  words,  "  Remember  the 
words  which  I  spake  unto  you,  being  yet  present  with  you."  May  onr 
lives  be  such  that  even  if  we  are  not  public  speakers,  yet  others  may 
remember  our  example,  and  so  may  hear  what  our  lives  spake  while  we 
were  yet  on  earth.  Your  bodies  and  your  spirits  are  God's :  oh,  live 
lo  (iod,  juid  glorify  him  in  the  power  of  his  Spirit  as  long  as  you  have 
any  breath  below,  that  so  when  the  breath  is  gone,  your  very  bones,  like 
those  of  Joseph,  shall  be  a  testimony.  Even  in  the  ashes  of  the  saints 
I  heir  wonted  fires  live  on.  In  their  hallowed  memories  ihey  rise  like 
a  phcenix  from  their  ashes. 

The  Lord  make  us  more  and  more  practicallv  his  o^vn,  and  may  his 
iiumo  Imj  v.:<»i'i«»iis,  Ibi-  ever  and  ever.    Amen,  and  amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — 1  Peter  i. 


^^ti*0pHtnn  &Irirttark  §n^\i 


LE&SOXS  FROM   NATURE. 


%  ^mmx 


DkLITERSO  OS  LOED'8-DAY  MOBNINO,  AUGUST  13tH,    1871,  BT 

C.  H.  SrUKGEON, 

AT    THE     METROPOLITAN     TABERNACLE,     NEWINGTON. 


**  Where  the  birds  make  their  nests  :  as  for  the  stork,  the  fir  treos  arc  her  hov^c. 
Xh©  high  hills  are  a  refuge  for  the  xkiUX  goats  ;  and  tho  rocks  for  the  conies." — 
Psalm  civ.  17,  18. 

This  Psalm  is  all  through  a  song  of  nature,  the  adoration  of  God  in 

the  great  outward  temple  of  tlic  universe.    Some  in  these  modem  times 

have  thought  it  to  be  a  mark  of  high  spirituality  never  to  observe  nature ; 

and  I  remember  sorrowfully  reading  the  expressions  of  a  godly  person,  who, 

in  sailing  down  one  of  the  most  famous  rivers  in  the  world,  closed  his 

eyes,  lest  the  picturesque  beauties  of  the  scene  should  divert  his  mind 

from  scriptural  topics.    This  may  be  regarded  by  some  as  profoimd 

spirituality ;  to  me  it  seems  to  savour  of  absurdity.    There   may  be 

IKjrsons  who  think  they  have  grown  in  grace  when  thoy  have  attained  to 

this  ;  it  seems  to  me  that  they  are  growing  out  of  tlieir  senses.    To 

despise  the  creating  work  of  (Jod,  what  is   it  but,  in  a  measure,  to 

despise  God  himself?      "Whoso  mocketh    the    poor   dcspiseth   his 

MaKcr."     To  despise  the  ^[aker,  then,  is  evidently  a  sin;  to  think  little 

of  (fod  under  the  asjxict  of  the  Creator  is  a  crime.    We  should  none  of 

US  think  it  a  groat  honour  to  ourselves  if  our  friends  considered  our  pro- 

diietions  to  be  unworthy  of  admiration,  and  rather  injurious  to  their 

minds  than  imju'oving.  If  when  they  passed  our  workmanship  they  turned 

their  eyes  away,  lest  they  should  suffer  injury  by  looking  at  it,  we  sliould 

not  regard  them  as  very  respectful  to  ourselves  ;  surely  the  despising  of 

that  wl)ieh  is  made  is  somewhat  akin   to  the  despising  i»f  the  Maivcr 

htunself.     David  tells  us  that  **  The  Lord  shall  rejoice  in  his  works." 

ff  he  rejoices  in  what  he  has  made,  shall  not  those  who  have  commu- 

iiiou  with  him  rejoice  in  his  works  also  ?     "  The  works  of  the  Lord  are 

;rreat,  sought  out  of  them  that  have  pleasure  therein."    Dospise  not  tho 

work,  lest  thou  despise  the  worker. 

This  prejudice  against  the  beauties  of  the  material  universe  reminds 

No.  IjhOb. 


\\{]  MLTIlOrOLlTAN  TARKltNACLE   PULPIT. 

niL-  of  ihe  linjrering  love  to  Judaism,  wliich  acted  like  a  spell  upon  Peter 
of  oUl.  When  tlic  sheet  knit  at  the  four  corners  descended  before  him, 
and  the  voice  said,  "  Rise,  Peter;  kill, and  eat,"  he  replied  that  he  had 
not  eaten  anything  that  was  common  or  unclean.  He  needed  that  the 
voice  should  speak  to  him  from  heaven  a^ain  and  again  before  he 
would  fully  learn  the  lesson,  "What  God  hath  cleansed  that  call  not 
thou  common."  The  Jew  thinks  this  ani  that  unclean,  though  Christ 
has  cleansed  it;  and  certain  Christians  appear  to  regard  nature  ai 
unclean.  The  birds  of  the  air,  and  the  fish  of  the  sea,  the  glorions 
sunrise  and  sunset,  the  snow-clad  Alps,  the  ancient  forests,  the  mys- 
terious j^laciers,  the  boundless  ocean,  God  hath  cleansed  them:  call 
them  not  common.  Here  on  this  earth  is  Calvary  where  the  Saviour  died, 
and  by  his  sacrifice,  offered  not  within  walls  and  roofs,  he  made  this  outer 
world  a  temple  wherein  everything:  doth  speak  of  God's  glory.  If  thou 
be  unclean,  all  things  will  be  unclean  to  thee;  but  if  thou  hast  washed 
thy  robe  and  made  it  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  and  if  the  Holy 
Spirit  hath  overshadowed  thee,  then  this  world  is  but  a  nether  heaven ; 
it  is  but  the  lower  chamber  of  which  the  up|>er  story  glows  with  the 
full  si)lendour  of  God,  where  angols  see  him  face  to  face,  and  this  lower 
story  is  not  without  glory,  for  in  the  person  of  Christ  Jesus  we  have 
seen  God,  and  have  communion  and  fellowship  with  him  even  now. 

It  appears  to  me  that  those  who  would  forbear  the  study  of  nature,  or 
shun  tlie  observation  of  its  beauties,  are  conscious  of  the  weakness  of 
their  own  spirituality.  When  the  hermits  and  monks  shut  themselves 
out  from  the  temptations  of  life,  foolish  ixjrsons  said,  **  These  are  strong 
in  grace.'*  Not  so,  they  were  so  weak  in  grace  that  they  were  afraid  to 
have  their  graces  tried.  They  nm  away  from  the  battle  like  the  cowards 
they  were,  and  shut  themselves  up  because  they  knew  their  swords  were 
not  of  the  true  Jerusalem  metal,  and  they  were  not  men  who  could 
resist  valiantly.  Monasticism  was  the  confession  of  a  weakness  which 
they  endeavoured  to  cover  with  the  vain  show  of  humility,  and 
the  pretence  of  superior  sanctity.  If  my  graces  are  strong,  I  can 
look  upon  the  outward  world,  and  draw  forth  i(s  good  without  feeling 
its  evil,  if  evil  there  be;  but  if  my  religion  is  mainly  fictitious,  then 
hypocrisy  dictates  to  me  the  affectation  of  unusual  spirituality,  oral 
any  rate  I  have  not  grace  enough  to  rise  from  a  contemplation  of  the 
worksof  God  to  a  nearer  fellowship  wiih  God  himself.  It  cannot  be  that 
nature  of  itself  debases  me,  or  diverts  me  from  God;  I  ought  to  suspect 
a  deficiency  in  myself  when  I  find  that  the  Creator's  handiworks  have  not 
a  good  effect  upon  my  soul. 

Moreover,  rest  assured  brethren,  timt  he  who  wrote  the  Bible,  the 
Hocond  and  clearest  revelation  of  his  divine  mind,  wrote  also  the  first 
book,  the  book  of  nature ;  and  who  are  we  that  we  shi»uld  derogate  from 
t  lie  worth  of  the  first  because  we  esteem  the  second.  Milton*B  "  Paradise 
Kcgained"  is  certainly  inferior  to  his  "  Paradise  Lost,"  but  the  Eternal 
God  has  no  inferior  [»roducti«.ns,  all  his  works  are  master-pieces.  Tliere 
is  no  quarrel  l>etweeu  nature  and  revelation,  fools  only  think  so:  to 
>yise  men  the  one  illustrat*  s  i.n'l  cstablishi  s  the  other.  Walkinsr  in  the 
fields  at  eventide,  as  Isaac  did,  I  see  in  the  ripening  harvest  the  same 
God  of  whom  I  read  in  the  word  tiat  he  covenanted  that  seed-time 
and    harvest  should  not  cease.    Surveying    the    midnight   skies,  I 


LESSONS  FROM  NATURE.  447 

remember  him  who,  while  he  calls  the  stars  bj  their  names,  also 
biiideth  up  the  broken  in  heart.  Who  will  may  neglect  the  volume 
of  creation,  or  the  volume  of  revelation,  I  shall  delight  in  them  both 
as  long  as  I  live. 

Let  us,  then,  follow  David  this  morning,  for  when  he  wrote  our 
text,  he  evidently  travelled  amongst  the  works  of  God,  admiring  and 
adoring.  Let  us  go  with  him,  and  see  if  there  be  not  something  to  bu 
learned  among  the  birds  and  storks,  the  wild  goats  and  the  conies. 

L  Our  first  observation  from  our  text  shall  be  this :    For  EACif 
PLACE  God  has  prepared  a  suitable  form  of  life.     For  the  lir 
trees,  the  stork  ;  for  the  high  hills,  the  wild  goat,  or  steinbock ;  for  the 
rocks,  the  conies,  or  rabbits.     Almost  every  part  of  God's  worhl  was 
meant  to  be  the  abode  of  some  creature  or  anoiher.    On  earth,  a  count- 
less company  wait  upon  the  Lord  for  meat;  and  as  for  the  sea,  it  contains 
^*  ereepiug  things  innumerable,  both  small  and  great  beasts."    Among 
the  trees  which  shade  the  brooks,  the  birds  are  singing;  in  the  tall 
flOHibre  pine,  the  silent  storks  are  building  their  nests;    on  the  lofty 
craiis,  vir;iin  as  yet  to  human  foot,  the  chamois  leaps  from  ledge  to 
ledge  ;  and  away,  where  human  voice  was  never  heard,  the  marmot, 
the  mouse,   and   the  rabbit  (whichever    creature    the   Hebrew  may 
mean)  find  their  dwelling-place  amcng  the  rocks.     The  teaching  oV 
this  fact  is  clear.      AVe  fhall  find  that  for  all  parts  of  the  spiritual 
universe   God    has    provided   suitable  forms  of   divine   life.     Think 
out  that  thought  a  moment.     Each  age  has  its  saints.     The  first  age 
bad  its  holy  meuj  who  walked  with  God:    and  when  the  golden  age 
had  gone,  and  men  everywhere  had  polluted  themselves,  God  had  his 
Noah.     In  afier  days,  when  men  had  again  multiplied  upon  the  face  of 
the  earth,  and  sin  abounded,  there  was  Job  in  the  land  of  Uz,  and 
Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and  Jacob  dwelling  in  tents  in  the  land  which  had 
been  given  to  them  by  proniise.   On  whatever  period  of  the  world's  history 
rou  choose  to  place  your  finger  you  may  rest  assured  that  as  God  is 
/here,  so  is  there  also  some  form  of  the  divine  life  extant ;  some  of  God*s 
iwice  bom  creatures  are  to  be  found  even  in  the  most  barren  ag'^s.     If 
fou  come  to  a  period  like  that  of  Ahab,  when  a  lonely  Elijah  bitterly 
complains,  *'  I,  only  1  am  left,  and  they  seek  my  life  to  destroy  it,"  you 
shall  hear  a  still  small  voice  that  saith,  '*  Yet  have  I  reserved  unto  myself 
;eveii  thonsand  men  that  have  not  bowed  the  knee  to  Baal."     God  has 
still  his  elect  remnant  in  the  most  wicked  times  to  whom  he  has  given 
I  banner,  because  of  the  truth.     When  the  light  was  almost  gone  from 
[srael,  and   formalism  had  eclipsed  the  sun  of  Judaism,  there  were 
still  a  Simeon  and  an  Aima  waiting  for  the  coming  of  the  Messiah. 
rimes  of  fearful  persecution,  when  to  mention  the  name  of  Christ 
Tas  to  sentence  yourself  to  death,  have  not  been  devoid  of  saints,  but 
*ather   in   the  hottest  times  of   oppression  God  has  brought  forth 
.eroes  equal  to  the  emergency.     The  fiercer  the  trial  the  stronger  the 
ntn.     Tlie  church  of  God,  like  the  fabled  Salamander,  has  lived  and 
lourished  amid  the  flames,  and  has  seemed  to  feed  uix)n  the  flames 
hat  threatened  to  devour  her.    As  on  the  crags  where  it  appears  im- 
jossilile  for  life  to  exist  God  places  wild  goats,  so  on  the  high  crags  of 
crsecution  he  upholds  men  whose  feet  are  like  hind's  feet,  and  who 
:loiy  as  they  tread  upon  their  high  places.    Oppression  brings  out  the 


448  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

lieavenly  manhood  of  the  saints  and  lets  the  devil  ^ee  whftt  utrenvth 
God  can  put.  into  the  weakness  of  man.  There  have  been  tiineiof 
hcresv  too — such  as  the  age  of  rampant  Arinnism,  but  saints  haveont- 
lived  it.  God  has  provided  for  such  an  cmeijicency  bravo  defenders  of 
the  faith.  What  a  man  was  Athanasins,  whi-n  stinding  npri^rht  and 
alone  he  said,  **I  know  that  Jesus  Christ  is  very  God,  ana  ifalltfie 
world  believe  the  contrary,  I,  AthanasiiiF,  stand  ajrjimst  the  world.**  Sardn 
may  h^ve  a  name  to  live  and  he  dead,  but  the  Lord  saitb,  ''thoa  hut 
a  few  names  even  in  S«rdis  which  have  not  defiled  their  ^rmenlB^ 
and  they  shall  walk  with  me  in  white,  for  they  are  worthy."  Is  not  tliis 
an  encouraging  truth,  for  as  it  has  been  in  the  past  it  is  in  the 
present,  and  it.  will  be  in  the  fntnre.  Do  not  give  way  to  gloomy  fore- 
l)odin;rs  as  to  the  church's  future  welfire.  Whine  not  with  those 
who  de]>lorc  these  evil  d^ys,  and  pioi^nosticate  overwhelming  ills.  We 
are  told  that  we  are  passin*r  through  a  rrisis,  but  I  recollect  thatituai 
a  crisis  twenty  years  ago,  and  our  grand^ircs  could  tdl  us  of  a  crisis  every 
year  of  the  last  fifty.  The  fact  is  t'lere  is  no  such  crisis  as  is  talked  ot 
The  crisis  is  past,  for  Christ  said,  *No\v  is  the  crisis  of  this  world,  now 
bhali  the  prince  of  this  world  be  cast  out."  When  Jesus  went  to  Golj^otha 
and  bled  and  died,  the  crisis  of  the  church  and  of  the  world  was  over; 
the  virtnrv  of  truth  and  ofChrisr  was  secured  bevond  all  hazard.  Even  if 
times  shonM  darken  and  the  ni;rht  shonld  gruw  thicker  and  thicker, 
rest  assured  that  he  who  has  the  conies  fur  the  I'ock 8,  and  goats  for 
the  high  hills,  and  finds  for  the  loiests  the  stork,  will  find  foreverj 
age  a  suiiablo  form  of  Christian  life  that  shall  biing  glury  to  his 
name. 

As  it  has  been  in  every  age,  so  is  it  in  erert/  postfwn  in  which  men  are 
found.  (Jo  into  all  clasi-es  of  soiiefy,  and  von  shall  find  that  theChrisliaii 
relijion,  if  reeeived  in  truth,  is  ccjually  well  adapted  for  all  conditions. 
Here  ami  there  upon  the  throne  have  been  found  those  that  have  feared 
God,  and  have  gone  from  a  crown  on  earth  to  a  crown  in  heaven.  There 
can  be  no  better  cpialificalion  for  swniing  a  kingdom  th;in  obedience  to 
the  King  of  kings.  Go  straight  di»\\n  from  the  pa'ace  to  the  |K)or-houBe, 
little  enonuh  of  comfort  there,  but  the  richest  consolation  which  can  be 
found  fnr  tlie  meane>t  pauper,  will  be  brought  by  that  hand  which  was 
nailed  to  the  tree.  He  it  is  that  can  console  the  son'ows  of  poverty  as 
well  as  sanciiiy  the  risks  of  wtalih.  Go  ve  where  ye  will  amongst  tlie 
busy,  whose  caics  buzzaronml  them, and  \ on  shall  find  nor^^lief  for  uchiDg 
heads  like  a  contemplation  of  the  love  of  Chri>t :  or  go  amongst  those 
who  have  h  isure,  and  spend  it  in  soliiude,  no  meditaition  can  be  so 
sweet  to  while  away  their  hours  as  the  me  dtation  which  springs  ontof 
the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  Glory  be  to  God,  no  man  need  sav,  "My 
trade  does  not  permit  me  to  be  a  Chiistian ;  "  if  it  be  so,  you  liave  no 
business  to  follow  that  trade,  for  no  lawful  calling  is  without  its  saint. 
Up  there  among  the  precii)ices  the  wild  ^oat  finds  safe  fonting,  and  so 
amid  dignity  and  honour  saints  can  survive,  and  in  the  dark  rock-rifls 
of  this  sm-smitten  city,  as  ccmies  live  auiong  the  rocks,  so  Chiistian 
men  are  useful  and  happy.  Where  the  believer  is  persecuted  on  every 
si(?e,  hf  shall  not  be  forsaken,  and  where,  through  the  example  of  tl» 
wicked,  h:s  heart  is  grieved,  he  shall  be  |)reserved  like  rivhteous  Lot 
As  Go^l  maintains  hie  in  every  region,  so  doth  he  maintain  spiritiud 


LESSONS  FROM  NATURK.  441) 

life  in  every  position  and  every  calling.  Have  comfort  in  this  yon  who  are 
placed  in  circamstances  nnfavonrable  to  grace. 

Again,  you  shall  find  spiritual  life  in  ei^ery  church,  I  know  it  is  the 
notion  of  the  bigot,  that  all  the  truly  godly  people  belong:  to  the  (Icnom- 
ination  which  he  adorns.  Orthodoxy  is  my  doxy ;  lieterodoxy  is  any- 
body else's  doxy  who  docs  not  agree  with  me.  All  the  good  people 
go  to  little  Bethel,  and  nowhere  else  :  they  all  worship  at  Zoar,  and  they 
sing  out  of  soch-and-snch  a  selection,  and  as  for  those  who  cnnnot  sjiy 
Shibboleth,  and  lay  a  pretty  good  stress  on  the  "h,"  but  who  pronounce 
it  •*  Sibboleth ;"  let  the  ftirds  ('f  the  Jordan  be  taken,  and  let  them  be 
pnt  to  death.  True,  it  is  not  fashionable  to  roast  them  alive,  but  we 
will  condemn  their  souls  to  everlasting  perdition,  which  is  the  next 
best  thing,  and  may  not  appear  to  be  quite  so  uncharituble.  Mnny 
f?uppose  that  because  there  is  grievous  error  in  a  church,  concemin«;  an 
ordinance  or  a  doctrine,  therefore  no  living  children  of  God  nre  there. 
Ah,  dear  brethren,  this  severe  opinion  arises  from  want  of  knowing  better. 
A  mouse  had  lived  in  a  box  all  its  life,  and  one  day  crawled  up  to  the 
edge  of  it,  and  looked  round  on  what  it  could  see.  Now  the  box  only 
stood  in  a  lumber  room,  but  the  mouse  was  surprised  at  its  vastness, 
and  exclaimed :  "  How  big  the  world  is  !"  If  some  bigots  would  get 
out  of  their  box,  and  only  look  a  little  way  round  them,  they  would  find 
the  realm  of  grace  to  be  far  wider  than  they  dream.  It  is  true  that 
these  pastures  are  a  most  proper  place  for  sheep,  but  yet  upon  yonder 
hill-tops  wild  gOHts  are  pastured  by  the  Greac  Shepherd.  It  is  true 
that  yonder  plains  covered  with  verdure  are  best  fitted  for  cattle, 
but  the  Lord  of  all  has  his  beasts  in  the  forest,  and  his  conies 
among  the  rocks.  You  may  have  to  look  a  lonij  while  before 
you  find  these  living  thinjrs,  but  he  sees  them  when  you  do  not, 
and  it  is  a  deal  more  important  to  a  cony  for  God  to  see  it,  than 
it  is  for  a  man  to  see  it;  and  so  it  is  an  infinitely  more  weighty 
matter  for  a  child  of  God  for  his  Father  to  know  that  he  is  his  child,  thnu 
for  his  brother  to  know  it.  If  my  brother  will  not  believe  mo  to  be  a 
Christian,  he  cannot  help  being  my  brother;  he  may  do  what  he  will  in 
his  unkindness,but  if  I  am  one  of  God's  children,  and  he  also  is  one,  the 
tie  of  brotherhood  cannot  be  broken  between  us.  I  love  to  think  that 
the  Lord  has  his  hidden  ones — even  in  churches  that  have  sadly 
degenerated  from  the  faith  ;  and,  although  it  is  yours  and  mine  to  de- 
nounce error  unsparingly,  and  with  the  iconoclastic  hammer  to  go  thnaii^h 
the  land  and  break  the  idols  of  all  the  churches  in  pieces  as  far  as  God 
gives  us  streniith,  yet  there  is  not  a  Iamb  amongst  Chi  ist's  flock  that 
we  would  disdain  to  feed — there  is  not  the  least  of  all  his  people,  how- 
ever mistaken  in  jud«.'nient,  whom  our  soul  would  not  embrace  in  ardent 
love.  God,  in  nature,  has  placed  life  in  singular  spots,  and  so  hns  he 
pnt  spiritual  life  into  strange  out-of-the-way  places,  and  has  his  own 
chosen  where  least  we  should  look  for  them. 

Once  more,  there  are  to  be  found  God's  people  in  every  city.  Some 
of  you  are  going  away,  it  may  be,  to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  and  this 
word  may  be  comfbrtwble  to  you.  The  Lord  has  an  elect  people  every- 
where. The  wild  goats  are  on  the  rocks,  and  the  conies  amongst 
Ihe  stones,  and  the  storks  in  the  trees.  Go  you  where  you  will, 
jon  shall  find  that  God  has  a  living  people  ;  or  if  you  should  be'sent 


450  METROPOLITAN  TABEUXACLK  PULPIT. 

to  a  country  where  as  yet  there  are  no  converted  men  or  women,  let 
not  that  discoiiraf^e  you,  but  rather  say,  **  I  am  gent  with  the  purpose 
of  findinj^  out  God's  elect,  who  as  yet  are  hidden  in  sin.  I  am  to  be 
the  instrument  of  finding  out  the  Lord's  own  blood-bouglit  but  hidden 
one^  hero/'  When  thou  p^oest  into  a  city  that  is  given  to  idolatry,  thou 
shalt  hear  it  said  to  thee,  **  I  have  much  people  in  this  city ;  "  go,  there- 
fore, and  labour  to  find  out  the  much  people.  Introduce  the  gospel, 
tell  of  the  love  of  Jesus,  and  you  shall  soon  find  that  your  efforts  are 
rewarded  by  the  discovery  of  those  who  shall  lore  your  Saviour,  and 
delight  in  the  same  truth  which  now  charms  your  heart.  Do  not 
believe  that  there  is  a  rock  without  its  wild  goat  ;  do  not  think  that 
there  is  a  fir-forest  without  its  stork  ;  or  that  there  are  to  be  found 
trees  by  the  brook  without  their  birds.  Expect  to  find  where  God 
dwells  that  there  are  some  who  are  sojourners  with  him,  as  all  their 
fathers  wore. 

I  shall  leave  the  first  poiut,  repeating  the  sentence,  y(?r  each  place  Ikre 
is  a  form  of  life. 

li.  Secondly,  the  text  teaches  us  plainly  that  each  creatitrk  has 
ITS  APPROPniATE  PLACK.  Birds  with  their  nests  for  the  cedars  of 
Lebanon,  storks  for  the  fir  trees,  wild  goats  for  the  high  hills,  and 
conies  for  the  rocks.  Each  of  these  creatures  looks  most  beantifnl  at 
home.  Go  into  the  Zoological  Gardens,  and  sec  the  poor  animals  there 
under  artificial  conditions,  and  you  can  little  guess  what  they  are  at 
home.  A  lion  in  a  cage  is  a  very  different  creature  from  a  lion  in  the 
wilderness.  The  stork  looks  wretched  in  his  wire  pen,  and  you  would 
hardly  know  him  as  the  same  creature  if  you  saw  him  on  the  housetops 
or  on  the  fir  trees.  Each  creature  looks  best  in  its  own  place.  Tate 
that  truth,  now,  and  use  it  for  yourself.  Each  man  has  by  God  a  /wh 
vidonlidi  fosillon  appointed  to  him,  and  the  position  ordained  for  each 
Christiiin  i>  that  in  which  he  looks  best ;  it  is  the  best  for  him  and  he 
is  the  best  for  that ;  and  if  you  could  change  his  position,  nnd  shift  him 
to  another,  ho  would  not  be  half  as  hapj)y,  nor  half  as  useful,  nor  half  so 
much  himself.  Put  the  stork  on  the  high  hills,  put  the  wild  goat  on  the 
fir  trees—  what  monstrosities  !  Take  my  dear  brother  who  has  been  a 
working-man  this  last  twenty  years,  and  always  been  a  spirituallv- 
minded  man,  and  make  him  Lord  Mayor  of  London,  and  you  would 
spoil  him  altogether.  Take  a  good  hearer  and  set  him  preaching,  and 
he  would  make  a  sorry  appearance.  A  man  out  of  place  is  not  seen  to 
advantage,  yon  see  the  wrong  side  of  him,  the  gracious  side  is  hidden. 
The  position  in  which  God  has  placed  me  is  the  best  for  me,  Letmc 
remember  this  when  I  am  grumbling  and  complaining.  It  may  be  I  hare 
got  past  that  focdish  discontent  which  is  altogether  selfish,  but  perhaps 
I  repine  because  1  think,  if  I  wore  in  a  diirerent  position,  I  coiud 
glorify  C»od  more.  This  species  of  discontent  is  very  insinoatingt 
but  let  us  beware  of  it.  It  is  foolish  to  cry,  *^  if  I  were  placed  in  a 
diiloront  position,  I  could  do  so  much  more  for  God  !"  You  conld  not 
do  so  much  as  you  can  do  now.  I  am  sure  the  goat  would  not  show"  the 
wisdom  of  CJod  so  well  in  a  fir  tree,  as  he  would  up  on  a  high  hill;  and 
you  would  not  display  the  grace  of  God  so  well  anywhere  else  as  yon 
can  do  where  you  are.  Ah,  says  the  young  Christian,  "  I  am  only  an 
apprentice;  if  I  were  a  master  man,  I  think  I  could  then  glorify  God.** 


LESSONS  FROM  NATURE.  451 

Sir,  if  you  cannot  maj^nify  him  in  your  apprenticeship,  you  will  not  do 
80  when  you  become  a  journeyman.  "  Oh,  bnt  my  shop  is  so  little,  my 
trade  brings  me  in  such  a  small  amount,  I  can  give  but  little,  and  I 
haTC  such  few  opportunities  of  doing  jjood/*  Be  slow  to  leave  your 
calling  till  you  have  plain  indications  from  providence  that  you  ought 
to  do  so,  for  many  a  man  in  moving  from  his  place  has  been  as  a  bird 
that  has  wandered  from  her  nest.  God  knows  better  than  you  what  is 
best  for  you;  bow  your  soul  to  his  sovereign  will.  God  appoints  our 
position  infinitely  better  tlian  we  could  appoint  it,  even  it  we  could 
nave  ihe  choosinjr  of  it. 

My  beloved  friends,  it  is  not  only  that  each  form  of  life  has  its  own 
best  position  as  to  providence,  but  it  is  so  as  to  experience.  God  has  not 
made  two  creatures  precisely  alike.  You  shall  gather  leaves  from  a  tree,, 
and  you  shall  not  find  two  veined  in  precisely  the  same  way.  In 
Christian  experience  it  is  the  same.  Wherever  there  is  living  Christian 
experience,  it  is  different  from  everybody  else's  experience  in  some  re- 
spect. In  a  family  of  children  each  child  may  be  like  its  father,  and  yet 
each  child  shall  be  different  from  each  other  child;  and  amongst  the 
children  of  God,  though  they  all  have  the  likeness  of  Christ  in  a  mea- 
sure, yet  are  they  not  all  exactly  the  one  like  the  other.  You  read  the 
other  day  the  lile  of  John  Bunyan,  and  you  said,  **  Oh,  if  I  had  cxpe- 
rience  like  John  Bunyan,  then  I  should  know  I  was  a  child  of  God." 
This  wjiS  foolish.  The  biogiaphics  that  are  publiphed  in  our  magazines 
in  many  cases  do  some  good,  but  more  mischief,  for  there  are  Christian 
people  who  begin  at  once  to  say,  •*  Have  I  felt  precisely  thus?  Have  1 
felt  exactly  that?  If  not,  I  am  lost."  Hast  thou  felt  thyself  a  sinner 
and  Christ  a  Saviour  ?  Art  thou  emptied  of  self  and  dost  thou  look  to 
Christ  alone?  Well,  if  no  other  soul  hath  trod  the  same  path  as  thou 
hast  done,  thou  art  in  aright  path;  and  though  thy  experience  in  ay  have 
eccentricities  in  it  that  ditfer  from  all  others,  it  is  right  it  should  be  so. 
God  has  not  made  the  wild  goat  like  the  cony,  nor  has  he  made  the 
stork  like  any  other  bird,  but  he  has  made  each  to  fit  the  place  it  is  to 
occupy,  and  he  makes  your  experience  to  be  suitable  to  the  bringing 
ont  some  point  of  his  glory,  which  could  not  be  brought  out  other- 
wise. Some  are  full  of  rejoicing,  others  are  often  depressed ;  a  few 
keep  the  happy  medium ;  many  soar  aloft,  and  then  dive  into  the 
deeps  again;  let  these  varied  experiences,  as  they  are  all  equally  clear 
phases  of  the  same  divine  lovingkiudness,  be  accepted,  and  let  them  be 
rejoiced  in. 

The  same  holds  good  as  to  individuaUty  of  character.  Each  creature 
has  its  appropiiate  place,  and  I  believe  that  each  constitution  is 
meant,  under  the  power  of  grace,  to  be  suitable  for  a  man's  position. 
I  miglit  wish  to  be  of  a  ditl'erent  tempenmfient  from  what  1  am — I 
sometimes  think  so,  but  in  wiser  moments,  1  would  not  wish  to  alter 
anything  in  myself  but  that  which  is  sinful.  Martin  Luther  might 
have  wished  that  he  had  been  as  gentle  as  Melancthon,  bnt  then  we 
might  hiive  had  no  reformation :  Melancthon  might  certainly  sometimes 
have  wished  that  he  had  been  as  energetic  as  Martin  Luther,  but  then 
Luther  might  have  lacked  his  most  tender  comforter,  if  Mehmcthou 
bad  been  as  rough  as  he.  Peter  might  have  been  improved  if  he  had 
bet  been  so  rougli,  and  John  might  possibly  have  been  improved  if  he 


452  BIETROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

had  bcH'U  somewhat  more  firm ;  hut  after  all,  when  God  makes  Peter 
he  is  best  as  Peter,  and  when  he  make^  John  he  is  best  as  John,  and  it  ii 
very  foolish  when  Peter  wants  to  be  John,  and  when  John  pines  to  be 
Peter.  Dear  brethren,  the  practical  matter  is,  be  yonrselyes  io  yonr 
relij^ion.  Never  attempt  to  counterfeit  another's  virtues,  nor  try  to 
square  your  experience  accortlinji:  to  another  man*s  feeUngs,  nor 
endeav(»ur  to  mould  your  character  so  that  you  may  look  as  if  jou 
were  like  a  certain  good  man  whom  yon  admiie.  No,  ask  the  I/Ord, 
who  made  a  new  man  of  >ou,  to  let  yimr  mnnhood  come  out  as  lie 
meant  it,  and  whichever  j;^rnce  he  meant  to  be  prominent,  let  it  be 
prominent.  If  you  are  meant  to  i>lay  the  hero  and  rush  into  the  thick 
of  the  battle,  then  let  couraire  be  deve'oped;  or  if  he  designed  you  to  lie 
in  the  hospital  and  HufTer,  then  let  patience  have  its  perfect  work;  bat 
ask  the  Lord  to  monld  you  after  his  own  mind,  that  as  he  finds  a  siork 
for  a  fir  tree,  and  a  fir  tree  for  a  stork  ;  a  hill  for  a  wild  goat,  and  a  wild 
«;oat  fur  a  hill  ;  he  will  find  a  place  for  yon,  the  man,  and  find  for  yon, 
the  man,  the  phice  that  ho  has  creited  f-r  yon.  There  his  name  shall 
be  most  ^^loritied,  and  you  shall  he  safest.  Kick  not  against  the  pricks, 
but  take  kindly  to  the  yoke,  and  serve  your  day  and  generation  till 
your  Master  calls  you  home. 

111.    Now,   briefly,  a  third  point.     It  appoai-s  from  the  text  that 

EVERY   CREATURE  TUAT  (iOD   HAS  MADE  IS   PROVIDED   WITH  SHELTER* 

Biids  fly  to  the  trees,  and  the  stork  to  the  fir,  the  wihl  goat  to  the 
high  hills,  and  the  cony  to  the  rocks.  There  is  a  shelter  for  every  one 
of  these  creatures,  great  and  small.  Think  a  moment,  then,  if  God  has 
ma<le  each  creature  liajjjjy,  and  given  a  place  of  refuge  to  each  creature, 
then,  depend  upon  it,  he  has  not  left  man's  soul  without  a  shelter.  And 
here  is  an  important  truth,  tor  every  man  is  certainly  in  danger,  and 
every  thinking  man  knows  it.  My  God,  dost  thou  shield  and  shelter 
the  conv  in  the  rock,  and  is  there  no  rock  for  me  to  shelter  in? 
Assuredly  thou  hast  not  made  man  and  left  him  without  a  refuj^e;  when 
thou  givest  to  the  vock-rahbit  the  cleft  in  which  he  may  hide  himself, 
there  must  be  a  shelter  for  man.  This  must  certainly  be  true,  becaosc 
you  and  I,  if  we  have  observed  our  inner  life,  must  have  felt  conscions 
that  nothing  here  below  can  fill  an  immortal  soul.  You  have  pros- 
pered in  business,  and  have  enjoyed  good  health ;  but  for  all  that,  in 
quiet  moments  of  reflection,  you  feel  a  craving  for  something  not  to  be 
found  beneath  the  sun.  Have  you  not  felt  yearnings  after  the  Infinite, 
— hungerings  which  bread  cannot  satisfy ;  thirstings  which  a  ri?er 
could  not  quench?  And  arc  you  never  conscious — I  know  I  am 
as  a  man,  I  speak  not  as  a  Christian  now — of  cold  shiverings  of  fear, 
which  make  the  entire  manhood  to  tremble?  The  mind  looks  forward 
and  considers,  "  And  shall  I  live  for  ever  ?  When  my  body  mtuldere, 
shall  I  continue  ?  Am  I  a  vessel  launched  upon  the  river  of  existence, 
and  shall  I  be  borne  onward  to  a  shoreless  and  mysterious  sea  ?  And 
what  will  be  that  sea,  and  will  it  be  a  calm,  or  tossed  with  storms!" 
Or,  to  change  the  figure,  **  I  shall  sleep,  but  in  that  sleep  of  death,  what 
dreams  mav  come?**  Have  von  never  felt  all  that,  and  said  within 
yourself,  "  0  that  there  were  a  place  where  I  could  hide  myself,  never 
to  tremhle  more  I  0  that  1  could  grasp  something  that  would  satisfj 
my  insatiable  longings  I     0  that  I  could  get  my  loot  upon  a  ixx:k,  and 


LESSONS  FROM  NATURE.  458 

i^r  fed  that  a  qnicksand  is  beneath  me!  0  that  1  Icn^^w  of 
i^nre  and  iiidi8(mbMbIe,  and  I'Of^BeRsed  a  treMBore  Ihat  wonld  enrich 
ever."  Well,  then,  if  joii  have  such  lon*ring8  as  these,  surely 
nust  be  a  provision  to  meet  them.  The  stork  has  an  instinct 
ilding  a  nest  of  a  certuin  sort ;  it  is  too  large  a  nest  to  be  p'aced 
ush,  she  needs  a  tree;  there  is  a  tree  somewhere  then,  for  God 
made  a  stork  for  a  tree  bub  he  made  also  a  tree  for  the  stork. 
6  a  wild  goat :  yon  put  it  down  on  a  flat  meadow,  and  it  is  not 
Give  it  the  greenest  pasture,  it  looks  up  and  pines.  Rest 
d  that  since  those  little  feet  are  mennt  to  traverse  rocks  nnd  crags, 
ire  rocks  and  crairs  that  are  meant  for  those  feet  to  leap  upon.  A 
is  argues  an  Alps,  and  the  conclusion  is  verified  by  fact.  Yonder 
'ony  cannot  live  >my where  hut  among  the  stones;  it  delights  to 
J  itself  in  the  fissures  of  the  roi-k:  then  he  assured  there  are 
meant  for  conies.  So  for  me,  with  my  thirbtings,  my  lonjrinjis,  my 
"8,  my  mysterious  instincts — there  is  a  God  somewhere,  there  is  a 
I  somewhere,  tberc  is  an  atonement  somewhere,  there  is  a  fulness 
he:e  to  meet  my  emptiness.  Man  wants  a  shelter,  there  must  be 
er ;  let  us  show  you  what  it  is. 

)vcd,  there  is  a  shelter  for  man  from  the  sense  of  past  jruilt.  It 
nuse  we  are  guilty  tiiat  we  are  fearful :  we  have  broken  our 
's  Inw,  and  therefore  we  are  afraid.  But  our  Maker  came  from 
I  to  earth;  Jesus,  the  Christ  of  God,  came  here,  nnd  was  mnde 
md  bore  that  we  might  never  bear  his  Piither's  righteous  wrath, 
liosoever  bclieveth  in  Jesus  shall  find  perfect  rest  in  those  dear 
8  of  his.  Since  Christ  suffered  for  me,  my  guilt  is  gone,  my 
iment  was  endured  by  my  Substitute,  therefore  do  I  hear  the  voice 
lith,  "Comfort  ye,  comlort  ye  my  people !  Sny  unto  them,  that 
warfare  is  accomplished ;  for  they  have  received  at  the  Lord's 
leub!e  for  all  their  sins."  And  as  for  future  fears,  he  who  be- 
in  Jesus  finds  a  refuL'e  from  them  in  the  Fatherhood  of  God.  He 
xists  Christ,  savs :  "  Xow  I  have  no  fear  about  the  present,  nor 
tiie  future.  Let  catastropiie  follow  catastrophe,  let  the  world 
anl  all  the  universe  go  to  ruin ;  beneath  the  wings  of  the  Eternal 
must  he  safe.  All  thinjrs  must  work  together  for  my  good,  for  I 
o(l,  and  have  been  called  according  to  his  purpose "  What  a 
1  shelter  this  is  !  The  little  conies  in  their  rock-clcHB  are  per- 
at  ease,  and  so  we,  when  we  enter  fully  into  the  truth  of  our 
on  of  God,  are  filled  with  unutterable  peace.  And  as  for  the 
t,  with  its  cares,  and  griefs,  and  heart-throbs,  there  is  the 
jhost  abiding  in  us,  the  Comforter,  and  we  fly  to  him,  and  re- 
consolations  so  rich  and  powerful,  that  this  day  we  feel  at 
n  the  midst  of  discomforts,  and  if  perplexed  we  are  not  in  despair, 
en,  there  is  a  shelter  in  the  atonement  of  Christ,  in  the  Father- 
jf  God,  in  the  abiding  presence  of  the  Comforter — there  is  a 
r  for  man — would  God  that  all  of  us  had  found  it  I 
And  now  just  a  moment  of  your  attention  will  be  wanted  for  the 
observation,  that  for  each' creature  the  shelter  is  appko- 
^  The  tree  for  the  bird  ;  the  fir  tree,  a  particular  and  special 
)r  the  stork ;  a  high  hill  for  the  steinbock  or  ibex,  and  the  rocks 
I  hyrax  or  rabbit.    Whatever  creature  it  may  be,  each  ahall  have 


"% 


451  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

his  own  suitnble  shelter.  But  vou  will  reply  to  me,  is  there  a  shelter, 
tlicn,  for  caL-li  indix  iilual  man  ?  Did  you  not  say  thiit  there  wasonlvone 
Hhtlter  for  manhood  ?  If  I  dil  not  say  it,  I  certainly  will  say  it  now. 
There  is  only  one  shelter  under  hciiven  or  in  heaven  for  any  man  of 
woman  born,  but  yet  there  is  a  shelter  suitable  for  each.  Christ  Jesu 
hiuits  all  sorts  of  sinners,  all  sorts  of  sufferers.  He  is  a  Saviour  as  snit- 
nblo  for  me  as  if  he  came  to  save  me  and  no  one  ehe ;  but  he  is  a 
Uidcemcr  as  remarkably  suitable  to  every  other  of  his  redeemed  onw. 
Nolo,  then,  that  there  is  a  refujjc  in  Christ  Jesus  for  those  sirapletnist- 
ful  natures  that  take  the  gospel  at  once  and  believe  it.  These  arc  like 
the  little  birds  that  fly  to  the  trees  and  build  their  nests  and  be^iin  to 
sinii.  These  are  the  commonest  sort  of  Christinns,  but  in  some  respects 
tiny  are  the  hest.  They  hear  the  jrosjiel,  believe  it  to  be  God's  word. 
ae<oi»t  it,  and  bcj2:in  to  sing.  Jesus  Christ  exactly  suits  them,  he  is  a  shelter 
for  those  chosen  birds  of  the  air,  whom  your  heavenly  Father  daily  feeds. 
]U\t  tliere  are  others  of  larger  intellect,  who  i*equi re  unusual  supportene 
they  can  build  their  nest  and  be  at  ease.  These,  like  the  stork,  need  a 
special  support,  and  they  find  it  in  the  gospel.  Since  they  are  mon* 
weighty  with  doubt  and  perplexity,  they  need  substantial  verities  to 
rest  on  ;  these  find  great  fir-tree  doctrines  and  cedar-like  principles  in 
the  Rible,  and  they  rest  in  them.  Many  of  us  this  day  arc  resting  on 
the  immutable  things  wherein  it  is  impossible  for  God  to  lie.  We  rest 
U[)(»n  the  substitution  of  Christ,  and  repose  in  the  completeness  of  the 
atonement.  Some  get  hold  of  one  great  prineiple  and  some  another  in 
connection  \>ith  the  grace  of  God ;  and  God  has  l)een  pleased  to  reveal 
strong,  immovable,  eternal,  immutable  principles  in  his  Word  which 
are  suitable  for  thoujihtful  and  troubled  minds  to  rest  on.  Moreorer, 
we  have  in  the  church  of  God  persons  of  great  reasoning  powers.: 
these  love  the  craggy  paths  of  thought,  but  when  they  come  to  Oirist 
and  trust  in  him,  though  they  are  like  the  wild  goat  and  love  the  high 
places,  they  find  in  the  Scriptures  good  ground  for  them.  The  doctrine 
of  elect  ion,  and  all  the  mysteries  of  predestination,  the  de^p  and  wi-mler- 
ful  doctrines  that  are  spoken  of  by  the  apostle  Paul ;  where  is  the  man 
of  thought  who  will  not  be  at  home  among  these  if  he  loves  subiimitj? 
If  you  have  that  turn  of  mind  which  delights  to  deal  with  the  high 
things  of  God,  which  have  been  the  perplexity  of  men  and  angels,  yon 
shall  find  yourself  at  home,  and  what  is  better,  safe  with  the  gospel.  If 
you  are  in  Christ,  you  shall  have  good,  solid,  safe  material  for  thepro- 
loundest  meditations.  Perhaps,  instead  of  being  bold  and  dainngand 
thoughtful,  you  arc  not  comparable  to  the  wdd  goat,  but  you  are 
a  very  timid  trembling  little  creature  like  the  cony.  If  an3'one  claps 
his  hands,  away  runs  the  cony;  he  fears  always.  But  there  is  a 
shelter  for  conies :  and  so  in  the  grace  of  God  for  very  timid  trembling 
peotde,  there  is  a  suitable  refuge.    Here  is  a  d<^lightfal  shelter  for  8on» 


LESSONS  FROM  NATURE.  455 

of  yon  to  run  into.  '*  Fear  Dot,  I  am  with  thee;  be  not  dismayed,  I  am 
thy  G(»d."  Here  is  another — "Him  that  comcth  to  me  I  will  in  no 
wise  cast  oat."  Many  a  poor  trembler  has  hidden  under  that  condes:?end- 
ing  word.  If  I  cannot  find  shelter  in  one  text,  what  a  blessing  it  is  the 
Bible  is  fall  of  promises,  and  there  are  promises  in  the  Bible  which 
fleem  made  for  a  certain  form  of  mind,  as  if  the  Holy  Ghost  cast  his 
ihonghts  and  his  words  into  all  sorts  of  moulds  to  snit  the  hubits 
of  thoaght  nnd  mind  of  all  whom  he  woald  bless.  0  trembling 
sonl,  though  thou  art  half  afraid  to  say  that  thou  belongest  to 
Jesns,  yet  come  and  rest  in  him,  hide  in  the  rift  of  his  side,  and  thou 
art  safe. 

Y.  Now  we  must  close,  and  we  do  so  with  this  observation,  that 
EACH  CREATURE  USES  ITS  SHELTER,  for  the  storks  havc  made  their  nests 
in  the  fir  trees,  and  the  wild  goats  climb  the  high  hills,  and  the  conies 
hide  among  the  rocks.  I  never  heard  of  one  of  those  creatures  that 
neglected  its  shelter — they  love  their  natural  abodes ;  but  I  havc 
heitrd  of  men  who  have  neglected  their  God,  I  know  women  who  have 
forgotten  Christ.  We  say,  "  silly  sheep."  Ah,  if  the  sheep  knew  all 
about  us,  they  would  wonder  we  should  call  them  silly.  The  cony  in 
danger  which  does  not  seek  its  rock  is  foolish ;  but  the  sonl  in  danger 
which  does  not  seek  its  Saviour  is  insane — insane,  nay,  if  there  can  be 
ft  madness  which  is  as  much  beyond  madness,  as  madness  is  beyond 
sanity,  then  such  is  the  raving  lunacy  of  a  man  who  neglects  the 
Saviour.  I  have  never  heard  of  any  of  these  creatures  that  they  des- 
pise the  shelter  provided.  The  birds  are  satisfied  with  the  trees,  and 
the  stork  with  the  firs,  and  even  the  cony  with  its  rock-hole  ;  but, 
alas  I  there  are  men  who  despise  Christ.  God  himself  becomes  the 
shelter  of  sinners,  and  yet  sinners  despise  their  God.  The  Son  of  God 
opens  his  side  and  lays  haro  his  heart  that  a  soul  may  come  and  shelter 
there  in  the  crimson  cleft,  and  yet  that  soul  for  many  a  day  refuses  to 
accept  the  shelter.  Oh,  where  are  tears?  Who  shall  give  us  fit 
expressions  for  our  sorrow  that  men  shonld  be  such  monsters  to  them- 
selves, and  to  their  God  ?  The  ox  knoweth  its  owner,  and  the  ass  its 
master's  crib ;  but  men  know  not  God.  The  stork  knows  its  fir  tree, 
the  wild  goat  its  crag,  and  the  cony  knows  its  cleft,  but  the  sinner 
knows  not  his  Christ.  Ah,  manhood,  what  has  befallen  thee  ?  What 
strange  wine  of  Gomorrah  hast  thou  drank  which  has  thus  intoxicated 
thee! 

One  other  thing,  I  never  heard  of  a  stork  that  when  it  met  with  a 
fir  tree  demurred  as  to  its  right  to  build  its  nest  there,  and  I  never 
beard  of  a  cony  yet  that  questioned  whether  it  had  a  permit  to  run 
into  the  rock.  AVhy  these  creatures  would  soon  perish  if  they  were 
always  doubting  and  fearing  as  to  whether  they  had  a  right  to  use 
providential  provisions.    The  stork  says  to  himself,  **  ah,  here  is  a  fir 


4 hi)  METU01X)LITiN  T.VBEKNACLL  PUU'IT. 

ti*ce;'*  ho  consults  with  hid  mate — *'  Will  this  do  for  the  nest  in  whidi 
wo  may  roar  our  young?"  *'Ay"  says  she,  and  they  gather  the 
matorials,  and  arrango  them.  There  is  never  any  deliberatioD. 
^*  May  we  huild  here  ?  '*  hut  they  hring  their  sticks  and  make  their 
nest.  So  the  wild  goat  on  the  crag  does  not  say,  ''  Have  I  a  right 
to  ho  here  ?*'  No,  he  must  be  somewhere,  and  there  is  a  crag  which 
exactly  suits  him ;  and  he  springs  upon  it.  Yet  though  these  dnmh 
orcaturos  know  the  provision  of  their  God,  the  sinner  does  not  recognise 
the  provisions  of  his  Saviour.  He  quibbles  and  questions,  ^ May  I 'f 
and  '*  I  am  afraid  it  is  not  for  me,*'  and  '*  I  think  it  cannot  be  meant 
for  me ;  and  I  am  afraid  it  is  too  good  to  be  trae.**  And  m 
nobody  ever  said  to  the  stork,  "  Whosoever  bnildeth  on  this  fir  t^■^• 
shall  never  liave  his  nest  pulled  down."  No  inspired  word  has  ever 
said  to  the  cony,  '*  Whosoever  runs  into  this  rock-cleft  shall  never 
be  drivt-n  out  of  it  ;'*  if  it  had  been  so,  it  would  make  assurance  donMr 
sure.  And  vi't  hei*e  is  ('hrint  provide*!  for  sinners^  jnst  the  sort  of  a 
Saviour  sinners  need,  and  the  eneouragoment  is  added,  *'  Hiui  x\\9i 
oomotli  unto  mo  I  will  in  no  wise  oast  out  :*'  *'  Whosoever  will  let  him 
oome,  and  take  the  water  of  life  freely."  0  dear  brothers  and  sisters 
do  not  1)0  standing:  out  a.i.^iin>t  the  generosity  of  a  &in-t>ardoning  Gotl. 
who  bids  the  sinner  oonio  and  weloomo.  Come,  believe  in  Jcsn!^  ami 
tin<l|  salvation  now.  0  that  you  would  come,  it  is  what  God  \m< 
provided  for  your  wants.  Come,  take  it,  for  he  bids  you  come.  "The 
Spirit  and  the  bride  ssiy  come,  and  whosoever  will  let  him  come  and 
take  the  water  of  life  fi-eely."  To  believe  is  to  trust  Jesus,  to  tnist  his 
KUtVering,  to  trust  his  atonement,  and  rely  u\yon  him  alone  for  salra(i(m. 
Mav  <.iod  enable  vou  to  do  it  for  Christ's  sake.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  SERXosr— Pbalm  civ. 


Mctr«p0litan  iHatirnaxle 


CHRIST  IS  ALL. 


%  ^txmu 


DXLITEBSD  ON  LoRD'S-DAY  MORNINO,  AUGUHT  20TH,   1871,  BT 

C.  H.  SPUKGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOUTAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


**  Christ  is  all,  and  in  all.** — Colossians  iii.  11. 

The  apostle  was  argning  for  holiness.    He  was  earnestly  contending 
against  sin  and  for  the  maintenance  of  Christian  graces,  but  he  did 
not,  as  some  do,  who  wonld  like  to  be  thought  preachers  of  the  gospel, 
reaort   to  reasons  inconsistent    with  the  gospel  of  free  grace.     He 
did  not  bring  forward  a  single  legal  argument ;  he  did  not  say,  *'Tliis 
do,   and   ye  shall  merit  reward;"   or,   "This  do  not,  and  ye  shall 
cease  to  be  the  beloved  of  the  Lord."    He  knew  that  he  was  writing  to 
believers,  who  are  not  under  the  law  but  under  grace,  and  he  therefore 
used  arguments  fetched  from  grace,  and  suitable  to  the  character  and  con- 
dition of  **  the  elect  of  God,  holy  and  beloved."  He  fed  the  flame  of  their 
loTc  with  suitable  fuel,  and  fanned  their  zeal  with  appropriate  appliances. 
Observe  in  this  chapter  that  he  begins  by  reminding  the  saints  of 
their  having  risen  with  Christ.    If  they  indeed  have  risen  with  him, 
be  argues  that  they  should  leave  the  grave  of  iniquity  and  the  grave- 
clothes  of  their  sins  behind,  and  act  as  those  who  are  endowed  with 
that  superior   life,  which    accounts  sin  to  be  death  and  corruption. 
He  then  goes  on  to  declare  that  the  believer's  life  is  in  Christ,  "  for  ye  arc 
dead,  and  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God."     He  infers  holiness 
from  this  also.    Shall  those  who  have  Christ  for  their  life  defile  them- 
selves with  guilt  ?  Is  it  not  inevitable  that,  if  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  be 
in  them  as  their  life,  their  life  should  be  fraught  with  everything  that 
is  virtuous  and  good  ?  And  then  he  brings  forward  the  third  argument, 
that  in  the  Christian  church  Christ  is  the  only  distinguishing  mark. 
In  the  new  birth  we  are  created  in  the  image  of  Jesus,  the  second  Adam, 
and  in  consequence  all  the  distinctions  that  appertain  to  the  old  creation 
are  rendered  valueless;  "  there  is  neither  Greek  nor  Jew,  circumcision  nor 
Qucircumcision,  Barbarian,  Pythian,  bond  nor  free :  but  Christ  is  all, 
and  in  all  :"  the  argument  from  this  fact  being,  that  since  the  only 
abiding  distinction  in  the  new  creation  is  Christ,  we  should  take  care 
that  his  ima&re  is  most  dearly  stamped  upon  us,  so  that  we  may  not 
ai|I?  confess  with  our  tongue^  that  we  are  Christians,  but  our  conversa- 
"Noi.  1,<  06-7. 


458  METROPOI.ITAN   TABEllNACLE  PITU*IT. 

tion  nnd  onr  entire  cliaracter  ^hall  bespeak  ns  to  be  such.  As  yon  mif 
recoonise  the  Jew  by  his  physion^nomy,  the  Greek  by  his  gracefahiesii 
and  the  barbarian  by  his  uncouthness,  so  should  the  Christian  be  known 
by  his  Christliness,  by  the  light,  love,  and  life  of  Christ  streaming  forth 
from  him.  This  is  the  seal  of  God  which  is  set  upon  the  forehead  of 
the  faithful,  and  this  is  the  mark  of  election  which  is  in  dne  season 
graven  in  the  right  hand  of  all  the  elect. 

Now,  iis  the  only  distinction  which  marks  the  Christian  from 
other  men,  and  the  only  essential  distinction  in  the  new  world  of 
grace,  is  Christ,  we  are  led  to  see  beneath  this  fact  a  great  underlying 
doctrine.  In  the  realm  of  grace,  things  are  what  they  seem.  Christ 
is  apparently  all,  because  he  is  actually  all.  The  fact  of  a  man's 
l>0S8essing  Christ  is  all  in  all  in  the  church,  because  in  very  deed  Christ 
is  all  in  all.  All  that  is  real  in  the  Christian,  all  that  is  holy,  heavenly, 
pure,  abiding,  Jind  saving,  is  of  the  Lord  Jesns.  This  great  granite 
fact  lies  at  the  basis  of  the  whole  Christian  system,  Christ  is  really 
and  truly  all  in  all  in  his  church,  and  in  each  individual  member 
of  it. 

AVe  shall,  this  morning,  in  trying  to  0})en  up  this  precious  sabjecti 
by  the  lielp  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  first,  notice  hy  irhom  this  iruih  it 
rerofftif'sofi ;  secondly,  we  shall  consider  ifh/rf  ////.<  irufh  includes ;  thirdly, 
v'hat  it  inrofrrs  ;  and  fourthly,  frhaf  if  rrqnires  of  v^t :  for  if  yon 
observe,  the  text  is  followed  by  a  *' Thirelbn* ;"  there  is  a  oonclosion 
logically  drawn  from  it. 

I.  First,  then,  by  whom  is  this  TiirTii  ue(x>(7XIsf.i>  ?  Paul  does 
not  sjiv  that  Christ  is  all  in  all  to  nil  men.  but  ho  tells  us  that  there  is 
a  n(^w  crention,  in  which  the  man  is  **  renewed  in  knowledge  after  the 
image  of  him  that  created  him,'*  where  all  national  and  ceremonial 
distinctions  cease,  and  Christ  is  all  and  in  all.  It  is  not  to  every  man  that 
(Mirist  is  all  and  in  all.  Alas!  there  an*  manv  in  this  world  to  whom 
Christ  is  nothing;  he  scarcely  enters  into  their  thoughts.  Some  of  the 
baser  sorb  only  use  his  name  to  curse  by ;  and  as  to  many  others,  if 
they  have  a  religion,  it  is  a  j)roud  presumption  which  excludes  a 
Saviour.  The  creed  of  the  self-riu:hteous  has  no  room  in  it  for  the 
sinner's  Saviour;  the  jnstifier  of  the  ungodly  is  nothing  to  them.  Ti» 
worldly,  the  frivolous,  the  unchaste,  the  licentious,  these  do  not  permit 
themselves  to  think  of  the  Holy  Redeemer.  Perchance  some  snch  are 
now  present,  and  though  they  will  hear  about  him  this  morning,  and  of 
nothing  else  but  him,  they  will  say,  "  what  a  weariness  it  is,"  and  be 
glad  when  the  discourse  is  ended.  Jesus  is  a  root  out  of  a  dry  groand 
to  multitudes,  to  them  he  hath  no  form  nor  comeliness,  and  in  him  they 
see  no  beauty  that  they  should  desire  him.  Ah,  what  will  they  do  when 
lie  is  revealed  in  the  glory  of  his  power?  They  thought  it  nothing 
to  tliem  as  they  passed  by  his  cross,  but  they  will  not  be  able  to 
<les|>ise  him  as  they  stand  convicted  before  his  throne.  O  ye  who  make 
.Jesus  nothing,  kiss  the  Son  lest  he  be  angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the 
way,  when  his  wrath  is  kindled  but  a  little.'  Without  Christ,  you  ire 
to-day  without  peace,  and  will  be  for  ever  without  hope!  Nothing 
remains  for  ('hristless  souls  at  the  last,  but  a  fearfnl  looking-for  a 
judgment  and  of  fiery  indignation.  1  could  well  pause  here,  and  aajf 
let  us  ]>ray  for  those  who  arc  unbelievers,  and  so  are  Hnng  without  a 


CHRIST  IS  ALL.  459 

mr,  that  they  may  not  remain  any  longer  in  this  state  of  con- 
lation. 

lere  are  others  in  this  world  to  whom  Christ  is  something,  hnt  not 
1.  They  are  anxions  to  save  themselves,  bat  since  they  must  con- 
some  imperfections,  they  nsc  the  merits  of  Christ  as  a  sort  of 
^weight  for  their  slight  deficiencies.  Their  robe  is  almost  long 
gh,  and  by  adding  a  little  fringe  of  the  Redeemer's  grace  it  becomes 
hey  can  wish.  To  say  prayers,  to  go  to  church,  to  take  the  sacra- 
;,  to  observe  Good  Friday,  these  are  the  main  reliances  of  many  a 
lonist,  and  then  if  the  coach  sticks  a  little  in  a  deeper  mt  than 
I,  they  call  in  the  help  of  the  Lord  Jesns,  and  hope  that  he  will  put 
thoulder  to  the  wheel.  They  commonly  say,  "  Well,  we  must  do 
)e8t,  then  Christ  will  be  our  Saviour,  and  God  is  very  merciful.*' 
'  allow  the  blessed  and  all-sufflcient  work  and  sacrifice  of  the  Saviour 
1  np  their  failures ;  and  imagine  that  they  are  extremely  humble 
lowing  so  much  as  that.  Jesus  is  to  them  a  stopgap,  and  nothing 
.     I  know  not  whether  the  condition  of  such  people  is  one  whit 

desirable  than  that  of  those  to  whom  Jesus  is  nothing  at  all,  for 
8  a  vile  contempt  and  despising  of  Christ  indeed,  to  think  that  he 

to  help  you  to  save  yourselves,  to  dream  that  he  is  a  part  Saviour, 
u\\  divide  the  work  and  honour  of  salvation  with  the  sinner.  Those 
yoke  the  sinner  and  the  Saviour  together  as  each  doing  a  part  rob 
;t  of  all  his  glory ;  and  this  is  robbery  indeed,  to  pilfer  from  the 
ing  Lamb  of  God  the  due  reward  of  his  agonies.  *'  He  trod  the 
jress  alone,  and  of  the  people  there  was  none  with  him."    In  the 

of  salvation  Jesus  stands  alone.    Salvation  is  of  the  Lord.    If 
t  is  not  all  to  you  he  is  nothing  to  you.     He  will  never  go  into 
lership  as  a  part  Saviour  of  men.    If  he  be  something  he  must  be 
thing,  and  if  he  be  not  everything  he  is  nothing  to  you. 
ere  are  many  who,  unconsciously  to  themselves,  think  Jesus  Christ 

mnch,  but  yet  they  do  not  understand  that  he  is  all  in  all.  I 
B  to  many  seeking  souls,  who  say,  "  I  would  put  my  trust  in  Jesus 
noming,  but  I  do  not  feel  as  I  ought."    I  see,  thou  thinkest  that 

is  at  least  a  little  of  thy  feeling  to  be  added  to  the  Saviour's  work 

can  avail  for  thee.  "But  I  am  not  as  penitent  as  I  should  be, 
bherefore,  I  cannot  rest  in  Jesus."  I  see,  thy  penitence  is  to  add 
)p8tone  to  the  Saviour's  yet  unfinished  work,  rerhaps  it  is  one  of 
ardest  works  in  the  world,  so  hard  as  to  be  impossible  except  to  the 

Spirit  himself,  to  drive  a  man  away  from  the  idea  that  he  is  to  do 
^mg,  or  to  be  something,  in  order  to  his  own  salvation.  Sinner, 
art  the  emptiness,  and  Christ  the  fulness ;  thou  art  the  filthiness, 
he  the  cleansing ;  thou  art  nothing,  and  he  is  all  in  all ;  and 
X)ner  thou  consentest  to  this  the  better.  Have  done  with  suyin(.% 
ould  come  to  the  Saviour  if  this,  and  if  that,"  for  this  quibbling  will 
e,  delay,  and  destroy  thee.  Come  as  thou  art,  just  now,  even  at 
Doment,  for  Christ  is  not  almost  all,  but  all  in  all. 
ere  are  some,  too,  who  think  that  Christ  is  all  in  some  things,  but 
lave  not  yet  seen  the  full  teaching  of  the  text ;  for  it  saith  :  **  Christ 

and  in  all.'*  He  is  all,"  say  they,  "  in  justification ;  he  it  is  that 
ns  all  our  sins  and  covers  us  with  his  righteousness,  but  as  to  onr 
ffication,  surely,  we  are  to  effect  that  ourselves  ;  and  *«i  to  our 


4G0  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

final  perseverance,  it  most  depend  wholly  upon  onr  own  waichfoIncsL 
Arc  Ave  not  in  jeopardy  still  ?  Are  there  not  some  points  wfaidi 
depend  u])on  onr  own  virtue  and  goodness  ?"  Beloved,  God  forbid  I 
should  say  a  word  against  the  most  earnest  watchfulness,  against  the 
most  diliorent  endeavours,  but  I  beseech  jou  do  not  place  them  in  a 
wrong  position,  or  speak  as  thongh  the  ultmiate  salvation  of  the  belierer 
were  based  upon  such  shifting  sand.  We  are  saved  in  Christ.  We 
are  complete  in  him.  We  are  sanctified  in  Christ  Jesns:  ''And  he  is 
made  of  God  unto  us  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification,  and  re- 
demption." Christ  is  all,  not  in  my  justification  only,  bat  in  my  sano- 
tification  too.  He  is  all,  not  only  in  the  first  steps  of  mj  faith,  bnt  in 
the  last.  "  He  is  Alpha  and  Omega ;  he  is  the  beginning  and  the 
ending,  saith  the  Lord.'*  There  is  no  point  between  the  gates  of  hell 
and  the  gates  of  heaven  where  a  believer  shall  have  to  say,  "Christ 
fails  me  here,  and  I  must  rely  upon  my  own  endeavours.  From  the  dnng- 
hill  of  our  corruption  up  to  the  throne  of  our  perfection  there  is  so 
point  left  to  hazard,  or  set  aside  for  us  to  supply ;  oar  salvation  has 
Christ  to  begin  with,  Christ  to  go  on  with,  and  Christ  to  finish  with, 
and  that  in  all  points,  at  all  times,  for  every  man  of  woman  bom  that 
ever  shall  be  saved.  There  is  no  point  in  which  the  creature  comes  in 
to  claim  merit,  or  to  bring  strength,  or  to  make  up  for  that  which  was 
lacking.  **  Christ  is  all,  and  in  all."  The  saints  are  "perfect  in  Christ 
Jesus.*'  He  said,  *'  it  is  finished,"  and  finished  it  is.  He  is  not  the 
author  of  our  faith  only,  but  the  finisher  of  it  too.  He  is  all  in  all, 
and  man  is  nothing  at  all. 

This  is  a  truth  wliich  every  believer  has  recognised.  There  are  apreat 
many  differences  among  believers,  but  there  is  no  difference  as  to  this 
essential  point.  Uniia{)pily,  the  Christian  church  has  been  divided  into 
sections,  but  those  divisions  do  not  affect  our  agreement  npon  this  one 
point,  that  Christ  is  all.  It  is  no  uncharity  if  I  say  that  the  man  who  does 
not  accept  this  is  no  Christian,  nor  is  it  too  wide  a  liberality  to  afGrm 
that  every  man  who  is  sound  in  licart  upon  this  point  is  most  oertainlj 
a  believer.  He  who  trusts  alone  in  Christ,  who  submits  to  him  as  his 
8ole  teacher,  king,  and  Saviour,  is  already  a  saved  man;  bnt  he  who 
gives  not  Chrit^t  the  glory,  though  he  should  speak  with  the  tongues 
of  men  and  of  angels,  though  he  should  have  the  gift  of  propheer, 
and  all  knowledge,  and  though  he  should  have  all  faith,  and  cotud  re- 
move mountains,  and  he  should  appear  to  have  all  virtue,  jet  he  is  no 
Christian  if  Christ  be  held  in  light  esteem  by  him,  or  be  anythinjs  \m 
than  all  in  all ;  for  in  the  new  creation  this  one  thing  stands  as  tlie 
mark  of  the  newly  created,  that  *'  Christ  is  all,  and  in  all  **  to  them, 
wiiatever  he  may  be  to  others. 

11.  Having  thus  shown  where  this  truth  is  recognised,  we  pass  onto 
notice  what  this  truth  includes. 

It  was  the  advice  of  an  aged  tutor  to  a  young  student  not  to  take 
too  magnificent  a  text.  I  have  sounded  that  warning  in  my  own  ears 
this  morning.  This  little  text  is  yet  one  of  the  greatest  in  the  whok 
Bible,  and  I  feel  lost  in  its  boundless  expanse.  It  is  like  one  of  those 
rai*e  gems  which  arc  little  to  look  npon,  and  yet  he  who  carries  them 
bears  the  price  of  empires  in  his  hand.  It  would  not  be  vtithin  the 
com|>ass  of  arithmetic   to  set  dowp  the  value  of  this  saprfliire  tat, 


CHBI8T  IS  ALL.  461 

might  as  soon  hope  to  carry  the  world  ia  my  hand  as^  to  grasp  all 
at  is  contained  in  these  few  words.  I  cannot  navigale  so  hnge  a 
B,  my  skiff  is  too  small,  I  can  only  coast  along  the  shore.  Who  can 
mpress  ''all  things"  into  a  sermon?  I  will  warrant  yon  that  my 
Bconrse  this  morning  will  be  more  remarkable  for  its  omissions  than 
r  what  it  contains,  and  I  shall  hope  indeed  that  every  Christian  here 
ill  be  remarking  npon  what  I  do  not  say ;  for  then  I  shall  have  done 
nch  good  in  exciting  meditations  and  reflections.  If  I  were  to  try  to 
U  you  all  the  meaning  of  this  bonndless  text,  I  should  reqnire  all 
ne  and  eternity,  and  even  then  all  tongues,  human  and  angelic,  could 
>t  avail  me  to  compass  the  whole.  We  will  swim  in  this  sea  though 
3  cannot  fathom  it,  and  feast  at  this  table  though  we  cannot  reckon 
>  its  costliness. 

1.  According  to  the  connection,  Christ  is  all  by  way  of  national 
sHudiony  9u%ctfor  glorying^  and  ground  for  custom.  Observe,  '*  there 
neither  Greek  nor  Jew,  circumcision  nor  uncircumcision,  barbarian, 
ythian,  bond  nor  free,"  in  the  new  creation,  but  •*  Christ  is  all,  and  in 
f."  In  the  new  world  there  is  no  difference  between  Jew  and  Gentile ; 
krbarian  simplicity  and  Greek  cultivation  are  as  nothing.  I  suppose 
long  as  we  are  in  the  flesh  we  shall  set  some  store  by  our  nationality, 
id  like  Paul  shall  somewhat  glory  that  we  were  free  bom :  but  surely  the 
38  of  this  the  better.  Within  the  gates  of  the  Christian  church  we 
e  cosmopolitan,  or  rather  we  are  citizens  of  the  New  Jerusalem  only. 
I  a  man,  I  rejoice  that  I  am  an  Englishman,  but  not  with  the  same 
Ay  joy  which  fills  me  when  I  remember  that  I  am  a  Christian.  When 
meet  another  man  who  fears  God,  I  do  not  want  him  to  think  me  an 
[iglishman,  nor  do  I  desire  to  regard  him  as  an  American,  a  Fsench- 
an,  or  a  Dutchman ;  for  we  are  no  longer  strangers  and  foreigners  but 
Uow-citizens.  If  any  man  be  a  Christian  and  a  foreigner  after  the 
ish,  he  is  yet  in  spirit  ten  thousand  times  more  allied  to  me  than  if 
J  were  an  Englishman  and  an  unbeliever.  Greatly  is  it  to  be  deplored 
[lenever  the  convulsions  of  nations  drag  Christian  men  into  opposition 
one  another  on  the  ground  of  politics.  One  part  of  the  body  of 
irist  cannot  be  at  war  with  another.  It  is  a  shameful  thing  whenever 
3  suffer  our  earthly  nationality  to  dominate  over  our  hevenly  citizen- 
lip.  Queen  Victoria  and  President  Grant  are  well  enough  in  their 
aces,  but  Kin^  Jesus  is  Lord  of  all ;  we  are  above  all  things  subjects 
'  his  Imperial  Hijjhness  the  Prince  of  Peace.  Nobody  comes  into  the 
lurch  as  a  Jew  or  a  Gentile,  nor  does  he  remain  there  as  a  Greek  or 
Scythian,  whatever  he  may  have  been  before ;  when  he  becomes  a 
bristian,  Christ  is  all.  Earthl  v  distinctions  of  rank,  if  they  still  exist, 
they  must  while  we  are  in  this  world,  are  brought  to  a  minimum 
[thin  the  church,  they  are  almost  obliterated,-  and  what  remains  is 
nctifled  to  sacred  ends. 

Christ  is  all  in  the  church  by  way  of  glorying.  The  Greek  said,  **  The 
ellenes  are  a  race  of  heroes  ;  remember  Sparta  and  Athens.  Ai'e  \^<f 
it  foremost  in  civilisation,  and  were  we  not  chief  in  war  ?  Who  set 
innds  to  the  Persian  tyrant,  and  bade  the  boastful  monarch  bite  th<r 
Bit?  We  hold  our  heads  erect  when  we  think  of  Marathon  and 
lamis."  But  when  the  Greek  joined  the  Christian  church,  he  lorgot  his 
(tional  boastings,  and  henceforth  gloried  only  in  the  cross  of  him  whose 


4G2  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

single  arm  defeated  the  hosts  of  Satan,  and  led  captiTitv  captin. 
The  Jew  wlien  despised  returned  scorn  for  scorn,  and  said  to  Greek  ud 
Boman,  '' Y^ou  may  speak  of  Marathon,  but  I  sing  of  the  Bed  Sea;  yoa 
may  boast  of  Persia  broken,  but  I  tell  of  Egypt  Tanqnished ;  mine  an 
tlie  j^lories  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  in  the  far  off  ages.  We  were  a  people  vhea 
YOU  were  as  yet  unknown,  and  we  are  the  chosen  favonrites  of  JehoTih.' 
The  moment  the  Jew  sat  down  at  the  gospel  supper,  he  laid  aside  Ui 
hereditary  pride  and  bigotry,  and  recognised  the  fact  that  the  Oreek  m 
as  much  a  brother  as  the  believing  Hebrew  at  his  side.  So  the  Scythiai, 
when  he  came  into  the  Christian  church,  was  no  longer  a  Barbarian,  h 
spoke  the  language  of  Canaan  as  correctly  as  his  Grecian  fellow  Chm- 
tian.  The  slave  no  sooner  breathed  the  air  of  the  Christian  church  thiB 
his  shackles  fell  from  olf  him.  He  might  be  a  slave  at  home  with  Ui 
master,  but  he  was  no  slave  there.  While  the  freeman,  though  he  hii 
been  born  free,  or  with  a  great  price  had  obtained  his  freedom,  never  in  tk 
Christian  church  looked  down  u|K)n  the  slave.  Bond  and  free  were  one 
in  Christ  Jesus.  Nobody  had  any  personal  ground  for  glory;  neither 
race,  nor  pedigree,  nor  rank,  nor  ])osicion,  were  of  any  acconnt,  bat 
Christ  wus  all.  '*  Christianus  sum"  I  am  a  Christian  was  and  is  the 
universal  glorj'ing  of  all  saints. 

This  at  the  same  time  obliterated  all  their  sinful  national  costoon 
The  Greek  said  originally,  **  I  may  certainly  indulge  in  this  vice,  becaoiB 
the  Lacedicmonians  have  always  observed  this  custom ;"  and  the  Jev, 
perhaps,  might  have  said,  ^'  1  will  eat  nothing  common  or  undean, 
neither  will  I  consort  with  Gentiles,  because  our  fathers  did  not  to." 
The  Barbarian  said,  *'  I  cannot  submit  to  the  laws  of  civilised  life;  mr 
father  ranged  the  desert;"  and  the  Scythian  said,  '*  I  shall  rob^  ana 
pillage,  and  kill,  for  1  am  a  wild  man ;  why  should  I  not  ?  Did  notmf 
fat  here  do  so  from  generation  to  generation  ?"  When  the  variow 
tribes  came  into  the  Christian  church,  down  went  all  separating  andefil 
customs  at  once.  What  liuth  Christ  sai'l  ?  AVhat  hath  Christ  done ? 
What  hath  he  bidden  us  ?     These  are  law  to  us  and  nothing  else. 

Thus  the  distinctions  of  race,  the  glory  ings  of  the  nationality,  and  the 
habitudes  and  customs  of  various  nations,  all  sank  into  nothing,  ibr 
Jesus  Christ  in  the  Ciiristian  church  became  all  in  all.  That,  I  doabl 
not,  is  the  meaning  of  the  text  in  its  connection.  Christ  all  and  in  all 
by  way  of  distinction. 

2.  Secondly,  Ciirist  is  all  in  all  to  us  in  anotlier  three-fold  way— 
io  Goif,  before  our  efieuiietf,  within  ourselves.  Happy  art  thou,  0  child 
of  G(^k1,  tiiat  in  all  thy  relationships  to  the  Great  Judge  of  all  theetftb, 
Christ  is  all  in  >ill  to  thee.  Thou  ueedest  a  mediator  to  stand  betwea 
thee  and  (iod;  Christ  is  that.  Thou  wantest  a  high  Priest  to  present 
with  his  own  sacrilice  thy  prayers  and  praises  ;  Christ  is  that.  Thoe 
wantest  u  representative  to  stand  at  all  times  before  God,  an  interceaiar 
to  plead  lor  thee,  one  who  shall  be  a  daysman,  akin  to  thee  and  aUi 
to  (lod,  who  can  put  his  hand  upon  both;  Christ  is  that  to  thie^ 
Whenever  God  looks  u[)on  thee  in  Christ,  he  sees  in  thee  all  M 
ought  to  )>e  there.  Did  he  look  upon  thee  apart  from  Christi  be 
would  sec  in  thee  nothinij:  he  could  commend  :  but  thou  art  •*  aooeptfld 
in  tiie  Beloved.''  Even  the  omniscient  eye  of  God  detects  notbinc 
for  which  to  condemn  the  soul  which  is  covered  with  the  righteonantfi 


CHRIST  IS  ALL.  468 

Christ.  "  Who  shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  €k)d*s  elect  ? 
is  God  that  jnstifieth."  Without  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  aiiy  snch  thing, 
the  entire  church  as  seen  in  the  person  of  Christ  Jesus,  her  repre- 
itative  and  head.  Christ  is  all  for  ns  before  the  throne  of  Ood, 
But,  alas  !  we  need  some  one  to  stand  between  us  and  our  enemies, 
lere  is  8atan  ;  how  shall  I  meet  him  ?  He  will  accuse  me ;  who 
all  plead  my  canse  ?  Christ  is  all  in  all  for  that.  Whatever  fiery 
rts  Satan  may  shoot,  Christ  is  the  shield  that  can  qnenob  those  darts. 
Satan  tempt  me,  Christ  shall  plead  for  me  before  the  temptation 
lies.  Whenever  I  have  to  contend  with  Satan,  this  is  the  weapon 
th  which  I  should  arm  myself.  If  I  reason  with  him,  if  I  bring  for- 
rd  any  strength  of  my  own  to  oppose  him,  he  may  well  say  to  me : 
Tesus  I  know,  but  who  art  thou  ?"  But  if  I  bring  Jesus  into  the 
iflict,  and  wield  the  merit  of  his  blood,  and  the  foithfdlness  of  his 
)mi6e,  the  destroying  an^el  cannot  overcome  the  sprinkled  blood. 
3  overcome  through  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  Christ  Jesus  is  both 
eld  and  sword  to  us,  armour  and  weapons  of  war. 
So  in  our  conflict  with  the  world.  Whatever  trials  you  have,  my 
ir  brother,  Christ  is  all  in  all  to  meet  them.  Are  you  poor?  He 
1  make  you  rich  in  your  poverty  by  his  consoling  presence.  Are  you 
k  ?  He  will  make  your  bed  in  your  sickness,  and  will  so  make  your 
k-bed  better  than  the  walks  of  health.    Are  you  persecuted  ?    Be  it 

his  sake,  and  you  may  even  leap  for  joy.  Are  you  oppressed  ? 
member  how  he  also  was  oppressed  and  afflicted ;  and  you  will  have 
owship  with  him  in  his  snfferings.  Amidst  all  the  vicissitudes  of 
B  present  life,  Christ  is  all  that  the  believer  wants  to  bear  him  up, 
I  bear  him  through.  No  wave  can  sink  the  man  who  clings  to  this 
^buoy ;  he  shall  swim  to  glory  on  it. 
to,  too,  wifhin  myself  Christ  is  all.    If  I  look  into  the  chambers  of 

inner  nature,  I  see  all  manner  of  deficiencies  and  deformities,  and 
nay  well  'be  filled  with  dismay;  but  when  I  see  Christ  there,  my 
irt  is  comforted,  for  he  will  both  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil,  and 
feet  that  which  he  has  begun  in  me.  I  am  a  sinner,  but  my  heart 
ts  on  its  Saviour  ;  I  am  burdened  with  this  body  of  sin  imd  death, 
;  behold  my  Saviour  is  formed  in  me  the  hope  of  glory.  1  nm  by 
ure  an  heir  of  wrath,  even  as  others,  but  I  am  bom  into  the  second 
am's  household,  and  therefore  I  am  beloved  of  the  Most  High,  and 
rfnt-heir  with  Christ.  Is  there  Christ  in  thy  heart  beloved  ?  Then 
rything  that  is  there  that  would  make  thee  sorrow  may  also  suggest 
thee  a  topic  for  joy.  The  saint  is  gi'ieved  to  think  that  he  has  sin 
confess,  but  he  is  glad  to  think  that  he  is  enabled  to  confess  sin. 
8  saint  is  vexed  that  he  should  have  so  much  infirmity,  yet  he  glories 
infirmity  because  the  power  of  Christ  doth  rest  upon  him.  He  is 
jved  day  by  day  to  oliserve  his  wanderings,  but  he  is  also  rejoiced  to 
how  the  Good  Shepherd  follows  him  and  restores  liis  soul.  So  that 
the  evils  and  shortcomings  in  me  which  make  me  weep,  also  make 
glad  when  Jesus  is  seen  within.  For  all  I  see  within  myself  lack- 
OT  sinful,  I  see  a  sufficient  remedy  in  Christ,  who  is  all  in  all. 
Sins  I  have  given  you  a  second  way  of  meditating  upon  our  text. 
bt  is  not  only  all  by  way  of  distinction,  but  he  is  all  to  God,  all 
ireen  ns  and  our  enemies,  and  all  within  ourselves. 


461  METBOFOLITIN  TABEBKACLE  PULPIT. 

3.  Wc  may  sgo  another  phase  or  the  same  meaning  if  ve  takea  thiri 
diTiaion.     ChriBt.iB  all  for  ub,  he  ia  all  /o  us,  he  is  all  in  as. 

Christ  is  all /or  us,  tiie  Burety,  the  aubstitnte  in  onr  atead  to  Iwar 
our  gnilt;  "  For  the  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  uliqnity  of  oa  all."  "  The 
chaaiiBement  of  our  peace  was  npon  bim."  "  He  oath  made  him  to 
be  Bia  for  qb  who  knew  no  Bin,  that  wo  might  be  made  the  righteoofr 
seBBof  God  in  him."  lie  ia  also  the  worker  atandJng  in  oar  plaoe  to 
fbllil  all  righteonsneas  lor  us.  Ue  ia  the  end  of  the  law  for  ri^iteou- 
nesB  to  everyone  that  bt;liovct)i.  All  that  God  requires  us  tob^Cbrid 
ia  for  ns.  He  hiu  not  ])rcBcnted  to  God  a  part  of  what  was  done,  bnt 
has  totheutmoet  farthing  paid  all  that  bU  people  owed.  Acting  aaou 
foremnner  in  heaven,  he  has  taken  pOEseBsion  of  oar  inberitance,  and  H 
onr  anrrJy  ^iKwnreH  to  us  our  entrance  there.  For  na  all  Jesna  ia  all. 
~  And  Ihiit  day  he  is'  afi  lo  ub.  We  tmat  wholly  in  bim.  I  ofla 
qneatioQ  myself  npon  maiiy^riBtian  gracca,  bnt  there  ia  one  thing  I 
never  can  doubt  abont,  and  tlinC  ia  I  know  I  have  no  other  hope  bat  in 
the  blood  and  rigiiteousncBs  of  Jesus  Christ.  If  a  aoul  can  perish 
relying  with  all  its  power  upon  the  tinfa'^tgd  work  of  the  Saviour,  then 
I  shall  iwrisb  ;  but  if  saving  faith  be  an  eiilfr^reliance  upon  Him  wliom 
God  hath  sent  fortb  to  be  a  propitiation  foi     '      "       -^    ■- 

fsrish  nntil  God'a  word  be  broken.  Can 
rethrcn,  and  will  it  not  vield  you  comfort '!  i 
yon  could  trust  to  ?  Have  yon  one  good  work 
upon  ?  Is  there  n  pniver  you  have  ever  offcrctl,  an 
ever  felt,  that  yon  would  dare  to  use  as  a  bnttreBK,  or 
aprop,  to  yonr  hope  of  wilvation  ?  I  know  you  reply,  _  . 
nuthinsr,  nothiu;;,  nothing;  but  Christ  my  Siivioiir  is  it!  I  iw"''*^ 
and  iill  my  desire,  and  I  abhor  the  vary  idea  of  putting  •"'S'S' ST 
by  side  with  liim  aa  a  ground  of  my  dcpeiidancc  before  I  ^\  ^ 
then,  assuredly  you  liave  the  mark  of  Chnst's  sheep,  lor  to  ull*  "*■ 
Christ  is  all. 

I  B.iid  also  that  Christ  is  nil  in  us,  and  so  he  is.  Whatever^*" 
in  UK  that  is  rot  of  Christ  and  the  work  of  his  Spirit,  will  have"'"'' 
out  oi'  us,  and  blessod  be  (lie  day  In  which  it  is  ejected,  Ir** 
growing  and  advancing,  bnt  it  ta  a  growth  in  the  flesh  and  an  .^"~" 
■"  it  is  a  spurious  fungus  growth  ;  and,  like  Jonah's  gourdi 


,,»•« 


jicriiili  in  a  ni;;lit.  WoihI,  liay,  stubble,  are  quick  building,  but  t^''* 
alsot|niik  burning  ;  only  that  whicli  belongs  to  "  Christ  fonnci*!!? 
ihe  lio]ie  of  glorj',"  will  prove  to  be  gold,  silver,  precious  stoiK'"* 
may  acem  slow  building,  hut  it  will  abide  the  fire.  0  ChrisiiiltPS 
much  and  labour  much  to  have  Christ  in  thee,  for  he  is  '»11P^^ 
worth  having  in  thee.  He  is  only  the  hask  of  a  Christian  whoH'lr 
the  precioUB  kernel  of  Christ  in  his  heart.  ChriBt  on  the  croa&  s;i-y,*^ 
becoming  Christ  in  the  heart,  Jesus  is  indeed  all  for  na,  all  to  ii  s,  .#** 

4.  Shift  the  kaleidoscope,  and  tnke  the  same  truth  in  niiuLl''''f' 
CVoiKt  in  Ihf  rhnmiel  of  all.  Ihe  pkdi/e  of  all,  tha  mm  of  a!!.  ^ 

The  r/uiiiiicl  of  aU.    All  love  and  mercy  flow  from  God  tbrou^'^^J 
the  mediator.    We  get  nought  apart  from  him.     "No  inin; 
unto  the  Father  but  by  me."    Other  coudoits  are  dry,  but  tli 
ia  always  full.    "  He  is  uhle  to  save  them  to  the  nttennost 
uulo  <''ud  by  him,  seeing  he  ever  livcth  to  make  Intercession 


CfiftlST  IH  ALL.  465 

ist  is  the  pl$dg$  of  all.  When  God  gave  ns  Christ,  be  did  ns 
as  say,  '*  I  nave  given  yon  all  thin^rs."  **  He  that  spared  not  his 
on,  bnt  freely  delivered  him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall  he  not  with  him 
*eely  give  us  all  things  1"    He  is  a  covenant  to  us,  the  title-deeds 

promised  rest. 

I,  indeed,  Christ  is  not  only  the  channel  of  all,  and  the  pledge  of 
it  the  apostle  says  he  is  all ;  so  I  take  it  he  ia  ihe  »um  of  all.  If 
"e  going  to  travel  on  the  Continent,  you  need  not  carry  a  bed  with 
Lor  a  house,  nor  a  table,  nor  medicine,  nor  food ;  if  you  only  have 
Q  your  purse,  yon  have  these  condensed.  Gold  is  the  representa- 
>f  everything  it  can  bnv,  it  is  a  kind  of  universal  talisman, 
cing  what  its  owner  wishes  for.  I  have  never  yet  met  with  a 
L  in  any  country  who  did  not  understand  its  meaning.  '^  Money 
reth  all  things,"  says  the  wise  man,  and  this  is  true  in  a  limitea 
;  but  he  that  has  Christ,  has  indeed  all  things :  he  has  the 
c,  the  substance  of  all  good.  I  have  only  to  plead  the  name  of 
before  the  Father's  throne,  and  nothing  desirable  shall  be  denied 
[f  Christ  is  yours,  all  things  are  yours.  God,  who  gave  you  Christ, 
I  that  one  gift  summed  up  the  total  of  all  yon  will  want  for 
nd  for  eternity,  to  obliterate  the  sin  of  the  past,  to  fdliil  the  needs 
present,  and  to  perfect  you  for  all  the  work  and  bliss  of  the  future. 
>nce  more  let  us  view  our  text  in  another  light.  Ghrisi  is  all  we 
lU  we  desire,  and  all  of  good  that  we  can  conmve.   He  is  all  I  need. 

is  the  living  water  to  quench  my  thirst,  the  heavenly  bread  to 

my  hunger,  the  snow-white  robe  to  cover  me,  the  sure  refuge, 
tppy  home  of  my  soul,  my  meat  and  my  medicine,  my  solace  and 
ig,  my  light  and  my  delight, 
is  all  I  desire f  and  when  most  covetous  I  only  covet  more  of  his  pre- 

when  most  ambitious,  it  is  my  ambition  to  be  like  him ;  when  most 
ible  in  desire,  I  only  long  to  be  with  him  where  he  is.  He  is  all 
wnceive  of  good.  When  my  imagination  stretches  all  her  wings 
)  a  flight  into  realms  beyond  where  the  eagle's  wing  hath  been, 
en  then  she  reachech  not  the  height  of  the  glory  which  Christ 
hath  promised  her;  she  cannot  conceive  with  her  most  expanded 
I  of  anything  more  rich  and  precious  than  Christ,  her  Christ,  her- 
hrist's,  and  Christ  all  her  own.    Oh,  if  you  want  to  know  what 

I  is,  know  what  Christ  is,  for  the  way  to  spell  heaven  is  with 
five  letters  that  make  up  the  word  Jesus.     When  you  get  him 

II  be  all  to  you  that  your  glorified  body  shall  need,  and  all  your 
3d  spirit  can  conceive.    0  precious  Christ,  thou  art  all  in  all. 

I  nave  shown  you  then,  in  a  very  hurried  way,  what  it  is  that 
nth  includes ;  now,  with  greater  brevity  still,  what  does  this 
IHYOLVE  ?  It  involves  a  great  many  things.  First,  it  involves 
ffT  and  excellence  of  Christ.  Of  whom  else  could  it  be  said  that 
ill  in  all?  There  are  many  things  in  this  world  that  are  good, 
sre  is  nothing  that  is  good  for  everything.  Some  plants  may 
;ood  medicine,  but  not  a  good  cordial ;  the  plant  of  renown  is 
irery  way.  Good  clothing  is  not  able  to  stay  your  hunger,  but 
the  bread  of  heaven  is  also  the  Father's  best  robe.  You  cannot 
any  finite  thing  to  be  good  for  all  things,  but  Christ  is  infinite 
88.     This  tree  of  life  bears  all  manner  of  fruits,  and  the  leaves 


4GC  MKTROPOTJTAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT, 

are  for  the  healin^^  of  the  nations.  He  is  strength  and  beauty,  safetj 
and  sanctity,  peace  and  plenty,  healin<r  and  help,  comfort  and  coDooeit, 
life  here,  and  life  for  ever.  Glory  be  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  I  Whit 
can  he  be  less  than  God,  if  he  be  all  ?  *' All."  Is  it  not  a  synonjma 
for  God  ?  We  say  there  cannot  be  two  Gods,  because  the  one  Qod  is 
everywhere,  and  fills  all  space;  and  who  then  can  he  be  who  is  called 
"  all  in  all,"  but  **  very  God  of  very  God  ?  "  Worship  him,  my  brethren, 
with  all  your  hearts,  rejoice  in  him,  bless  him  from  day  to  day.  Let 
not  the  world  think  you  poor  who  are  so  rich  in  him.  Uever  snte 
men  to  think  you  unhappy,  who  have  perfect  happiness  in  the  erer 
blessed  Immanuel. 

See,  in  the  next  place,  the  safety  and  tlie  blessedness  of  the  believer. 
Christ  is  all ;  but  the  believer  can  add,  **  And  Christ  is  mine.*  Then 
the  believer  has  all  thin^^s — all  that  he  will  want,  as  well  as  all  he  doei 
want.  No  emperor  that  has  not  Christ  is  half  ns  rich  as  he  that  has 
Christ  and  is  a  beggar.  He  that  hath  Christ,  being  a  panper,  hath  all 
things;  and  he  that  hath  not  Christ,  possessing  a  thousand  worlds, 
possesses  nothing  for  real  happiness  and  joy.  Oh,  the  blessednesi 
of  the  man  who  can  say,  '^  Christ  is  mine."  On  the  other  hand,  see 
the  wretchedness  of  the  man  who  has  not  the  Saviour :  for  if  Christ 
is  all,  you  who  believe  not  on  him  are  devoid  of  all,  in  being  destitote 
of  Christ.  But  you  say,  "  I  try  my  best,  I  attend  public  worshia  I  do 
a  great  deal  that  is  good ;  "  you  have  nothing  if  you  hare  not  Christ 
Do  not  flatter  yourself  that  you  are  getting  on  and  adding  goods  to 
goods  in  spiritual  things  ;  if  you  have  not  a  Saviour  you  are  ndced  and 
poor  and  miserable ;  you  are  without  all  if  you  are  without  Christ,  who 
is  all.  The  Christian,  then,  is  rich,  but  everyone  who  is  destitute  of 
Christ  is  poor  to  the  extreme  of  poverty. 

See,  too,  in  the  truth  before  us  a  rebuke  for  the  doubts  of  manj 
seekers.  They  will  say,  **  I  have  not  this,  I  have  not  that.'*  Suppose 
thou  hast  it  not,  Christ  has  it,  if  it  be  good  for  anything.  "  I  wonld 
fain  cast  myself  ujwn  the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ  this  day,  but,"— Ah, 
away  with  thy  '*  buts."  What  dost  thou  want  ?  "  I  want  true  belief** 
saith  one.  Come  to  Christ  for  it  then.  "  I  want  a  broken  heart,**  says 
another.  If  you  cannot  come  with  a  broken  heart  to  Christ,  come  for 
a  broken  heart. 

"  True  belief,  and  true  repentance. 

Every  grace  that  brings  us  nigh, 
Without  money. 

Come  to  Jesus  Christ  and  buy." 

We  have  an  old  proverb  about  the  lolly  of  taking  coals  to  Newcastle ; 
but  what  folly  must  that  be  which  makes  a  man  think  that  he  can  take 
something  to  Christ,  when  Christ  is  all.  Come,  come,  come,  come  to 
him,  poor  sinner,  and  let  him  be  all  in  all  to  thee.  Simply  rely  upon 
him  and  be  at  peace. 

How  this,  a^ain,  rebukes  the  coldness  of  saints.  If  Christ  be  alt  in 
all,  then  how  is  it  we  love  him  so  little  ?  If  he  be  so  precious,  how  is  it 
Ave  prize  him  so  little  ?  Oh  !  my  dull,  dead,  cold  heart,  what  art  Uioa 
at?  Art  thou  harder  than  adamant,  and  baser  than  brutish,  that  thoa 
art  not  much  more  moved  with  ardour  and  fervent  affection  towards  such 
a  Lord  as  this  ?    Christ  is  all,  my  brethren,  yet  look  how  little  we  offer 


CHRIST  IS  ALL.  407 

to  him— of  our  substance  how  scant  a  portion — of  our  time  how  slender 
a  part — of  our  talents  how  small  a  parcel!  God  stir  us  to  holy 
fervency,  that  if  Christ  be  all  for  us,  we  may  be  all  for  Christ.  May 
we  lay  ourselves  out  without  reservation  to  the  utmost  stretch  of  our 

Kwer,  asking  fresh  strength  from  him,  that  we  may  do  all  that  can 
done  by  mortal  men,  and  that  all  may  be  done  with  us  by  Go^  that 
he  shall  see  it  to  be  compatible  with  his  glory  to  do. 

Again,  by  our  text  another  lesson  is  furnished  us.  We  learn  here 
how  to  measure  young  converts.  We  ought  not  to  expect  them  to 
be  philosophers  or  divines ;  Christ  is  all.  If  they  know  Christ,  and 
are  renting  in  him,  we  are  bound  to  say,  "  Come,  and  welcome."  Be 
they  poor,  be  they  unlettered,  if  Jesus  Christ  be  formed  in  their  hearts, 
even  though  we  can  see  him  there  only  as  a  dim  outline,  we  are  to  open 
wide  the  gate,  and  receive  them  as  Jesus  received  us. 

Here  is  a  measure,  too,  by  which  to  measure  ministers.  The  fashion 
of  the  world  is  to  admire  him  most  who  shall  speak  most  rhetorically. 
Accursed  be  the  day  in  which  oratory  was  tolerated  in  the  Christian 
pulpit.  It  has  been  the  bane  and  plague  of  the  church  of  God.  This 
labour  after  flowery  speech,  this  seeking  after  polished  periods  and 
gaudy  sentences,  what  is  it  but  a  pandering  to  the  world,  and  a  prostitu- 
tion of  the  ministry  of  reconciliation.  Had  men  learned  what  the  apostle 
meant  when  he  said,  "  I  brethren,  came  not  with  excellency  of  speech 
or  of  wisdom,"  they  would  have  preached  far  other  wise  than  they  have 
done.  We  should  strive  to  speak  the  gospel  simply  from  our  hearts, 
and  then  men*s  hearts  will  be  impressed  with  the  truth.  Alas, 
this  toying  with  fair  words,  and  seeking  after  pleasing  expressions, 
this  dressing  up  of  truth  in  the  flaunting  finery  of  falsehood,  degrades 
rather  than  adorns  the  gospel,  and  it  has  done  incalculable  damage 
to  souls,  and  to  the  advance  of  truth.  Measure  ministers  by  this, 
What  is  there  of  Christ  about  them  ?  That  ministry  which  hath  no 
savour  of  Christ  in  it,  be  it  what  it  may,  is  a  ministry  which  the 
Lord  will  not  own,  and  that  you  ought  not  to  own  ;  it  is  not  God-sent, 
and  ought  not  to  be  received  by  you.  Give  me  Christ  Jesus,  though 
the  speech  in  which  ho  be  set  forth  be  of  the  most  uncouth  kind,  rather 
than  the  choicest  inventions  of  the  most  ingenious  thinkers,  from 
which  Jesus  Christ  is  absent,  or  in  which  he  is  not  exalted. 

Brother,  this  will  also  help  you  to  estimate  your  own  devotions.  Ton 
came  to  the  communion  table  the  other  day,  but  you  did  not  enter  into 
fellowship  with  Christ.  Ah  !  then  there  was  a  lost  opportunity.  You 
were  in  your  closet  this  morning  in  prayer,  but  you  did  not  plead  the 
name  of  Jesus.  Ah  !  then  again  there  was  a  lost  season  of  devotion. 
You  are  a  Bible  reader,  and  your  eye  glances  over  the  holy  words,  but 

Jou  do  not  see  Jesus  in  each  page ;  then  your  reading  has  failed.  You 
ave  been  giving  to  the  poor  of  late ;  but  have  you  done  it  for  Christ's 
Bake  ?  You  have  sought  to  win  souls :  have  you  done  it  in  Christ's 
strength  ?  If  Jesus  be  absent,  you  have  offered  a  sacrifice  from  which 
the  heart  is  gone  ;  and  among  the  Romans,  no  omen  was  supposed  to 
be  80  damaging  as  the  absence  of  the  heart  from  the  sacrifice.  No 
Christ,  then  there  can  be  no  acceptance,  but  a  fulness  of  Christ  proves  a 
ftlnesB  of  acceptance  with  God. 

IV.  There  are  many  other  things  which  I  could  have  said,  but  time 


408  MFTTROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

has  failed  me,  and  therefore  I  muAt  close  by  noticing  what  this  tbdth 
REQUiRKS  OF  US.    Christ  is  all  in  all ;  therefore  '*  put  on,  as  the  eleot 
of  God,  holy  and  beloved,  bowels  of  mercies,  kindness,  hnmbleoesa  of 
mind,  meekness,  lon^ifsufferinj;."    The  exhibition  of  the  Christ-life  in 
the  saints  is  the  legitimate  inference  from  the  fact  that  Christ  is  all 
to  them.     If  Christ  is  all,  and  jet  I  being  a  Christian  am  not  like 
Christ,  my  Christianity  is  a  transparent  sham,  I  am  nothing  bat  t 
base  pretender,  and  my  outward  religiousness  is  a  pompons  pageantiy 
for  my  soul  to  be  carried  to  hell  in — nothing  more.    It  is  a  gilded 
coffin  for  a  lifeless  spirit.    I  shall  perish  with  a  double  destmction,  if 
I  have  dared  to  profane  the  name  of  Christ  by  taking  it  upon  me, 
when  I  have  not  the  essence  of  the  Christian  religion  within  roe. 
Orthodoxy,  though  it  be  of  the  most  assured  sort,  is  vanity  of  ranities, 
unless  there  be  with  it  an  orthodoxy  of  life :  and  experience,  whate?er 
man  may  say  about  it,  is  but  a  dream,  a  fiction  of  his  own  imagining,  if 
it  does  not  display  itself  in  shaking  off  the  sins  of  the  flesh,  and  putting 
on  the  adornments  of  holiness.    0  brethi*en,  these  are  searching  things 
to  everyone  of  us.    Who  amongst  us  lives  as  he  should  at  home? 
Could  you  bear  that  the  anj:;el  who  visits  your  house  should  publish, 
before  the  great  cloud  of  witnesses,  all  that  he  has  seen  there  ?    In 
your  shops,  in  your  businesses,  you  professors,  are  you  always  upright 
aud  straiichtforward  as  Christians  should  be !     You  merchants  on  the 
Exchange,  are  not  some  of  you,  who  profess  to  be  Christians,  as  greedy 
and  as  overi*eacliing  as  others  ?    I  charge  you,  if  you  have  any  respect 
for  Christ,  lay  down  his  name  if  yon  will  not  endeavour  to  honour  it 
You  will  be  lost,  you  covetous  money-grubbers,  you  earth-scrapen, 
who  live  only  for  this  world,  you  will  be  lost;  you  need  not  doubt  of  that, 
you  will  be  lost  sure  enough ;  but  why  need  you  make  the  assurance  of 
your  condemnation  doubly  sure  by  the  base  imposture  of  calling  yonr- 
selves  Christians.     Meanwhile,  let  the  Ethiopian  call  himself  white,  if  he 
will :  let  the  leopard  declare  that  he  has  no  spots ;  these  things  shall  not 
matter;  but  the  falsehood  of  a  man  who  lives  without  Christ,  while  calling 
himself  a  Christian,  brings  such  dishonour  upon  him  who  was  nailed 
to  the  tree,  and  whose  religion  is  that  of  holiness,  that  I  beseech  yoa, 
by  the  living  God,  give  up  your  profession,  if  you  do  not  endeavour  to 
make  it  true.    If  you  are  not  living  as  you  should,  do  not  pretend  to 
be  what  you  are  not.    Seek  ye  unto  God,  that  the  life  of  Christ  being 
in  you,  you  may  manifest  it  in  your  conversation. 

Without  Christ  ye  are  nothing,  though  ye  be  baptised,  though  ye  be 
members  of  churches,  though  ye  be  highly  esteemed  as  deacons,  elderB, 
pastors.  Oh,  then,  have  Christ  everywhere  in  all  things,  and  constrain 
men  to  say  of  you,  "  To  that  man  Christ  is  all  in  all :  I  have  marked 
him ;  he  has  been  with  Jesus,  he  has  learned  of  him,  for  he  acts  as  Jesus 
did.    God  grant  a  blessing  on  these  words,  for  Christ's  s^e.     Amen. 


Portions  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Colossians  iii. 

,    and  iv.  1 — (5. 
xl 

Sprmon  Readers  are  ro^poctfuUy  romindt^  that  the  200  boys  at  the  StoekfraQ 
Orpliannf^e  arc  supported  by  voluntary  contributions,  and  that  these  are.  aiivay* 
thankfully  received  by  C.  If*  Spurgeon,  Clapham. 


^^ti[0j0liian:  ^nhtrmdt 


NORTH  AND  SOUTH. 


^  pennon 


DELIVEBED  BY 

C.  H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  TUB  MKTUOPOLITAN  TABERNAaiE,   NRWINGTON. 


••  I  will  say  to  the  north,  Give  up ;  and  to  the  south,  Keep  not  back/' — Isaiah  xliii.  6. 

In  the  fulness  of  tlic  promised  days  when  the  Jews  shall  be  restored 
from  their  wanderings,  and  all  the  seed  of  Jacob  shall  a<i^in  meet  in 
their  own  land,  God  in  his  mighty  providence  will  speak  to  all  the 
nations,  saying  :  "  To  the  north,  Gi?e  up;  and  to  the  south,  Keep  not 
back;*'  and  at  the  divine  bidding  free  passage  shall  be  given,  all  lets  and 
hindrances  shall  be  removed,  and  his  own  people  shall  come  to  their  own 
land.  Entailed  on  Abraham's  seed  by  a  covenant  of  salt,  the  Holy 
Land  shall  receive  again  its  rightful  heritors,  the  banished  shall  come 
to  their  own  aprain,  and  no  nation  or  people  shall  keep  them  back.  So 
much  for  the  literal  meaning.  I  am  unable  to  indulge  you  with  fuller 
details,  for  I  have  no  skill  in  guessing  at  the  meaning  of  dark  passages, 
bnt  leave  such  things  to  those  to  whom  it  is  given,  or  who  think  it  is 
gtTen  to  them.  We  shall  now  pursue  the  spiritual  teaching  of  the 
passage. 

At  this  moment,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  we  who  follow  the  foot- 
steps of  King  Jesus  are  soldiers  of  an  army  which  has  invaded  this 
world.  This  land  belongs  to  our  great  Leader,  for  he  made  it.  It  was 
right  that  everywhere,  all  round  the  globe,  his  name  should  be  honoured, 
for  he  is  the  King  among  the  nations,  and  the  governor  thereof.  Bnt 
our  race  has  revolted,  set  up  another  monarch,  and  bowed  its  strength  to 
support  another  dynasty — the  dynasty  of  darkness  and  death.  Uur  race 
has  broken  the  good  and  wholesome  laws  of  the  great  Lord,  the  rightfhl 
King,  and  set  up  new  laws  and  new  customs  altogether  opposed  to 
nght  and  truth.  This  is  the  Great  Rebellion,  the  Revolt  of  Manhood, 
the  Sedition  of  Sinners.  Now,  no  king  will  willingly  lose  his  dominions, 
and  therefore  the  Great  King  of  kings  has  sent  his  son  to  conquer  this 
world  bv  force  of  arms,  though  not  by  arms  of  steel,  or  weapons  that 
cat  ana  kill,  and  wound,  yet  by  arms  more  mighty  far;  and  this  earth 


^70  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

is  to  be  yet  subdued  to  the  kinjijdoni  of  the  Crown  Prince,  the  Prince 
Imperial  of  heaven^  Jesus  Christ,  tlie  Lord.  We,  his  regensnted 
people,  form  part  of  the  army  of  occupation.  We  hare  invaded  the  land. 
Hard  and  stern  hath  been  the  battle  up  to  this  point.  We  have  had  to 
win  every  inch  of  ground  by  sheer  pusn  of  pike.  Effort  after  effort  his 
been  put  forth  by  the  church  of  God  under  the  jjuidance  of  her  heavwilj 
leader,  and  none  has  been  in  vain.  Hitherto  the  Lord  hath  helped  m, 
but  there  is  much  yet  to  be  done.  Canaimites  and  Hivit^,  and 
Jebusites  have  to  be  driven  out;  yea,  in  fact,  the  whole  world  seems 
still  to  lie  in  darkness,  and  under  the  dominion  of  the  wicked  one 
We  do  but  hold  here  and  there  a  sacred  fortress  for  truth  and  holiness 
in  the  land ;  but  these  we  must  retain  till  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  send  ns 
more  prosperous  times,  and  the  battle  shall  be  turned  against  the  foe, 
and  the  kingdom  shall  come  unto  our  prince.  Nor  is  there  any  fear 
but  that  such  a  time  will  come,  therefore  let  us  have  couraj^e.  Soldiers 
of  the  cross,  have  faith ;  have  faith  in  your  rj^reat  leader,  ibr  behold  he 
is  still  at  the  head  of  you,  and  is  still  onmipotent.  The  hour  of  his 
weakness  is  past.  His  sun  set  once  in  blood,  but  it  has  risen  to  go 
down  no  more.  Once  was  it  eclipsed  at  noon  day ;  but  now  the  Snnof 
of  Righteousness  ariseth  with  healin<r  beneath  his  wings.  He  who  died 
once  for  all,  is  now  life's  source,  centre,  and  Lord.  The  living  Christ 
is  present  among  us  as  the  commander-in-chief  of  the  church  militant. 
Let  us  refresh  our  souls  by  drawing  near  to  him  by  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Ghost. 

The  text  has  two  grand  matters  in  it: — Firsts  here  is  tM  r&yally(if 
Uie  word — where  the  word  of  this  king  is  there  is  power.  Secondly, 
here  is  the  word  of  rotjalli/y  and  that  word  we  may  well  consider,  for 
where  the  word  of  this  king  is  there  is  wisdom. 

I.  First,  here  is  the  royalty  of  the  word.  It  is  more  than  an 
imperial  edict ;  it  is  the  fiat  of  omnipotence.  Jesus  Christ  saith  to  the 
north,  "Give  up,"  and  it  does  give  up;  and  to  the  south,  "Keep  not 
back,*'  and  it  cannot  keep  back. 

I  understand  from  reading  this  declaration,  that  there  is  a  general 
opposition  in  the  world  to  the  cause  and  kingdom  of  God;  for  until  he 
saith,  "  Give  up,"  and  "  Keep  not  back,"  men  do  not  crowd  to 
ImmanuePs  feet,  and  even  the  chosen  of  God  do  not  come  forth  firom 
their  hiding  places.  All  the  world  over  there  is  a  genenil  opposition 
to  the  cause  of  Christ,  to  the  doctrine  of  truth,  to  the  throne  of  God. 
Go  where  you  may,  in  the  highest  places  of  the  earth,  you  shall  find 
true  religion  despised;  among  the  lowest  of  the  land  you  shall  find  that 
same  religion  blasphemed  ;  and  in  the  middle  classes,  where  some  seem 
to  fancy  that  all  virtue  resides,  you  shall  find  carelessness  about  tlie 
things  of  the  world  to  come,  and  carking  carefulness  about  the  selfish- 
ness of  this  present  life.  Jesus  Christ  is  everywkere  despised  in  com- 
parison with  the  things  that  perish.  They  will  not  have  this  man  to 
reign  over  them.  The  trees  of  the  wood  reject  heaven's  cedar,  and 
choose  hell's  bramble.  Even  the  eleven  sell  the  true  Joseph  into 
Egypt,  nor  is  there  one  found  who  will  defend  the  chosen  of  God.  Go 
amongst  savage  nations,  and  there  the  idol  is  worshipped,  but  Jesus  is 
not  known.  Go  among  civilised  nations,  and,  lo,  they  have  only  changed 
tiieir  idols ;  they  have  rebaptiscd  their  images,  given  new  names  to  the 


NORTH  AND  SOUTH.  471 

objects  of  their  superstitions  reverence,  but  the  true  Christ  is  misunder- 
Btood  and  rejected.  Go  you  to  the  swarthy  Hindoo,  the  man  of  deep 
philosophy  and  sophi8tr}%  and  you  shall  find  his  heart  set  a^^ainst  the 
gospel  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth ;  and  then  sail  over  the  blue  sea  to  the  islands 
of  the  deep,  and  man  in  his  simplicity  worships  he  knows  not  what,  but 
not  the  incarnate  God  Traverse  the  central  parts  of  continents  where 
as  yet  civilization  has  scarcely  reached,  and  yon  shall  find  that  man  is 
itill  opposed  to  faris  Maker,  and  hates  the  name  of  the  only  begotten  Son 
of  God.  Nor  need  we  travel  or  even  look  abroad ;  the  opposition  is 
universal  amon^  ourselves,  among  the  old,  among  the  young.  Striking 
is  that  text,  *^  They  go  astray  from  the  womb,  speaking  lies."  An  old 
Puritan  puts  it;  "They  go  astray  before  they  go  :  they  speak  lies  before 
they  speak;"  and  so  it  is.  Before  it  comes  to  acts,  the  evil  propensity  is 
in  the  heart ;  and  before  the  lips  can  frame  the  falsehood,  there  is  the 
lie  within  the  soul.  From  the  earliest  infancy  to  palsied  age,  nothing 
seems  to  cure  manhood  of  its  rebellious  disposition ;  the  carnal  mind  is 
enmity  against  God,  and  is  not  reconciled  to  God,  neither  indeed  while 
it  remains  what  it  is  can  it  be.  There  is  a  general  opposition  to  the 
cause  and  kin^*dom  of  Christ. 

But  the  text  seems  to  hint  that  there  is  a  particular  form  of  that 
opposition  in  each  case.  There  is  a  word  to  the  north,  a  different  word 
from  that  which  is  given  to  the  south.  The  north  holds  fast,  and 
therefore  the  word  is,  "Give  up:"  the  south  retires,  is  despairing, 
therefore  it  is  said,  "  Keep  not  back."  The  opposition  takes  different 
shapes,  and  there  is  a  different  word  to  meet  its  ever  varying  forms. 
How  true  is  Dr.  Watts's  verse — 

"  We  wander  each  a  different  way, 
But  all  the  downward  road." 

As  each  land  has  its  own  tribes  of  wild  animals,  so  has  each  heart 
its  indigenous  sins.  All  land  will  grow  weeds,  but  you  will  not  find 
the  same  sort  of  weed  equally  abundant  in  every  soil :  so  in  one  heart 
the  deadly  nightshade  of  ignorance  chokes  the  seed,  and  in  another 
the  prickly  thistle  of  malice  crowds  out  the  wheat.  There  are  diffi- 
culties in  reaching  the  heart  of  any  man,  but  not  the  same  difficulties 
in  all  men.  Some,  for  instance,  cannot  be  influenced  because  of  their 
want  of  intelligence  ;  others  because  of  their  supposed  learning.  Some 
cannot  be  come  at  because  of  their  presumption;  others  because  of  their 
despondency.  Some  spend  their  all  upon  the  pleasures  of  this  world ; 
others  spend  nothing,  but  find  their  pleasure  simply  in  hoarding,  yet 
are  they  equally  averse  to  heavenly  things.  Whatever  form  sin  takes, 
it  is  the  same  opposition,  but  yet  it  may  need  a  different  mode  of  treat- 
ment, and  by  a  different  weapon  .will  it  have  to  be  overcom&  My  dear 
brother  in  Christ,  you  perhaps  have  a  different  personal,  spiritual 
difficulty  from  mine.  I  have  no  wish  to  change  with  you,  and  I  shonld 
not  advise  you  to  change  with  me.  The  same  is  true  with  our  trials 
in  winning  souls.    We  have  each  our  difficulties,  but  they  are  not 

Srecisely  alike  in  detail.  You  have  to  fight  the  north  perhaps,  and  I 
lie  south  ;  but  the  same  Lord  and  Master  can  make  us  victorious,  and 
without  him  we  shall  be  equally  defeated.  The  opposition  which  we 
iilcoiuiter  in  serving  our  Lord  is  the  same,  depend  upon  it.    You  need 


472  MKTHOlNiIJTAN   TAIlKRXAf'LK   PL'LPIT. 

not  say,  "  Mine  is  a  peculiarly  hard  task,"  or  if  you  do,  I  may  sij 
the  Baine  of  mine.  After  all,  both  tasks  are  impossibilities  withoot 
God,  and  both  labours  shall  be  readily  performed  if  Jesus  speaks  the 
divine  fiat,  aud  saith  *'  to  the  north,  Give  up;  and  to  the  south,  Keqi 
not  back." 

Further,  as  there  is  in  all  an  opposition,  and  as  there  is  in  each  a 
distinct  opposition,  so  no  power  can  in  any  case  subdue  any  part  of  the 
world  to  Christ  apart  from  him.  It  is  possible  that  you  may  fall  in  with  i 
family  which  seems  to  be  naturally  religious :  you  may  even  meet  with 
tribes  of  people  who  appear  to  be  spontaneously  inclined  to  godliness;  bat 
if  you  bring  the  religion  of  Christ  to  them,  you  will  find  that  their  vaj 
religiousness  is  the  greatest  difficulty  yon  have  to  deal  with.    S(»ne,(a 
the  other  hand,  never  could  be  su{)ersiitious :  the  conformation  of  their 
mind  is  that  of  practical,  sound,  common  sense;  but  do  not  deceive 
yourself  with  the  idea  that  their  conversion  is  any  the  easier.    You  maj 
preach  the  gospel  in  the  most  forcible  way  to  them,  and  you  will  find 
that  this  very  common   sense  of  theirs  will  be  the  main  difficulty 
to  be  overcome.    Believe  me,  however  intent  you  may  be  in  winning 
souls  to  Christ,  you  shall  never  meet  with  one  who  can  be  subdued 
to  him  by  any  persuasions  of  yours  apart  from  the  working  of  lii» 
own  power.      I  know  the  preaclier  hiis  thought  within  himself,  "I 
have  only  to  put  tlie  truth  in  a  reasonable  way,  and  the  man  will  see 
it.'*    Ah  I  sir,  but  sinnere  are  not  reasonable:  tliey  are  the  most  unrea- 
sonable of  all  creatures :  none  are  so  senseless,  none  act  so  madly  as 
they  do.     "  But,"  saith  one,  "  if  I  were  to  tell  them  of  the  love  of  Christ 
in  an  affectionate  lovin^;  way,  that  would  reach  them."     Yes;  botyoa 
will  find  that  all  your  aflection  aud  your  tears,  and  earnest  delineution  of 
the  love  of  Jesus,  will  be  powerless  against  human  hearts,  unless  the 
Eternal  Spirit  shall  drive  home  your  appeals.     We  know  some  who 
have  been  reasoned  with,  and  if  logic  could  win  them,  they  ought  to  have 
been  won  long  ago  :  they  have  also  been  persuaded,  and  if  rhetoric  could 
reach  them,  they  ought  to  have  turned  away  from  their  evil  wa}'8  years 
ago ;  but  all  human  art  has  been  tried  and  tried,  and  tried  in  vain; 
yet  there  is  no  room  for  despair,  for  Jesus  can  conquer  the  unconquerablea, 
and  heal  the  incurables.     Do  not  be  disappointed,  dear  brother,  if  yoa 
have  hitherto  failed  in  your  efforts ;  you  have  but  proved  that  "  vain 
is  the  help  of  man."     You  see  now  by  experience  that  **  it  is  not  of 
him  that  willeth,  nor  of  him  that  runneth,  but  of  God  that  showeth 
mercy."     It  is  yours  to  try  and  bring  that  soul  to  Jesus;  but  it  lies 
with  him  to  prform  the  work.     Duty  is  ours,  the  result  is  God's.    If 
the  soil  of  the  field  committed  to  me  will  never  yield  a  haryest,  I  am 
yet  bound  to  plough  it,  if  my  Lord  commands.     If  I  could  foresee 
ihat  my  child  would  never  turn  to  the  Lord,  yet  I  ought  not  to  slacken 
my  efforts  for  its  conversion.     I   have  to  do  with  my  Master's  com- 
mand, and  what  he  bids  me  do  I  am  bound  to  do.     Never  let  us  be 
surprised  when  we  are  defeated,  for  we  ought  to  know  that  old  Adam 
is  far  too  strong  for  us,  if  we  assail  him  single-handed.     We  cannot 
expect  to  cast  out  the  deyil :  he  laughs  us  to  scorn  if  we  attempt  to 
exorcise  him  in  our  own  name.    We  may  speak  as  we  will,  but  iritis 
only  ire  that  speak,  the  devil  will  say,   "Jesus  I  know,  and  the  Hcij 
Ghost  I  know — but  who  are  ye  ?    I  do  not  yield  to  you.    I  wiD  mat 


NORTH  AND  SOUTH.  473 

go  out  of  this  sinner,  through  all  your  persnaeionB  and  all  your  talk- 
ings.**  Do  not  forget  then  that  there  is  a  general  opposition  to  the 
kingdom  of  Christ — such  opposition  as  no  human  power  can  by  any 
possibility  overcome. 

But,  my  brethren,  here  is  the  point  of  the  text.  That  opposition, 
whatever  form  it  assumes,  though  not  to  be  subdued  by  our  agency  alone, 
shall  assuredly  yield  before  the  fiat  of  our  great  King,  when  he  saith 
*'  to  the  north.  Give  up;  and  to  the  south,  Aeep  not  back."  His  word 
is  a  word  of  power  wherever  it  comes.  Let  us  rejoice  then,  whatever 
place  we  dwell  in,  that  we  have  only  to  ask  the  King  iiimself  to  come 
there,  and  to  speak  with  power,  and  we  shall  see  conversions,  conversions 
most  numerous,  that  shall  glorify  his  name.  I  fully  believe  that  the 
.darkest  time  of  any  true  Christian  church  is  just  the  period  when  it 
cmght  to  have  most  hope,  for  when  the  Lord  has  allowed  us  to  spin 
ourselves  out  till  there  is  no  more  strength  in  us,  then  it  is  that  he  will 
come  to  om'  rescue.  What  could  have  been  lower  than  the  condition 
into  which  we,  as  a  church,  had  sunk  some  seventeen  years  ago  ?  But 
a  little  faitlifal  band  used  to  meet  in  that  dreary  chapel  in  Park  Street, 
and  cry  unto  the  Lord,  never  ceasing  their  prayers.  And,  oh  !  how  soon 
the  house  began  to  fill,  and  how  speedily  our  tent  was  too  strait  for  us, 
and  we  broke  forth  on  the  ri^ht  hand  and  on  the  left,  and  God  made 
the  desolate  places  to  be  inhabited.  Members  of  other  churches,  you 
have  the  same  God  to  go  to.  Go  to  him,  for  he  can  work  the  same 
wonders  for  you.  Look  to  the  Most  High,  and  not  to  man,  or  ministers, 
or  modes,  or  methods,  but  only  to  him,  and  the  guidance  of  his  Spirit. 
"  Well,  but  ours  is  a  village,"  saith  one.  And  is  not  he  the  Lora  of 
the  Tillages  ?  Is  he  the  Lord  of  the  cities,  and  not  the  Lord  of  the 
hamlets  ?  '*  But  our  chapel  is  ugly,  and  built  in  a  back  street,"  saith  one. 
*•  Nobody  knows  of  its  existence.  We  shall  never  get  the  people  mthin 
its  obscure  and  dreary  walls."  Is  God  the  God  of  the  wide  thoroughfares 
and  not  of  the  lanes  ?  Does  not  the  Lord  k  no  w  the  back  streets  as  well  as 
the  broad  ones  ?  Was  not  that  the  question  in  dispute  of  old  ?  Is  he 
Uie  God  of  the  hills,  and  not  the  God  of  the  valleys?  I  have  already 
put  it  in  another  shape  to  you.  In  his  name  I  ask  you,  can  anything 
oe  too  hard  for  the  Lord  ?  Perhaps  in  your  sphere  of  service  you  have 
grown  so  dispirited  that  you  are  inclined  to  say,  '^  I  may  as  well  give 
up  all  further  eflPort;  no  good  will  result  from  my  endeavours." 
Bnt  what  have  you  told  the  Master,  and  what  have  you  sought  at  his 
haiid  ?  Have  you  told  him  all  your  discouragements  ?  Have  you  asked 
him  to  speak  with  power,  and  has  he  refused  you  ?  If  so,  then  give  it 
np,  bnt  not  till  then,  for  he  can  even  now  '*  say  to  the  north,  Give  up  ; 
and  to  the  south.  Keep  not  back ;  "  and  as  when  he  said  to  the  thick 
primaeval  darkness,  *^  Let  there  be  light,"  and  the  light  leaped  into 
oeiog,  and  the  darkness  fied,  so  can  he,  amid  the  gross  darkness  of  our 
hnge  city,  or  the  not  less  dense  darkness  of  our  villages,  create  light 
to  our  astonishment  and  to  his  glory.  It  is  the  King's  word  we  want — 
nothing  short  of  it,  and  nothing  more.  We  must  get  that  by  prayer : 
we  must  wait  upon  him  with  importunity.  If  there  be  only  two  or 
three  whose  hearts  break  over  the  desolations  of  the  church,  if  we  have 
only  half  a  dozen  that  resolve  to  give  the  Lord  no  rest  till  he  establish 
wa  make  Jerusalem  a  praise  in  the  earth,  we  shall  see  great  things 


474  METllOPOLITAN  TABEBNACLE  PULPIT. 

yet.  A  handful  of  people  who  resolve  if  a  blessing  is  to  be  had  tiNf 
will  have  it,  and  that  if  souls  are  not  saved  it  shall  be  the  Bovereigiih 
of  God  that  prevents  it  and  nothing  else :  such  a  mere  handfal  ndl 
win  the  day.  If  they  tvill  have  souls  saved,  if  so  they  plead  aad 
agonize,  oh!  then  the  Lord  will  turn  his  gracious  hand,  and  send  i 
plenteous  stream  of  blessing  upon  their  district ;  for  whoe  he  wilh 
It  the  blessing  must  come,  and  he  always  wills  to  display  hia  pioe 
where  and  when  he  leads  his  people  to  pray  for  it. 

Before  I  leave  this  point,  let  me  say  the  power  of  the,  King^  wwd 
is  always  exercised  in  full  consistence  with  the  firee  agency  of  hub. 
You  must  not  think  when  we  say  that  Christ  has  his  will,  and  worta 
omnipotently  in  men's  hearts,  that  we  imagine  that  he  violated  the  free 
asjenoy  which  he  has  created.  He  says  to  the  north,  **  Gire  up,**  and 
that  word  does  it ;  for  a  word  is  a  suitable  instrument  by  which  to  mk 
a  free  ajrent.  The  way  to  make  blocks  of  timber  move  would  be  to 
drag  them,  and  if  we  wish  to  shape  them  we  must  hew  them  with  the 
axe,  or  cut  them  with  a  saw ;  but  the  way  to  deal  with  men  is  to  speik 
with  them.  That  is  how  Jesus  operates.  His  power  is  exerted  ia 
conformity  with  the  laws  of  human  mind.  He  does  not  violate  the 
free  agency  of  man,  though  he  does  as  he  wills  with  man.  His  word 
is  an  instrument  consistent  with  our  mental  nature,  and  he  nsesthit 
word  wisely.  He  says  to  the  north,  " Give  up:"  he  says  to  the sonth, 
"  Keep  not  back.**  His  word  touches  the  secret  spring,  and  sets  all  in 
motion.  No  man  is  ever  taken  to  heaven  against  his  will,  thooffh  I  do 
not  believe  any  man  ever  went  there  of  his  own  free  will  till  6od*i 
sovereign  grace  enlightened  him  and  made  him  willing.  Tonnnut 
not  suppose  that  Christ  conquers  human  hearts  by  physicsd  ccnnpnlsioi^ 
such  as  the  King  of  Prussia  used,  for  instance,  in  subduing  France,  or 
such  as  a  man  uses  in  driving  a  horse.  The  Lord  knows  how  to  leave 
us  free,  nnd  yet  to  make  us  do  his  bidding,  and  therein  lies  the  beaatj 
of  gospel  influences.  Suppose  man's  will  to  be  a  room;  if  yot 
and  I  want  to  open  it,  we  break  in  the  lock;  we  do  not  nnderstand 
the  true  method;  but  the  Lord  has  the  key,  and  knows  how  to 
open  the  door  without  a  wrench.  Without  violating  even  the  most 
delicate  spring  in  the  watch,  the  maker  knows  how  to  regulate  it,  Grooo 
draws,  but  it  is  with  bands  of  a  man  ;  it  rules,  but  it  is  with  a  Boeptn 
of  love.  The  fact  is,  the  great  dispute  between  Calvinists  and  Arminianf 
has  arisen  very  much  through  not  understanding  one  another,  and  from 
one  brother  saying,  "What  I  hold  is  the  truth'* — and  the  other  sayingi 
"What  I  hold  is  truth,  and  nothing  else.**  The  men  need  lomcDOogf 
to  knock  both  their  heads  together,  and  ftise  their  beliefe  into  one.  They 
need  one  cai)acious  brain  to  hold  both  the  truths  which  their  two  litib 
heads  contain ;  for  God*s  word  is  neither  all  on  one  side  nor  alt<^|eiher 
on  the  other  :  it  overlaps  all  systems,  and  defies  all  formnlaries.  It 
lays  the  full  responsibility  of  his  ruin  on  man,  but  all  the  power  and 
glory  of  grace  it  ascribes  to  .God  ;  and  it  is  wise  of  us  to  do  the  BamOi 
The* great  King  doeth  as  he  wills  among  men  as  well  as  amon'j  the 
armies  of  heaven.  Who  shall  stay  his  hand  or  say  unto  him,  "  What 
doest  thou?"  He  rules  men  as  men,  and  not  as  inanimate  stones.  He 
has  a  sceptre  which  is  adapted  to  mind  and  spirit.  The  weapons  of  hii 
warfare  are  not  earn  n  I :  his  forces  rule  the  heart,  the  mind,  the  whok 


NORTH  JLND  SOUTH.  476 

manhood  as  he  has  made  it ;  and  so  he  conqners,  and  becomes  the 
happy  king  of  willing  subjects,  who,  thongh  subdued  bj  power,  are 
happy  to  own  his  sway.  Thus  much  on  the  first  point — ^the  royalty  of 
the  word. 

II.  Now  we  will  consider  the  word  of  botaltt.  The  Emg  saith 
^  to  the  north,  Giye  up ;  and  to  the  south.  Keep  not  back." 

Wo  will  not  spend  many  minutes  over  these  words,  but  just  briefly 
hint  at  what  meaning  may  be  drawn  from  them.  There  are  some  persons 
to  whom,  when  the  powerful  word  of  grace  comes,  it  speaks  in  this  way 
—'^  Give  up  I  give  up."  There  are  other  persons  in  another  state  of 
mind  to  whom,  whenerer  the  word  of  salvation  comes,  it  says,  *'  Keep 
not  bade ;  keep  not  back."  Now,  to  some  we  find  that  it  comes  in  this 
way:  "  Give  up;  give  up."  You  say,  "I  am  righteous;  I  am  no  worse 
thfui  others.  1  have  broken  the  law,  but  not  much ;  my  sins  are  trivial. 
I  cannot  deserve  to  be  cast  into  hell  for  my  small  offences.  I  have 
been — not  perfect,  but  as  righteous  as  most.  I  have  done  this,  I  have 
done  that,  I  have  done  the  other."  Ah,  dear  friend,  the  sword  of 
divine  grace  will  kill  all  this;  and  the  message  that  God*s  mercy 
msxdB  to  you  to-day  is,  *'  Give  up."  Renounce  your  fancied  goodness 
and  deceitful  self-esteem.  Oh,  give  up  that  spinning ;  it  is  a  poor 
trade  to  spin  cobwebs.  Give  it  up.  Your  father,  Adam,  taught  you  to 
make  aprons  of  fig-leaves;  but  it  was  after  he  had  fallen.  It  is  a  bad 
business:  give  it  up.  Your  own  works  will  never  cover  you  as  you 
should  be  covered;  there  is  a  better  righteousness  than  yours  to 
be  had ;  there  is  a  better  footing  to  stand  before  God  upon  than  any- 
thing you  have  done.  Your  reftiges  are  all  refuges  of  lies;  give  them  up. 
That  pretty  righteousness  of  yours,  which  looks  so  white,  is  only  white 
because  your  eyes  are  blind ;  if  you  could  see  it,  it  is  all  as  black  as 
filth  can  make  it.  You  conceive  your  robe  to  be  new  and  fair,  but  it  is 
all  riddled  through  nnd  through  with  holes.  The  worms  have  devoured  it; 
it  is  all  moth-eaten  and  decayed.  Give  ic  up.  Oh,  give  up  that 
Pharisaic  mouthful,  *^  God,  I  thnnk  thee,"  and  betake  thyself  to  the 
publican's  prayer,  '*  God  be  merciful  to  me,  a  sinner."  Give  up  thy  self- 
trust;  it  is  a  painted  lie,  a  rotten  plank,  a  foul  deception,  a  false  traitor; 
it  promises  salvation,  but  it  brings  sure  damnation.  Jesus  is  the 
sinner's  only  hope.    Give  up  every  other  reliance. 

Then,  too,  you  have  an  opposition  in  your  hearts  to  the  gospel.  Con- 
cerning that  also  the  word  saith  to  you,  **  Give  up."  Perhaps  you 
were  prejudiced  against  it  foolishly  and  ignorantly ;  before  you  ever 
heard  it  you  felt  persuaded  you  should  not  like  it.  Possibly  you  have 
been  brought  up  to  a  religion  of  forms;  you  hardly  think  that  salvation 
can  be  by  simple  faith  in  Jesus  Christ ;  you  feel  a  great  deal  of  attach- 
ment to  that  regeneration  of  yours  which  was  wrougnt  in  your  baptism, 
and  to  that  confirmation  of  yours  bestowed  by  the  bishop's  fingers. 
Besides,  you  have  been  so  regular  in  your  religion  up  till  now,  that  you 
can  hardly  brook  to  be  told  that  the  whole  bundle  of  it  is  mere  rubbish, 
not  worth  the  time  you  have  spent  on  it.  You  cannot  endure  to  be 
told  that — 

"  None  but  Jesus  can  do  helpless  sinners  good." 

But  rest  assured,  the  sooner  you  give  up  all  those  flattering  reliances  of 


476  METBOPOLTTAN  TABEB17A0LE  PULPIT. 

yours  the  better  for  you,  for  there  is  nothing  in  them.  E^en 
that  God  has  commanded  are  only  of  spiritual  use  to  spiritual  men,  and 
since  you  are  not  a  spiritual  man  they  cannot  profit  you.  Hare  you  ia 
your  heart  an  opposition  to  Christ  ?  Can  tou  not  yield  to  him  as  God? 
Can  you  not  stoop  to  be  saved  entirely  by  his  merits,  and  acknowledge 
him  for  your  Lawgiver,  and  Teacher,  and  Guide  ?  Then  as  the  tot 
saith  so  would  I  say,  and  may  the  Lord  apply  the  word :  **  dire  up; 
give  up."  There  is  no  salvation  for  thee  till  thou  ^'gire  up"  all 
ceremonial  hopes  and  formal  confidences.  Strike  the  colonrB,  msn, 
before  a  broadside  goes  through  thee ;  for  depend  upon  it,  if  thon 
yield  not  in  one  way  thou  wilt  in  another.  Thou  shalt  either  faretk 
or  bow ;  thou  shalt  either  turn  or  bum ;  that  is  the  altematiTe  to 
eveiy  man  of  woman  bom :  he  must  turn  away  from  his  enmity  to 
Christ,  and  yield  himself  up  to  his  love,  or  else  be  shall  find  the  pom 
of  God  in  Christ  to  be  his  destruction. 

It  is  possible,  dear  friends,  that  your  opposition  to  Jesus  Christ  hiB 
taken  the  form  of  the  love  of  a  favourite  sin.  Now,  there  is  nothiDg 
more  certain  than  this,  that  you  cannot  be  saved  and  keep  your  sini: 
they  must  be  parted  with.  No  man  can  carry  fire  in  his  bosom  and  jet 
be  safe  from  burning.  While  you  drink  the  poison,  it  must  and  mH 
work  death  in  yon.  The  thief  cannot  expect  mercy  while  he  keeps  tbe 
goods  he  has  stolen.  John  Bunyan  says  that  one  day,  when  he  was 
playing  **  cat "  on  a  Sunday,  on  the  village  green,  he  thought  he  heard  a 
voice  saying  to  him  :  *'  Wilt  thou  have  thy  sins  and  go  to  hell,  or  kare 
thy  sins  and  go  to  heaven  ?*'  That  question  is  put  to  eveiy  man  who 
hears  the  gospel  faithfully  preached.  Most  men  in  their  h^urt  of  hearto 
would  1  ike  to  have  their  sins  and  go  to  heaven  too.  But  that  cannbt  be; 
while  God  is  just,  and  heaven  is  holy,  and  truth  is  precious,  it  cannot  be. 
What  then  ?  '^  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  ana  the  unrighteous  man 
his  thoughts :  and  let  him  return  nnto  the  Lord,  and  he  will  hare  mercy 
upon  him  ;  and  to  our  God,  for  he  will  abundantly  pardon."  Give  Uf, 
give  up ;  give  up  your  sin.  What  is  the  sin  ?  The  drnnkard's  cop? 
Away  witli  the  bewitching  draught.  Is  it  the  drnnkard's  companjr? 
That  is  as  damnable  as  his  cup ;  renounce  such  society  at  once.  Is  it 
blaspheming?  0  man,  God  rinse  thy  mouth  out  of  such  black  stuff 
as  that !  Have  done  with  a  sin  for  which  there  cannot  be  any  excnae^ 
for  it  cannot  bring  thee  any  pleasure  or  profit,  nor  can  there  be  any 
necessity  for  it :  it  is  a  degrading,  useless,  senseless,  God-provokiog 
crime.  Is  it  some  secret  sin  that  must  not  be  named  lest  the  cheek  of 
modesty  be  reddened  ?  Give  it  up,  friend  ;  it  will  be  much  better  for 
thee  to  lose  it  though  it  were  as  precious  as  thy  right  arm  or  thy  ri^t 
eye,  than  to  keep  it  and  be  cast  into  hell  fire.  The  chamber  of 
wantonness  is  the  gate  of  death,  fiee  from  it  without  delay.  Tbe  bidb 
of  the  fiesh  are  a  deep  ditch,  and  the  abhorred  of  the  Lord  fall  th^n; 
but  as  thou  lovest  thy  soul,  0  young  roan,  escape  like  a  bird  from  the 
fowler  s  snare.  Here  is  the  message  of  God  to  thee :  "  Give  up,  give  up 
thy  sins.'*  Perhaps  though  you  hear  the  summons,  you  trifie  with  it,  ana 
reply, "  Yes ;  I  mean  to  give  them  all  up,  and  I  hope  by  so  doing  I  shall 
find  my  way  to  heaven.  I  shall  deserve  well  of  my  Maker  when  I  have 
denied  myself  all  sinful  pleasures."  But  stop ;  let  me  not  deceive  you: 
this  is  not  all.    I  fear  that  some  men  arc  not  improved  in  their  heairto 


NORTH   AND  SOUTH.  477 

when  they  arc  altered  in  their  outward  behaviour.  I  am  glad  of  the 
(mtward  improyement,  but  I  have  sometimes  fancied  that  they  have  only 
dianged  their  sins,  but  not  given  them  up.  They  show  no  leprosy  in 
their  skin,  but  it  lies  in  their  bone  and  their  flesh.  It  is  little  use 
merely  to  shift  the  region  in  which  sin  sets  up  its  throne  if  its  dominion 
18  still  undestroyed.    It  reminds  one  of  the  verse — 

"  So  when  a  raging  fever  bums, 
We  shift  from  side  to  aide  by  turns  ; 
And  *ti8  a  poor  relief  we  gain 
To  shift  the  place  but  keep  the  pain.** 

What  if  the  man  does  not  go  to  hell  as  a  drunkard,  it  will  not  mend  it 
if  he  is  ruined  by  being  self-righteous;  so  long  as  he  is  lost  I  do  not 
see  that  it  materially  matters  how.  Many  and  many  a  man  has  given 
up  outward  sins  and  set  up  a  self-righteousness  of  his  own,  and  said, 
**  These  be  thy  gods,  0  Israel ;"  and  so  he  fled  from  a  bear,  and  a  lion 
dew  him;  he  leaned  on  a  wall,  and  a  serpent  bit  him.  All  sin  must 
be  cast  out  of  the  throne  of  the  heart,  and  whatever  righteousness  that 
k  not  Christ's  righteousness  must  go  with  it.  I  would  fain  put  the 
■word-point  to  thy  heart,  0  sinner,  and  say,  "  Give  up  all  that  opposes 
Christ ;  "  for  if  thou  do  not  give  it  up,  thy  soul  will  be  lost. 

In  flne,  dear  fnends,  speaking  to  the  children  of  God  as  well  as  to 
Bach  as  are  not  converted,  I  saj,  give  up  all  and  have  Christ ;  give  up 
all  attempts  to  save  yourself,  and  let  Christ  save  you.  Work  afterwards, 
because  he  worketh  in  you  to  will  and  to  do ;  but  now  do  nothing, 
either  great  or  small,  to  make  yourself  righteous,  for  Jesns  did  it, 
did  it  all,  long,  long  ago.  Do  nothing  by  way  of  straining  for  merit, 
bnt  begin  to  do  everything  by  way  of  gratitude.  "Give  up;"  that 
ifl,  give  np  yourself  to  Christ,  whatever  his  will  may  be.  If  it  be  his 
will  that  you  be  sick,  that  you  be  poor,  that  you  die,  give  all  up,  and 
Bay,  *'Thy  will  be  done.  I  resign  all  to  thee,  my  God."  Doth  Jesus 
eommand  you  to  do  anything  ?  Let  it  not  be  irksome  to  you. 
Whatsoever  he  saitli  unto  you,  do  it.  Let  there  be  no  back-stair 
by  which  to  play  the  truant ;  no  keeping  back  of  part  of  the  price  as 
though  you  would  not  do  Christ's  will,  except  in  some  points.  Give 
np  unreservedly,  and  make  no  provision  for  the  flesh.  Let  his  will 
be  your  will.  Yield  entirely;  and  if  you  have  anything  in  this  world  of 
substance,  of  talent,  of  opportunity,  "Give  up."  Begin  with  resigna- 
tion, go  on  to  obedience,  and  finish  with  consecration.  "Give  up,  give 
np  "  till  all  is  given  up,  body,  soul,  and  spirit,  a  reasonable  sacritice  to 
him,  till  you  can  say : 

**  NoAv,  Lord,  I  would  be  thine  alone, 
And  wholly  live  to  thee." 

I  perceive  that  ray  text  has  grown  from  a  word  to  the  sinner  who  has 
to  be  conquered  into  a  word  directed  to  Christ's  nearest  and  dearest 
friends,  even  to  those  who  are  the  soldiers  of  his  army.  It  is  in  effect 
a  lofty,  far-reaching  precept,  and  would  to  God  we  could  live  up  to  it, 
by  presenting  our  all  to  Jesus  our  Lord. 

Let  us  now  spend  a  minute  or  two  on  the  second  word  of  the  King : 
**  Keep  not  back."  Is  there  some  person  within  this  assembly  who  feels 
within  his  heart  the  desire  to  come  and  confess  his  sins  to  his  God  ? 


478  METUOPOLITAN  TABEKXACLE  PULPIT. 

Standing  at  the  filthy  8\Yine-troagh,  does  the  prodigal  say  within  hhtt 
self:  *'  I  will  arise  and  go  unto  my  Father,  and  say  unto  him,  FttUNL 
I  have  sinned"?  ''Keep  not  hack:'*  quench  not  that  holy  flame.  U 
thou  hnst  a  desire  to  come  and  acknowledge  thy  transgressiong  unto  tfai 
pardoning  Saviour,  let  nothing  keep  thee  back — neither  fear,  nor  shuMy 
nor  procrastination,  but  rest  not  till  thou  hast  reached  the  botoa 
of  thy  God  and  acknowledged  all  thy  guilt  before  him.  A  repulse  need 
not  be  feared,  nor  even  an  upbraiding — a  rich,  free,  loving  welooms 
is  sure.     "  Keep  not  back." 

But  is  there  another  who  has  confessed  his  sin,  but  yet  has  found  no 
})eace?  Dost  thou  see  yonder  Ciirist  on  the  cross?  "Ye8,**8ijert 
thou;  "I  know  there  is  life  in  a  look  at  him,  but  may  I  look?"  Mj 
]Mast»n*s  message  to  thee  is,  **  Keep  not  back;  keep  not  back,"  br 
whosoever  looketh  shall  be  made  whole,  and  none  are  forbidden  t0 
look.  Docs  the  crowd  around  the  Saviour  hinder  thee,  thou  sick  tol 
dyinjr  soul  ?  Be  not  baffled  by  difficulty,  but  persevere.  Press  into 
the  thickest  of  the  throng,  for  if  thou  do  but  touch  the  hem  of 
his  garment  thou  shalt  be  made  whole.  "  Keep  not  back  ;  keep 
not  back."  Tliou  mayst  believe  in  Jesus  now !  Maijat  /  Nay,  thoi 
art  commanded  to  do  ic ;  and  thou  art  threatened  if  thoa  do  not,  whiek 
proves  that  thou  hast  jwrmission  and  something  more.  It  is  written: 
'*  He  that  bclieveth  not  shall  be  damned."  0  man,  it  is  but  another  way 
of  saying  thou  hast  a  full  permission  to  do  it,  for  thou  art  threatened  if 
thou  do  it  not.  Come  thou,  then,  come  thou,  now,  right  joyftilly. 
"  Kec])  not  back."  Confess  thy  sin  with  re])eutance,  and  lay  it  on  Chrut 
by  faith,  and  thou  shalt  be  siutHl. 

Dear  brethren  and  sisters,  manv  of  vou  have  come  to  Christ  and  btvo 
been  saved,  and  to  you  the  text  says,  **  Keej)  not  back,"  in  another  senw. 
Do  not  keep  back  from  confessiufr  Christ.   If  you  have  the  love  of  Jesni 
Christ  in  your  soul,  confess  it,  tell  it  to  others.    Never  be  ashamed  rf 
your  Lord  and  Master.     Come  and  unite  with  his  church  and  peopiei 
It  is  due  to  the  church ;  it  is  due  to  the  preacher  who  was  the  means  of 
your  conversion  ;  it  is  due  es|>ecially  to  your  Lord  and  Master  that yoi 
**  Keep  not  back."    I  have  heard  of  some  who  keep  back  because  the 
church  is  not  perfect.    And  you  are  very  perfect  I  dare  say  !    Why,  if 
the  church  were  perfect  we  bhould  not  endure  you  in  it,  my  captioai 
friend.     I  have  no  doubt  whatever  that  you  will  lind  the  chnrch  quite 
as  perfect  as  you  are.      There  are  others  who  keep  aloof  from  tba 
people  of  God  because  they  feel  they  are  not  perfect  themselves.    My 
dear  friend,  if  you  were  ])erfect  we  should  not  want  yon,  becaose  yoa 
would  be  the  only  ])erfect  member  among  us,  and  having  a  vcir  un- 
perf'L'Ct  pastor,  I  do  not  know  what  we  should  do  with  you ;  we  shonkl 
lind  you  such  a  speckled  bird  among  us,  that  we  should  probably  pwv 
the  Lord  to  take  you  home  to  heaven  at  once.     I  should  like  to  bav« 
you  become  jxirfect,  and  the  nearer  perfection  the  better — but  still  if 
yon  make  no  i)rofession  of  faith  till  you  are  sinless,  it  will  not  lie  thli 
side  the  grave.     Nay,  confess  Christ,  for  is  it  not  written :  **  He  that 
with  liis  heart  bclieveth,  and  with  his  mouth  maketh  confession  of 
hini,  shall  be  saved"?     Do  not  forget  the  confession  of  the  moatb. 
**  Keep  not  back."    And  when  you  have  done  that,  if  there  be  any 
Christian  excellency  that  can  be  reached,  do  not  despair  of  reaching  il^ 


NORTH  AND  SOUTH.  479 

Sep  not  back."  And  if  perfection  itself  be  attainable,  never  be 
«nt  till  you  get  it.  If  you  are  a  child  of  God  you  never  will 
self-satisfied,  you  will  be  always  crying :  "  Not  as  though  I  had 
ady- attained,  either  were  already  perfect :  but  I  follow  afbsr,  if  that 
ay  apprehend  that  for  which  also  1  am  apprehended  of  Christ  Jesus.*' 
bat  you  may  never  be  content  with  yourself !  Self-satisfaction  is  the 
'h  of  progress.  You  have  come  into  the  lowest  seat  at  the  feast,  but 
IB  saith :  "  Friend,  come  up  higher ; "  and  when  you  get  into  a  higher 
n,  and  enter  into  closer  communion  with  him,  he  will  say  to  yon, 
riend,  come  up  higher.*'  Do  not  hesitate  to  climb  higher  in  grace  and 
)wship.  Let  your  prayer  be, "  Nearer  to  thee,  my  6oa,  nearer  to  thee.** 
insatiable  in  the  longings  of  your  soul;  hunger  and  thirst  after 
itcousness ;  covet  earnestly  the  best  gifts.    Grow  in  grace,  and  in 

knowledge  of  your  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  '^  Keep  not 
Ic."   There  is  no  point  in  grace  which  we  are  prohibited  from  aim- 

at.    We  ought  none  of  us  to  say, "  I  am  all  I  can  ever  be.**     Oh, 

let  us  reach  to  the  front  ranks  by  God's  grace;  for  he  says, 
eep  not  back." 

iCt  me  add,  if  there  be  a  brother  who  could  do  more  for  Christ  than 
is  doing,  let  him  "  Keep  not  back."  Could  you  preach  ?  Well^ 
*e  arc  plenty  of  places  needing  occasional  ministry,  and  others  that 
quite  destitute.  I  do  not  know  a  nobler  occupation  for  a  man  who 
1  business  in  London  than  for  him  to  be  maintaining  himself  by 
shop,  or  whatever  else  his  calling  may  be,  and  going  out  to  suburban 
iges  on  the  Sabbath  to  preach.    I  often  wonder  more  pereons  do 

imitate  the  example  of  some  good  brethren,  whom  I  could  name, 
)  are  in  their  business  diligent,  and  who  are  also  fervent  in  spirit 
heir  Master's  work.  What  reason  can  there  be  that  for  everv  little 
rch  there  should  be  a  pastor  specially  set  apart  for  the  wwk  ?     It 

very  desirable  thing  wherever  there  are  enough  Christian  people  to 
able  to  support  the  minister  that  there  should  be  such  ;  but  I 
eve  we  very  much  hamper  ourselves  in  our  Christian  work  through 
ays  imagining  that  a  paid  person  set  apart  to  preach  is  necessary 

every  Christian  church.  There  ought  to  be  more  farmers  who 
cate  themselves,  and  preach  in  their  own  bams  or  on  the  village 
5ns.  There  ought  to  be  more  men  of  business  in  London  who 
k  to  improve  their  minds,  that  they  may  pi'each  acceptably 
where  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ;  and  I  hope  the  time  will  come 
m  our  dear  friends,  the  members  of  churches  in  London,  will  not 
so  backward  as  thev  are,  but  will  come  forward  and  speak  to 

honour  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  If  yon  cannot  edify  a  thousand,  per- 
is you  can  influence  ten ;  if  you  cannot  with  a  regular  congrega- 
1  continue  to  find  fresh  matter  year  after  year  (and  believe  me  that 

very  difficult  thing),  yet  you  can  preach  a  sermon  here  and  a  sermon 
re,  and  tell  to  different  companies  the  same  story  of  the  Saviour's 
3.  I  do  not  know  what  special  work  you  can  do,  but  something  is 
bin  your  power,  and  from  that  **  Keep  not  back."  Besides,  there  are  all 

street  comers.  In  spring  and  sunmier,  how  delightful  to  stand 
he  thick  of  the  throng  and  uplift  the  Crucified  One !  Of  course,  you 
sure  to  have  a  congregation  out  of  doors,  and  a  congregation  that  is 
er  attentive,  and  sometimes  rather  inquisit've,  and  do  not  need  to 


480  METROPOLITiVN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

be  80  inconveniently  crowded  as  we  are  in  this  Tabernacle.  Tjike  the 
wide  Bwce}),  cast  the  big  net,  and  hope  for  fish.  If  you  have  any  grace 
or  gift,  *'  Keep  not  back."  "Alas  !"  munnurs  the  glowworm,  **  Imean 
to  shnt  np  my  lamp,  and  hide  under  those  damp  weeds,  and  never  shine 
again."  What  is  the  matter  with  you  ?  "  Why,"  says  he,  "  I  have  seen 
the  sun  ;  I  shall  never  shine  again  after  seeing  the  sun."  That  glow- 
worm is  stupid.  If  it  were  wise,  it  would  say,  "  I  have  looked  upon 
the  sun ;  and  I  perceive  with  shame  that  my  lamp  is  but  a  poor  light, 
but  for  that  reason  I  must  use  it  the  more  diligently.  The  sun  maj 
well  hide  its  light  after  twelve  hours  are  over;  but  I  must  try  to 
glimmer  during  the  whole  twenty-four  hours,  and  so  give  as  much  light 
us  I  can,  little  though  it  be/'  You  complain  that  you  have  bnt  uoe 
talent  ;  that  is  the  reason  for  being  doubly  diligent  with  it.  If  yonbsid 
five,  they  ought  to  be  fully  used  :  but  if  you  have  only  one,  you  mm 
put  all  your  wits  to  work  to  make  something  more  of  it.  At'any  Rite, 
"  Keep  not  back." 

"  Well,"  says  one,  **  I  think  I  could  do  something,  but  I  am  of  a 
retiring  disposition."  I  am  afraid  if  I  had  been  in  the  French  army  in 
the  late  war,  I  should  be  very  much  of  the  same  disposition  ;  but  in  i 
soldier,  as  a  rule,  a  retiring  disposition  in  the  hour  of  battle  is  not  mnd 
commended  by  his  captain.  You  who  are  so  modest  (shall  I  sav  so 
cowardly?)  that  you  cannot  do  for  Christ  what  you  ought  to  do,  will 
have  an  account  to  settle  with  yonr  consciences  one  of  these  daya, 
which  will  cost  yon  a  world  of  sorrow.  Breakthrough  this  bashfnlnoss 
this  InzincsR  (for  it  comes  to  that  in  the  long  nin),  this  silly,  wicked, 
shame.  Pride  must  'also  be  sliiin,  for  this  hinders  many.  They 
cannot  be"*  so  prominent  as  others,  and  therefore  shun  the  work 
oltojicther.  (Jet  rid  of  all  that  cripples  you,  shake  all  off  by  the  power 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  my  dear  brethren,  and  *' Keep  not  back,"  for  who 
knows  but  that  you  may  yet  bring  sinners  to  Jesus  JWiiy  save  a  sool 
from  death,  and  hide  a  multitude  of  sins,  through  God's  eternal  Spirit 
May  it  be  so,  for  Christ's  sake.     Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Isaiah  xliii 


IWrfro^flKtan  SlJabcmacU  iitljtt. 


■=•» 


LOVE'S  LOGIC. 


Delivkred  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  August  27th,  1871,  by 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT     THE     METROPOLITAN     TABERNACLE,     NEWINOTON. 


"TVo  love  him  because  ho  first  lovod  us.'* — 1  John  iv.  19. 

• 

This  is  a  great  doctrinal  truth,  and  I  might  with  much  propriety  preach 
•a  doctrinal  sermon  from  it,  of  which  the  sum  and  substance  would  be  the 
soyereign  grace  of  (Jod.    God's  love  is  evidently  prior  to  ours  :  **  He 
first  loved  ns."    It  is  also  clear  enough  from  the  text  that  God's  love  is 
tiie  canse  of  ours,  for  '*  We  love  him  because  he  first  loved  us."    There- 
fore, going  back  tb  old  time,  or  rather  before  all  time,  when  we  find 
God  loving  us  with  an  everlasting  love,  we  gather  that  the  reason  of 
fats 'choice  is  not  because  we  loved  him,  but  because  he  willed  to  love 
OS.    His  reasons,  and  he  had  reasons  (for  we  read  of  the  counsel  of  his 
will),  are  known  to  himself,  but  they  are  not  to  be  found  in  any  inherent 
goodness  in  ns,  or  which  was  foreseen  to  be  in  us.    We  were  chosen 
simply  because  he  will  have  mercy  on  whom  he  will  have  mercy.    He 
loved  us  because  he  would  love  us.    The  gift  of  his  dear  Son,  which 
was  a  close  consequent  upon  his  choice  of  his  people,  was  too  great 
a    sacrifice   on    God's   part    to  have  been  drawn  from  him  by  any 
goodness  in  the  creature.    It  was  not  possible  for  the  highest  piety 
to  have  deserved  so  vast  a  boon  as  the  gift  of  the  Only-begotten ; 
it  was  not  possible  for  an3rthing  in  man  to  have  merited  the  incarna- 
tion  and  the  passion  of  the  Kedeemer.      Our  redemption,  like  our 
election,  springs  from  the  spontaneous  self-originating  love  of  God. 
^nd  onr  regeneration,  in  which  we  are  made  actual  partakers  of  the 
divine  blessings  in  Jesus  Christ,  was  not  of  us,  nor  by  us.    We  were 
not  converted  because  we  were  already  inclined  that  way,  neither  were 
we  regenerated  because  some  good  thing  was  in  us  by  nature ;  but  we 
owe  onr  new  birth  entirely  to  his  potent  love,  which  dealt  with  us 
effectnally,  turning  ns  from  death  to  life,  from  darkness  to  light., 
and  from  the  alienation  of  our  mind  and  the  enmity  of  our  spirit  into 
that  delightful  path  of  love,  in  which  we  are  now  travelling  to  the  skies. 
Ab  believers  on  Christ's  name  we  "  were  bom,  not  of  blood,  nor  of  the 
No.  1,C08. 


482  METROPOUTAN  TABBRITACLB  PULPIT. 


• 


will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God."    The  sam  and 
snbBtance  of  the  text  is  that  God's  uncaused  love,  springing  up  within 
himself,  has  been  the  sole  means  of  bringing  ns  into  the  condition  of 
loving  him.     Our  love  to  him  is  like  a  trickling  rill,  speeding  its  way  to 
the  ocean  because  it  first  came  fix)m  the  ocean.    All  the  rivers  run  into 
the  sea,  but  their  floods  first  arose  from  it:    the  clonds  that  were 
exhaled  from  the  mighty  main  distilled  in  showers  and  filled  the  water- 
brooks.     Here  was  their  first  cause  and  prime  origin ;  and,  as  if  th^ 
recognised  the  obligation,  they  pay  tribute  in  return  to  the  parait 
source.    The  ocean  love  of  God,  so  oroad  that  even  the  wing  of  unagi- 
nation  could  not  traverse  it,  sends  forth  its  treasures  of  the  rain  d 
grace,  which  drop  upon  our  hearts,  which  are  as  the  pastures  of  the 
wilderness  ;  they  make  our  hearts  to  overflow,  and  in  streams  of  grati- 
tude the  life  imparted  flows  back  again  to  God.     All  good  things  are  of 
thee,  Great  God ;  thy  goodness  creates  our  good  ;  thine  infinite  love  to 
us  draws  forth  our  love  to  thee. 

But,  dear  friends,  I  trust  after  many  years  of  instruction  in  the 
doctrines  of  our  holy  faith,  I  need  not  keep  to  the  beaten  doctrinal 
track,  but  may  lead  you  in  a  parallel  path,  in  which  the  same  truth  may 
be  seen  from  another  point.  I  purpose  to  preach  an  experimental 
sermon,  and  possibly  this  will  be  even  more  in  accordance  with  the  nm 
of  the  passage  and  the  mind  of  its  writer,  than  a  doctrinal  disoooise. 
We  shall  view  the  text  as  a  fact  which  we  have  tested  and  proved  in  onr 
own  consciousness.  Under  this  aspect  the  statement  of  the  text  is 
this : — a  sense  of  the  love  ofOod  td  us  is  the  tnain  cause  of  our  Iwe  to  km. 
When  we  believe,  know,  and  feel  that  God  loves  us ,  we,  as  a  natmal 
result,  love  him  in  return;  and  in  proportion  as  onr  knowledge 
increases,  our  faith  strengthens,  and  our  conviction  deepens  that  we 
are  really  beloved  of  God;  we,  from  the  very  constitution  of  onr 
being,  are  constrained  to  yield  our  hearts  to  God  in  return.  The 
discourse  of  this  morning,  therefore,  will  run  in  that  channd.  Ood 
grant  it  may  be  blessed  to  each  of  us  by  his  Holy  Spirit. 

I.  At  the  outset  we  will  consider  the  indispensable  neoessftt  (ff 
LOVE  TO  God  IN  the  heart. 

There  are  some  graces  which  in  their  vigour  are  not  absolutely  essen- 
tial to  the  bare  existence)  of  spiritual  life,  though  very  important  fo  its 
healthy  growth ;  but  love  to  God  must  be  in  the  heart,  or  else  there  is 
no  grace  there  whatever.  If  any  man  love  not  God,  he  is  not  a  renewed 
man.  Love  to  God  is  a  mark  which  is  always  set  upon  Christ's  sheqp^ 
and  never  set  upon  any  others.  In  enlarging  upon  this  most  important 
truth,  I  would  call  your  attention  to  the  connection  of  the  text.  Yon 
will  find  in  the  seventh  verse  of  this  chapter,  that  love  to  God  is  set 
down  as  being  a  necessary  mark  of  the  new  Urih.  "  Every  one  that 
loveth  is  bom  of  God,  and  knoweth  God."  I  have  no  rights  therefore, 
to  believe  that  I  am  a  regenerated  person  unless  my  heart  truly  and  sin- 
cerely loves  God.  It  is  vain  for  me,  if  I  love  not  God,  to  quote  the 
register  which  records  an  ecclesiastical  ceremony,  and  say  that  this 
regenerated  me ;  it  certainly  did  no  such  thing,  or  the  sure  residt  woold 
have  followed.  If  I  have  been  regenerated  I  may  not  be  perfect,  but  this 
one  thing  I  can  say,  '^  Lord  thou  knowest  all  tmngs,  thou  knoweat  that 
I  love  thee."    When  by  believing  we  receive  the  privilege  to  become  tlia 


LOVE'S  LOGIC.  483 

sons  of  God,  we  receive  also  the  nature  of  sons,  and  with  filial  love  we 
•cry,  "  Abba,  Father."  There  is  no  exception  to  this  rule ;  if  a  mnn 
loves  not  God,  neither  is  he  bom  of  God.  Show  me  a  fire  without 
heat,  then  show  me  regeneration  tliat  does  not  produce  love  to  God; 
for  as  the  sun  must  give  forth  its  light,  so  must  a  soul  that  has  been 
<!reated  anew  by  divine  grace  display  its  nature  by  sincere  affec- 
tion towards  God."  *'  Ye  must  be  bom  again,"  but  ye  are  not  born 
«gain  unless  ye  love  God.     How  indispensable,  then,  is  love  to  God. 

In  the  eighth  verse  we  are  told  also  that  love  to  God  is  a  niark  of  our 
knowing  God.  Trae  knowledge  is  essential  to  salvation.  God  does 
not  save  us  in  the  dark.  He  is  our  '^  light  and  our  salvation.*'  We  are 
renewed  m  knowledge  after  the  image  of  him  that  created  us.  Now, 
**  he  that  loveih  not  knoweth  not  G<3,  for  God  is  love."  All  you  liave 
•ever  been  taught  from  the  pulpit,  all  you  have  ever  studied  from  the 
Scriptures,  all  you  have  ever  gathered  from  the  leamed,  all  you  have 
collected  from  the  libraries,  all  this  is  no  knowledge  of  God  at  all 
unless  you  love  God ;  for  in  trae  religion,  to  love  and  to  know  God  are 
synonymous  terms.  Without  love  you  remain  in  ignorance  still, 
ignorance  of  the  most  unhappy  and  ruinous  kind.  All  attainments  are 
transitory,  if  love  be  not  as  a  salt  to  preserve  them ;  tongues  must 
cease  and  knowledge  must  vanish  away ;  love  alone  abides  for  ever.  This 
love  you  must  have  or  be  a  fool  for  ever.  All  the  children  of  the  true 
Zion  are  taught  of  the  Lord,  but  you  are  not  taught  of  God  unless  you 
love  God.  oee  then  that  to  be  devoid  of  love  to  God  is  to  be  devoid  of 
all  tme  knowledge  of  God,  and  so  of  all  salvation. 

Further,  the  chapter  teaches  us  that  love  to  God  is  the  root  of  love 
io  others.  The  eleventh  verse  says,  **  Beloved,  if  God  so  loved  us,  we 
ought  also  to  love  one  another.  If  we  love  one  another,  God  dwelleth 
in  us,  and  his  love  is  peifected  in  us."  Now  no  man  is  a  Christian  who 
does  not  love  Christians.  He,  who,  being  in  the  church,  is  yet  not  of 
it  heart  and  soul,  is  but  an  intruder  in  the  family.  But  since  love  to 
our  brethren  springs  out  of  love  to  our  one  common  father,  it  is  plain 
that  we  must  have  love  to  that  father,  or  else  we  shall  fail  in  one  of  the 
indispensable  marks  of  the  children  of  God.  "  We  know  that  we  have 
passed  from  death  unto  life,  because  we  love  the  brethren ;  "  but  we 
cannot  truly  love  the  brethren  unless  we  love  the  father  ;  therefore, 
lacking  love  to  God,  we  lack  love  to  the  church,  which  is  an  essential 
foark  of  grace. 

Again,  keeping  to  the  run  of  the  passage,  you  will  find  by  the 
eighteenth  verse,  that  love  to  God  is  a  chief  means  of  ihnt  holy  peace 
vhich  is  an  essential  mark  of  a  Christian.  "Being  justified  by  faith, 
we  have  peace  with  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,"  but  where 
there  is  no  love  there  is  no  such  peace,  for  fear,  which  hath  torment, 
distresses  the  soul ;  hence  love  is  the  indispensable  companion  of  faith, 
and  when  they  come  togetlier,  peace  is  the  result.  Where  there  is  fer- 
vent love  to  God  there  is  set  up  a  holy  familiarity  with  God,  and  from 
this  flow  satisfaction,  delight,  and  rest.  Love  must  co-operate  with 
fiiitii  and  cast  out  fear,  so  that  the  soul  may  have  boldness  before  God. 
Oh  !  Christian,  thou  canst  not  have  the  nature  of  God  implanted  within 
thee  by  regeneration,  it  cannot  reveal  itself  in  love  to  the  brotherhood, 
it  cannot  blossom  with  the  fair  flowers  of  peace  and  joy,  except  thine 


484  METUOl'OLlTAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

atfection  be  set  ujk)!!  God.  Let  him  then  be  thine  exceeding  joy.  De- 
light thyself  also  in  the  Lord.     0  love  the  Lord  ye  his  saints. 

We  also  see,  if  we  turn  again  to  St.  John's  epistle  and  noisne  his 
observations  to  the  next  chapter  and  the  third  verse,  that  lore  is  the 
spring  of  (rue  obedience.  **  This  is  the  love  of  God,  that  we  keep  his 
commandments.*'  Now  a  man  who  is  not  obedient  to  God's  eommand- 
ments  is  evidently  not  a  true  believer;  for,  although  good  works  do  not 
save  us,  yet,  being  saved,  believers  are  sure  to  prodnce  good  worki 
Though  title  fruit  \^  not  the  root  of  the  tree,  yet  a  well  rooted  tree  will, 
in  its  season,  bring  forth  its  fruits.  So,  though  the  keeping  of  theoom- 
mandments  does  not  make  me  a  child  of  God,  yet,  being  a  child  of  God, 
I  shall  be  obedient  to  my  heavenly  Father.  But  this  I  cannot  be  nnkv 
I  love  God.  A  mere  external  obedience,  a  decent  formal  recognition  of 
the  laws  of  God,  is  not  obedience  in  God's  sight  He  abhors  Uie  sacri- 
fice where  not  the  heart  is  found.  I  must  obey  because  I  lore,  or  dst 
I  have  not  in  spirit  and  in  truth  obeyed  at  all.  See  then,  that  to  pro- 
duce the  indispensable  fruits  of  saving  faith,  there  must  be  lore  to  God; 
for  without  it,  they  would  be  unreal  and  indeed  impossible. 

I  hope  it  is  not  necessary  for  me  to  pursue  this  argument  any  finrther. 
Love  to  God  is  as  natural  to  the  renewed  heart  as  love  to  its  mother  is 
to  a  babe.  Who  needs  to  rqfuson  a  child  into  love  7  As  certainly  as  yoa 
have  the  life  and  nature  of  God  in  you,  you  will  seek  after  the  Lord. 
As  the  spark,  because  it  has  in  it  the  nature  of  fire,  ascends  akft 
to  seek  the  sun,  so  will  your  new-born  spirit  seek  her  God,  from 
whom  she  has  derived  her  life.  Search  yourselves,  then,  and  see 
whether  you  love  God  or  no.  Put  your  hands  on  your  hearts,  and  as 
in  the  sight  of  him,  whose  eyes  are  as  a  flame  of  fire,  answer  to  him ; 
make  him  your  confessor  at  this  hour;  answer  this  one  question: 
**  Lovest  thou  me  ? "   I  trust  very  many  of  you  will  be  able  to  say — 

**  Yes,  we  love  thee  and  adore ; 
Oh,  for  grace  to  love  thee  more." 

This  much  was  necessary  to  bring  us  to  the  second  step  of  onr  dis- 
Com*se.    May  the  Holy  Spirit  lead  us  onward. 

II.  You  see  the  indispensable  importance  of  love  to  God :  let  us  now 

«am   THE    SOURCE    AND    SPRING   OF  TRUE    LOVE  TO  GOD.       "We  lOVe 

ihim  because  he  first  loved  us."  Love  to  God,  wherever  it  really  exists, 
has  been  created  in  the  bosom  by  a  belief  of  God's  love  to  us.  No  man 
loves  God  till  he  knows  that  God  loves  him;  and  every  believer  loves 
God  for  this  reason  first  and  chiefly,  that  God  loves  him.  He  has  seen 
himself  to  be  unworthy  of  divine  favour,  yet  he  has  believed  God's  love  in 
the  gift  of  his  dear  Son,  and  he  has  accepted  the  atonement  that  Christ  has 
made  as  a  proof  of  God's  love,  and  now  being  satisfied  of  the  divine 
affection  towards  him,  he  of  necessity  loves  his  God. 

Observe,  then,  that  love  to  God  does  not  begin  in  the  heart  from  any 
disinterested  admiration  of  the  nature  of  God.  I  believe  that,  after  we 
have  loved  God  because  he  first  loved  us,  we  may  so  grow  in  grace  as  to 
love  God  for  what  he  is.  I  suppose  it  is  possible  for  us  to  be  the  snbjeets 
of  a  state  of  heart  in  which  our  love  spends  itself  npon  the  loyeliness  of 
God  in  his  own  person  :  we  may  come  to  love  him  oecanse  he  is  so  wise, 
so  powerful,  so  good,  so  patient,  so  everything  that  is  lovable.    This  may 


LOVE'S  LOGIC.  485 

be  produced  within  as  as  the  ripe  fruit  of  maturity  in  the  divine  life,  but 
it  is  ne^er  the  first  spring  and  fountain  of  the  grace  of  love  in  any  man's 
heart.  Even  the  apostle  John,  the  man  who  had  looked  within  the  veil 
and  seen  the  excellent  glory  beyond  any  other  man,  and  who  had  leaned 
his  head  upon  the  bosom  of  the  Lord,  and  had  seen  the  Lord's  holiness,  and 
marked  the  inimitable  beauty  of  the  character  of  the  incarnate  God,  even 
John  does  not  say,  "  We  love  him  because  we  admire  him,''  but  **  We  love 
him  because  he  first  loved  us."  For  see,  brethren,  if  this  kind  of  love 
which  I  have  mentioned,  which  is  called  the  love  of  disinterested  admira- 
tion, were  required  of  a  sinner,  I  do  not  see  how  he  could  readily  render 
it.  There  are  two  gentlemen  of  equal  rank  in  society,  and  the  one  is 
not  at  all  obliged  to  the  other ;  now,  they,  standing  on  an  equality,  can 
easily  feel  a  d^interested  admiration  of  each  other's  characters,  and  a 
consequent  disinterested  affection ;  but  I,  a  poor  sinner,  by  nature  sunk 
in  the  mire,  full  of  everything  that  is  evil,  condemned,  guilty  of  death,  so 
that  my  only  desert  is  to  be  cast  into  hell,  am  under  such  obligations  to 
my  Saviour  and  my  God,  that  it  would  be  idle  for  me  to  talk  about  a 
disinterested  affection  for  him,  since  I  owe  to  him  my  life,  my  all. 
Besides,  until  I  catch  the  gleams  of  his  mercy  and  his  loving-kindness 
to  the  guilty,  his  holy,  just,  and  righteous  character  are  not  loveable  to 
me,  I  dread  the  purity  which  condemns  my  defilement,  and  shudder  at 
the  justice  which  will  consume  me  for  mv  sin.  Do  not,  0  seeker, 
trouble  your  heart  with  nice  distinctions  about  disinterested  love,  but 
be  you  content  with  the  beloved  disciple  to  love  Christ  because  he  first 
loved  you. 

Again,  our  love  to  God  does  not  spring  from  the  self-determining 
power  of  the  will.  I  greatly  question  whether  anything  does  in  the 
world,  good  or  bad.  There  are  some  who  set  up  the  will  as  a  kind  of 
deity, — it  doeth  as  it  wills  mth  earth  and  heaven  ;  but  in  truth  the 
will  is  not  a  master  but  a  servant.  To  the  sinner  his  will  is  a  slave ;  and 
in  the  saint,  although  the  will  is  set  free,  it  is  still  blessedly  unc^cr  bonds 
to  God.  Men  do  not  will  a  thing  because  they  will  it,  but  because  their 
affections,  their  passions,  or  their  judgments  infiaence  their  wills  in  that 
direction.  No  man  can  stand  up  and  truly  say,  *'  I,  unbiassed  and 
imaided,  will  to  love  God  and  I  will^  not  to  love  Satan."  Such  proud 
self-assuming  language  would  prove  him  a  liar;  the  man  would  be 
dearly  a  worshipper  of  himself.     A  man  can  only  love  God  when  he  has 

Ssrceived  some  reasons  for  so  doing ;  and  the  first  argument  for  loving 
od,  which  influences  the  intellect  so  as  to  turn  the  affiections,  is  the 
reason  mentioned  in  the  text,  "  Wc  love  him  because  he  first  loved  us." 

Now,  having  thus  set  the  text  in  a  negative  light,  let  us  look  at  it  in  a 
more  positive  manner. 

It  is  certain,  beloved  brethren,  that  faith  in  the  heart  always  precedes 
love.  We  first  believe  the  love  of  God  to  us  before  we  love  God  in 
return.  And,  Oh  what  an  encouraging  truth  this  is.  I,  a  sinner,  do 
not  believe  that  God  loves  me  because  I  feel  I  love  him ;  but  I  first 
believe  that  he  loves  me,  sinner  as  I  am,  and  then  having  believed  that 
gracious  fact,  I  come  to  love  my  Benefactor  in  return.  Perhaps  some 
of  you  seekers  arc  saying  to  yourselves,  ''  Oh,  that  we  could  love  God, 
for  then  we  could  hope  for  mercy."  That  is  not  the  first  step.  Your 
6nt  step  is  to  believe  that  God  loves  you,  and  when  that  tmtn  is  fully 


486  METROPOLITAK  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

fixed  iu  your  soul  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  a  fervent  love  to  God  will  spon- 
taneously issue  from  your  soul,  even  as  flowers  willingly  pour  forth  their 
fragrance  under  the  influence  of  the  dew  and  the  sun.  Every  man  that 
ever  was  saved  had  to  come  to  God  not  as  a  lover  of  God,  but  as  a 
sinner,  and  to  believe  in  God's  love  to  him  as  a  sinner.  We  all  wish  to 
take  money  in  our  sacks  when  we  go  down  hungry  to  this  Eg^t  to  buy 
the  bread  of  life ;  but  it  must  not  be,  heaven's  bread  is  given  to  us 
freely,  and  we  must  accept  it  freely,  without  money  and  without  price. 
Do  you  say,  **  I  do  not  feel  in  my  heart  one  good  emotion ;  I  do  not 
appear  to  possess  one  good  thought;  I  fear  I  have  no  love  to  God  at  alL" 
Do  not  remain  in  unbelief  until  you  feel  this  love,  for  if  you  do,  you  will 
never  believe  at  all.  You  ought  to  love  God,  it  is  true,  but  you  neier 
will  till  you  believe  him,  and  especially  believe  in  his  love  as  revealed  in 
his  only  begotten  Son.  If  you  come  to  God  in  Christ,  and  believe  this 
simple  message:  "  God  was  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  unto  him- 
self, not  imputing  their  trespasses  unto  them,"  you  shall  find  your  heart 
going  out  after  God.  "  Whosoever  believeth  in  Jesus  Christ  shall  not 
perish,  but  have  everlasting  life;"  believest  thou  this  ?  Canst  thounow 
believe  in  Jesus  ;  that  is,  trust  him  ?  Then,  Christ  died  for  thee ;  Qiriit 
the  Son  of  God,  in  thy  stead,  suftered  for  thy  guilt.  God  gave  his  <Mily 
Son  to  die  for  thee.  "  Oh,"  saith  one,  "  if  I  believed  that,  how  I  woaMI 
love  God  I"  Yes,  indeed,  thou  wouldst,  and  that  is  the  only  consideiBr 
tion  which  can  make  thee  do  so.  Thou,  a  sinner,  must  take*Ohrist  to  be 
thy  Saviour,  and  then  love  to  God  shall  spring  up  spontaneously  in  thy 
soul,  as  the  grass  after  showers.  Love  believed  is  the  mother  of  love 
returned.  The  planet  reflects  light,  but  first  of  all  it  receives  it  from  the 
sun ;  the  heliotrope  turns  its  face  to  the  orb  of  day,  but  first  the  sunbeams 
^varm  and  woo  it.  You  shall  turn  to  God,  and  delight  in  God,  and  re- 
joice in  God  ;  but  it  must  be  because  you  iSrat  of  all  believe,  and  know, 
and  confide  iu  the  love  of  God  to  you.  "  Oh,"  saith  one,  "  it  cannot  be 
that  God  sliould  love  an  unloving  sinner,  that  the  pure  One  should  love 
the  impure,  that  the  Ruler  of  all  should  love  his  enemy."  Hear  what 
God  saith  :  "  My  thoughts  are  not  your  thoughts,  neither  are  my  ways 
your  ways,  for  the  heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth ;  so  are  my  ways 
higher  than  your  ways,  and  my  thoughts  than  your  thoughts."  You 
think  that  God  loves  men  because  they  are  godly,  but  listen  to  this: 
"God  commendeth  his  love  towards  us,  in  that,  while  we  were  yet 
sinners  Christ  died  for  us."  "  He  came  not  to  call  the  righteous,  but 
sinners  to  repentance."  **  While  we  were  yet  without  strength,  in  doe 
time  Christ  died  for  the  imgodly."  Think  of  his  "  great  love  wherewith 
he  loved  u?,  even  when  we  were  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins."  God  has 
love  in  his  lieart  towards  those  who  have  nothing  in  them  to  love.  He 
loves  you,  i)oor  soul,  who  feel  that  you  are  most  unloveable ;  loves  you 
who  mourn  over  a  stony  heart,  which  will  not  warm  or  melt  with  lore 
to  him.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  :  "  1  have  blotted  out,  us  a  thick  cloud, 
thy  transgressions,  and,  as  a  cloud,  thy  sins;  return  unto  me;  fori  have 
redeemed  thee."  0  that  God's  gracious  voice  this  morning  might  so 
call  some  of  his  poor  wandering  ones  that  they  may  come  and  believe 
his  love  to  them,  and  then  cast  themselves  at  his  feet  to  be  his  servants 
for  ever. 
Brethren,  rest  assured  that  in  proi)ortion  as  we  are  fully  persuaded  of 


J 


LOVE'S  LOGIC.  487 

}od's  love  to  US,  we  shall  be  affected  with  love  to  him.  Do  not  let  the 
levil  tempt  yoa  to  believe  that  God  does  not  love  you  because  your  love 
s  feeble ;  for  if  he  can  in  any  way  weaken  your  belief  in  God's  love  to  you, 
te  cuts  off  or  diminishes  the  flow  of  the  streams  which  feed  the  sacred 
nrace  of  love  to  God.  If  I  lament  that  I  do  not  love  God  as  I  ought, 
hat  is  a  holy  regret;  but  if  I,  therefore,  conclude  that  God's  lo?e  tome 
3  the  less  because  of  this,  I  deny  the  light  because  my  eye  is  dim,  and  I 
leprive  myself  also  of  the  power  to  increase  in  love.  Let  me  rather  think 
aore  and  more  of  the  greatness  of  God's  love  to  me,  as  I  see  more  and 
Eiore  my  un worthiness  of  it ;  the  more  a  sinner  I  am,  let  me  the  more  fully 
ee  how  great  must  be  that  love  which  embraces  such  a  sinner  as  I  am; 
nd  then,  as  I  receive  a  deeper  sense  of  the  divine  mercy,  I  shall  feel  the 
lore  bound  to  gratitude  and  constrained  to  affection.  0  for  a  great 
rave  of  love,  to  carry  us  right  out  into  the  ocean  of  love. 

Observe,  beloved  brethren,  day  by  day  the  deeds  of  God's  love  to  you 
01  the  gift  of  food  and  raiment,  and  in  the  mercies  of  this  life,  and  especially 
01  the  covenant  blessings  which  God  gives  you,  the  peace  which  he  sheds 
broad  in  your,  hearts,  the  commanion  which  he  vouchsafes  to  you  with 
limself  and  his  blessed  Son,  and  the  answers  to  prayer  which  he  grants 
on.  Note  well  these  things,  and  if  you  consider  them  carefully,  and 
reigh  their  value,  you  will  be  accumulating  the  fuel  on  which  love 
seds  its  consecrated  flame.  In  proportion  as  you  see  in  every  good 
ifb  a  new  token  of  your  Father's  love,  in  that  proportion  will  you 
lake  progress  in  the  sweet  school  of  love.  Oh,  it  is  heavenly  living 
0  taste  God's  love  in  every  morsel  of  bread  we  eat ;  it  is  blessed 
iving  to  know  that  we  breathe  an  atmosphere  purified  and  made 
ragrant  with  divine  love,  that  love  protects  us  while  we  sleep,  hanging 
ike  a  silken  curtain  all  around  our  bed,  and  love  opens  the  eyelids  of 
be  morning  to  smile  upon  us  when  we  wake.  Ah,  even  when  we 
re  sick,  it  is  love  that  chastens  us ;  when  we  are  impoverished,  love 
Blieves  us  of  a  burden ;  love  gives  and  love  takes ;  love  cheers  and  love 
mites.  We  are  compassed  about  with  love,  above,  beneath,  around, 
rithin,  without.  If  we  could  but  recognise  this,  we  should  become  as 
ames  of  fire,  ardent  and  fervent  towards  our  God.  Knowledge  and 
bservation  are  admirable  nurses  of  our  infant  love. 

And,  ah,  the  soul  grows  rich  in  love  to  God  when  she  rests  on  the 
Ofiom  of  divine  lovingkindness.  Yoa,  who  are  tossed  about  with  doubts 
nd  fears  as  to  whether  you  are  now  accepted  or  shall  persevere  to  the 
ad,  you  can  scarcely  guess  the  ardours  of  heart  whicn  infiame  those 
&ints  who  have  learned  to  cast  themselves  wholly  upon  Jesus,  and  know 
eyondadoubt  his  love  immutable.  Whether  I  sink  or  swim,  I  have  no 
ope  but  in  Christ,  my  life,  my  all. 

**I  know  that  safe  with  him  remains, 
Protected  by  his  power, 
What  IVe  committed  to  his  hands 
Till  the  decisive  hour :" 

nd  in  proportion  as  I  am  thus  scripturally  confident,  and  rest  in  my 
ord,  will  my  love  to  him  engross  all  my  heart,  and  consecrate  my  life 
}  the  Bedeemer's  glory. 
Beloved,  I  desire  to  make  this  very  clear,  that  to  feel  love  to  God 


488  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

we  must  tread  along  the  road  of  faith.  Truly,  this  is  not  a  hard  or 
perilous  way,  but  one  prepared  by  infinite  wisdom.  It  is  a  road  suit- 
able for  sinners,  and  indeed  saints  must  come  that  way  too.  If  thou 
wouldst  love  God,  do  not  look  within  thee  to  see  whether  this  grace  or 
that  be  as  it  ought  to  be,  but  look  to  thy  God,  and  read  his  eternal 
love,  his  boundless  love,  his  costly  love,  which  gave  Christ  for  thee; 
then  shall  thy  love  drink  in  fresh  life  and  vigour. 

Remember  wherever  there  is  love  to  God  in  the  soul  it  is  an  argument 
that  God  loves  that  soul.  I  recollect  meeting  once  with  a  Christian 
woman  who  said  she  knew  she  loved  God,  but  she  was  afraid  God  did 
not  love  her.  That  is  a  fe^  so  preposterous  that  it  ought  never  t(^ 
occur  to  anybody.  You  would  not  love  God  in  deed  and  in  truth  unles 
he  had  shed  abroad  Iiis  love  in  your  heart  in  a  measure.  Bat  on  the 
other  hand,  our  not  loving  God  is  not  a  conclusive  argument  that  God 
does  not  love  us ;  else  might  the  sinner  be  afraid  to  come  to  God.  0 
loveless  sinner,  with  heart  unquickened  and  chill,  the  voice  of  Qod  odk 
even  tliec  to  Clirist.  Even  to  the  dead  in  sin,  his  voice  saith  **  Liye." 
Whilst  thou  art  yet  ix)lluted  in  thy  blood,  cast  out  in  the  open  field,  Uy 
the  loathing  of  thy  person,  the  Lord  of  mercy  passes  by,  and  says  "  life.** 
His  mighty  sovereignty  comes  forth  dressed  in  robes  of  love,  and  he 
touches  thee  the  unloveable,  the  loveless,  the  depraved,  degraded  sinner, 
at  enmity  with  God, — he  touches  thee  in  all  thine  alienation  and  he 
Hfls  thee  out  of  it  and  makes  thee  to  love  him,  not  for  thine  own  sake, 
but  for  his  name  sake  and  for  his  mercy  sake.  Thou  hadst  no  love  at 
all  to  him,  but  all  the  love  lay  in  him  alone  ;  and  therefore  he  began 
to  bless  thee,  and  will  continue  to  bless  thee  world  without  end,  if  tfiou 
art  a  believer  in  Jesus.  In  the  bosom  of  the  Eternal  are  the  deep 
springs  of  all  love. 

III.  Tiiis  leads  us,  in  the  third  place,  to  consider  for  a  moment 
TUE  REVIVAL  OF  oi'R  LOVE.  It  is  sadly  probable  that  there  are  in 
this  house  some  who  once  loved  God  very  earnestly,  but  now  they  hare 
declined  and  become  grievously  indifferent;  God's  love  tons  never  changes, 
but  ours  too  often  sinks  to  a  low  ebb.  Perhaps  some  of  you  have  be- 
come so  cold  in  your  affections,  that  it  is  difficult  to  be  sure  that  you 
ever  did  love  God  at  all.  It  may  be  that  your  life  has  become  lax,  so* 
as  to  deserve  the  censure  of  the  Church.  You  are  a  backslider  and 
you  are  in  a  dangerous  condition ;  yet,  if  there  be  indeed  spiritual  life 
in  you,  you  will  wish  to  return.  You  have  gone  astray  like  a  loat 
sheep,  but  your  prayer  is,  "  seek  thy  servant,  for  I  do  not  forget  thy 
commandments."  Kow,  note  well,  that  the  cause  which  originate  your 
love  is  the  same  which  must  restore  it.  You  went  to  Christ  as  a  sinner 
at  first,  and  your  first  act  was  to  believe  the  love  of  God  to  you  when 
there  was  nothing  in  you  that  evidenced  it.  Go  the  same  way  again. 
J)o  not  stop,  my  dear  brother,  to  pump  up  love  out  of  the  dry  well 
within  yourself!  Do  not  think  it  possible  that  love  will  come  at  your 
bidding.  If  a  man  would  give  all  the  substance  of  his  house  for  love, 
it  would  utterly  be  contemned.  Think  of  the  Lord's  unchanging 
gi'ace,  and  you  will  feel  the  spring-time  of  love  returning  to  your  souL 
Still  doth  the  Lord  reserve  mercy  ifbr  the  sinful,  still  he  waiteth  to  be 
gracious ;  he  is  as  willing  to  receive  you  now  that  jrou  have  played  the 
prodigal,  as  he  was  to  have  retained  you  at  home  m  the  Ix^m  of  his- 


LOVE'S  LOGIC.  489 

loTe.  Many  considerations  onght  to  aid  you,  a  backslider,  to  believe 
more  in  the  love  of  Ood  than  ever  yon  did.  For  think  what  love  it 
mast  be  that  can  invite  you  still  to  return,  yon,  who  after  knowing  so 
much  have  sinned  against  light  and  knowledge;  you,  who  after  having 
experienced  so  much,  have  given  the  lie  to  your  profession.  He  might 
justly  have  cut  you  down,  for  you  have  cumbered  the  ground  long 
enough.  Surely,  when  Israel  went  astray  from  Ood,  it  was  a  clear  proof 
to  her  of  Jehovah's  love  when  he  graciously  said,  *'  They  say  if  a  man 
put  away  his  wife,  or  she  go  from  him,  and  become  another  man's, 
shall  he  return  to  her  again  ?"  Why,  the  answer  in  every  bosom  is 
**No!"  Who  would  love  a  wife  who  had  so  polluted  herself?  But 
thus  saith  the  Lord,  ''  Thou  hast  played  the  harlot  with  many  lovers, 
yet  return  unto  me."  What  matchless  love  is  this.  Hear  yet  more  of 
these  gracious  words,  which  you  will  find  in  the  third  chapter  of  Jere- 
miah's prophecy.  ''  Oo  and  proclaim  these  words  toward  the  north, 
and  say,  Ketum,  thou  backsliding  Israel,  saith  the  Lord ;  and  I  will 
not  cause  mine  aoger  to  fall  upon  you :  for  I  am  mercifal,  saith  the 
Lord,  and  I  will  not  keep  anger  for  ever."  '^  Turn,  0  backsliding 
diildren,  saith  the  Lord  ;  for  I  am  married  unto  you :  and  I  will  take 
yon  one  of  a  dty,  and  two  of  a  family,  and  I  will  bring  you  to  Zion." 
'*  Betum,  ye  backsliding  children,  and  I  will  heal  your  backslidings." 
Can  you  hear  these  words  without  emotion  ?  Backslider !  I  pray  thee 
take  the  wings  of  Ood's  love  to  liy  back  to  him  with.  But  I  hear  you 
enquiring,  Will  he  still  receive  me  ?    Shall  I  be  once  more — 

•*  To  the  Father's  bosom  pressed, 
Once  again  a  child  confessed.*' 

It  shall  be  so.  Does  he  not  declare  that  he  is  God  and  changes  not, 
and  therefore  you  are  not  consumed  ?  Rekindled  are  tte  flames  of  love 
tn  the  backslider's  bosom  when  he  feels  all  this  to  be  trae ;  he  cries, 
"  Behold,  we  come  to  thee,  for  thou  art  the  Lord  our  God."  I  pray 
fou,  then,  any  of  you  who  are  conscious  of  gross  derelictions  of  duty, 
and  wanderings  of  heart,  do  not  ask  Moses  to  lead  you  back  to  Christ, 
he  knows  the  way  to  Sinai's  flames,  but  not  to  Calvary's  pardoning 
blood.  Go  to  Christ  himself  at  once.  If  you  go  to  the  law  and  begin 
to  judge  yourself,  if  you  get  the  notion  that  you  are  to  undergo  a  sort 
of  spiritual  quarantine,  that  you  must  pass  through  a  mental  purgatory 
before  you  may  renew  your  faith  in  the  Saviour,  you  are  mistaken. 
D»me  just  as  you  are,  bad  as  you  are,  hardened,  cold,  dead  as  you  feel 
fourselves  to  oe,  come  even  so,  and  believe  in  the  boundless  love  of 
Sod  in  Christ  Jesus.  Then  shall  come  the  deep  rejpentance ;  then  shall 
x>me  the  brokenness  of  heart ;  then  shall  come  the  holy  jealousy,  the 
Hicred  hatred  of  sin,  and  the  refining  of  the  soul  from  all  her  aross ; 
ihen,  indeed,  all  good  things  shall  come  to  restore  your  soul,  and  lead 
jTou  in  the  paths  of  righteousness.  Do  not  look  for  these  first;  that 
irould  be  looking  for  the  effects  before  the  cause.  The  great  cause  of 
ore -in  the  restored  backslider  must  still  be  the  love  of  God  to  him,  to 
vhom  he  clings  with  a  faith  that  dares  not  let  go  its  hold. 

'^But,"  saith  one,  "I  think  it  is  very  dangerous  to  tell  the 
Mckslider  to  believe  in  God's  love,  surely  it  will  be  gross  pre- 
emption for  him  so  to  believe."    It  is  never  presumptuous  for  a  man 


vjo  metropolitan  tabernacle  pulpit. 

to  believe  tlie  truth  :  whether  a  statement  be  comfortable  or  nnoomfort- 
able,  the  presumption  does  not  lie  in  the  matter  itself,  bat  in  itfinntnith- 
faluess.  I  say  again,  it  is  never  presumptnons  to  believe  the  tmth. 
And  this  is  the  trnth,  that  the  Lord  ]oves  his  prodigal  sons  still, 
and  his  stray  sheep  still,  and  he  will  devise  means  to  bring  his 
banished  back  again,  that  they  perish  not.  '*  If  any  man  sin,  we  haie 
an  advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous." 

Remember  here  that  the  motiye  power  which  draws  back  the  backslider 
again,  is  the  cord  of  love,  the  band  of  a  man,  which  makes  him  feel  he  most 
go  back  to  God  with  weeping  and  repentance,  because  Ood  loves  him  itilL 
What  man  among  you  this  morning  hath  a  son  who  has  disobeyed  him 
and  gone  from  him,  and  is  living  in  drunkenness,  and  in  all  manner  of 
lust  ?  If  you  have  in  anger  told  him,  so  that  he  doubts  it  not^  thatyra 
have  struck  his  name  out  of  your  family,  and  will  not  regard  himut 
child  any  longer,  do  you  think  that  your  severity  will  induce  him  to 
return  to  you  in  love?  Far  from  it.  But  suppose  instead  thereof^  joa 
still  assure  him  that  you  love  him ;  that  there  is  alwa}'8  a  place  at  voor 
table  for  him,  and  a  bed  in  your  house  for  him,  ay,  and  better  still,  a 
warm  place  in  your  heart  for  him;  suppose  he  sees  your  tears  and  hears 
your  prayers  for  him,  will  not  this  draw  him  ?  Yes,  indeed,  if  he  be  a 
son.  It  is  even  thus  between  thy  God  and  thee,  O  backslider.  Hear 
ye  the  Lord  as  he  argues  thy  case  within  his  own  hearL  ^'  My  peo|de 
are  bent  to  backsliding  from  me ;  though  they  called  them  to  the  moat 
High,  none  at  all  would  exalt  him.  How  shall  I  give  thee  up,  Ephraim  ? 
how  shall  I  deliver  thee,  Israel  ?  how  shall  I  make  thee  as  Admah  ?  how 
shall  I  set  thee  as  Zeboim  ?  mine  heart  is  turned  within  me,  my 
repentings  are  kindled  together.  I  will  not  execute  the  fiei*cenes8  of  mine 
anger,  I  will  not  return  to  destroy  Ephraim  ;  for  I  am  God,  and  not 
man."  Surely,  if  anything  will  draw  yon  back,  this  will.  "  Ah  I ' 
saiLh  the  wandering  son,  **  my  dear  father  loves  me  still.  I  will  ariae 
and  go  to  him.  I  will  not  vex  so  tender  a  heart.  I  will  be  his  loving 
son  again."  God  does  not  say  to  you  prodigals,  who  once  professed  his. 
name,  "  I  have  uncliilded  you,  I  have  cast  you  away,"  but  he  says,  "  I 
love  you  still ;  and  for  my  name's  sake  will  I  restrain  my  wrath  that  I 
cut  you  not  off."  Come  to  your  offended  Father,  and  you  shall  find 
that  he  has  not  repented  of  his  love,  but  will  embrace  you  still. 

IV.  Time  fails,  but  I  must  speak  for  a  little,  time  or  no  time,  upon 
the  fourth  point — the  pkrfecting  of  our  love  to  Ck)D. 

Beloved,  there  arc  few  of  us  who  know  much  of  the  deeps  of  the 
love  of  God ;  our  love  is  shallow ;  ah,  how  shallow !  Love  to  God  is 
like  a  great  mountain.  The  majority  of  travellers  view  it  from  afar,  or 
traverse  the  valley  at  its  base :  a  few  climb  to  a  halting  place  on  one 
of  its  elevated  spurs,  whence  they  see  a  portion  of  its  sublimities:  hen 
and  tliere  an  adventurous  traveller  climbs  a  minor  peak,  and  views 
glacier  and  alp  at  closer  range ;  fewest  of  all  are  those  who  scale  the 
topmost  pinnacle  and  tread  the  virgin  snow.  So  in  the  Church  of  Q<)i 
Every  Christian  abides  under  the  shadow  of  divine  love :  a  few  cnjcy 
and  return  that  love  to  a  remarkable  degree :  but  there  are  few,  in  this 
age  sadly  few,  who  reach  to  seraphic  love,  who  ascend  into  the  hiU  of 
the  Lord,  to  stand  where  the  eagle's  eye  hath  not  seen,  and  walk  the 
path  which  the  lion's  whelp  hath  never  trodden,  the  high  places  rf 


love's  Loaio.  491 

•complete  consecration  and  ardent  Belf-consnming  loTe.  Now,  mark 
yon,  it  may  be  difficult  to  ascend  so  high,  but  there  is  one  sure  route, 
and  only  one,  which  the  man  must  follow  who  would  gain  the  sacred 
•eleyation.  It  is  not  the  track  of  his  works,  nor  the  path  of  his  own 
actions,  but  this,  "  We  Iotc  him  because  he  first  loved  us."  John  and  the 
apostles  confess^  that  thus  they  attained  their  love.  For  the  highest  love 
that  ever  glowed  in  human  bosom  there  was  no  source  but  this — God  first 
loved  that  man.  Do  yon  not  see  how  this  is  ?  The  knowledge  that 
<3od  loves  me  casts  out  my  tormenting  dread  of  God:  and  when 
this  is  expelled,  there  is  room  for  abounding  loye  to  God.  As  fear 
^oes  out,  love  comes  in  at  the  other  door.  So  the  more  faith  in  God 
the  more  room  there  is  for  soul-filling  love. 

Again,  strong  faith  in  God's  loye  brings  great  enjoyment ;  our  heart 
is  glad,  our  soul  is  satisfied  with  marrow  and  fatness  when  we  know 
thsS  the  whole  heart  of  God  beats  towards  us  as  forcibly  as  if  we  were  the 
only  creatures  he  had  ever  made,  and  his  whole  heart  were  wrapt  up  in 
vs.  This  deep  enjoyment  creates  the  flaming  love  of  which  I  haye  just 
now  spoken. 

If  tne  ardent  love  of  some  saints  often  takes  the  shape  of  admii*ation 
of  God,  this  arises  from  their  familiarity  with  God,  and  this  familiarity 
the^  never  would  haye  indulged  in,  unless  they  had  know  that  he  was 
their  friend.  A  man  could  not  speak  to  God  as  to  a  friend,  unless  he 
knew  the  love  that  God  hath  toward  him.  The  more  true  his  knowledge 
and  the  more  sure,  the  more  close  his  fellowship. 

Brethren  beloyed,  if  you  know  that  God  has  loyed  you,  then  you  will 
feel  grateful ;  every  doubt  will  diminish  your  gratitude,  but  eyery  grain 
of  &iUi  will  increase  it.  Then  as  we  adyance  in  grace,  love  to  God  in 
our  soul  will  excite  desire  after  him.  Those  we  loye  we  long  to  be  with ; 
-we  count  the  hours  that  separate  us  ;  no  place  so  happy  as  that  in  which 
we  enjoy  their  society.  Hence  loye  to  God  produces  a  desire  to  be  with 
him ;  a  desire  to  be  like  him,  a  longing  to  be  with  him  eternally  in  heayen, 
•and  this  breaks  us  away  from  worldliness ;  this  keeps  us  from  idolatry, 
and  thus  has  a  most  blessedly  sanctifying  effect  upon  us,  producing  tliat 
•elevated  diaracter  which  is  now  so  rare,  out  which  whereyer  it  exists  is 
powerful  for  the  good  of  the  church  and  for  the  glory  of  God.  Oh  that 
we  had  many  in  this  church  who  had  reached  the  highest  platform  of 

Slety.  Would  God  we  had  a  band  of  men  full  of  faith  and  of  the  Holy 
host ;  strong  in  the  Lord  and  in  the  power  of  his  might.  It  may  help 
those  who  aspire  to  mount  high  in  grace,  if  they  keep  in  mind  that  eyery 
step  they  climb  they  must  use  the  ladder  which  Jacob  saw.  The  loye 
of  God  to  us  is  the  only  way  to  climb  to  the  love  of  God. 

And  now  I  must  spend  a  minute  in  putting  the  truth  of  my  text  to 

the  test.    I  want  you  not  to  listen  to  me  so  much  as  to  listen  to  your 

own  hearts,  and  to  God's  word,  a  minute,  if  you  are  belieyers.    What  is 

it  we  have  been  talking  about  ?  It  is  God's  love  to  us.    Get  the  thought 

into  your  head  a  minute :  *'  God  loyes  me — not  merely  bears  with  me, 

thinks  of  me,  feeds  me,  but  loves  me.    Oh,  it  is  a  very  sweet  thing  to  feel 

that  we  haye  the  loye  of  a  dear  wife,  or  a  kind  husband ;  and  there  is  much 

sweetness  in  the  love  of  a  fond  child,  or  a  tender  mother ;   but  to  think 

that  God  loves  me,  this  is  infinitely  better  1    Who  is  it  that  loves  you  ? 

Oody  the  Maker  of  heaven  and  earth,  the  Almighty,  All  in  all,  does  he 


492  METROPOUTAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

love  me  ?  Even  he  ?  If  all  men,  and  all  angels,  and  all  the  linng 
creatures  that  are  before  the  throne  loved  me,  it  were  nothing  to  this— 
the  Infinite  loves  me  !  And  who  is  it  that  he  loves  ?  Me.  The  text 
saith,  "us."  "  We  love  him  because  he  first  loved  ns."  But  this  is  the 
personal  point — he  loves  me,  an  insignificant  nobody,  fall  of  sin — ^who 
<leserved  to  be  in  hell ;  who  loves  him  so  little  in  return — God  loves  IK 
Beloved  believer,  docs  not  this  melt  you?  Does  not  this  fire  your 
soul  ?  I  know  it  does  if  it  is  really  believed.  It  must.  And  how 
<lid  he  love  me  ?  He  loved  me  so  that  he  gave  up  his  only  begottea 
Son  for  me,  to  be  nailed  to  the  tree,  and  made  to  bleed  and  die.  And 
what  will  come  of  it  ?  Why,  because  he  loved  me  and  forgave  me,— 
I  am  on  the  way  to  licaven,  and  within  a  few  months,  perhaps  dajB, 
I  shall  see  his  face  and  sing  his  praises.  He  loved  me  before  I  was 
born ;  before  a  star  began  to  shine  he  loved  me,  and  he  has  never  ceased 
to  do  so  all  these  years.  When  I  have  sinned  he  has  loved  me  ;  when 
I  have  forgotten  him  he  has  loved  me;  and  when  in  the  days  of  my 
sin  I  cursed  him,  yet  still  he  loved  me;  and  he  will  love  me  wben 
my  knees  tremble,  and  my  hair  is  grey  with  age,  "  even  to  hoar  hairs" 
he  will  bear  and  carry  his  servant ;  and  he  will  love  me  when  the 
world  is  on  a  blaze,  and  love  me  for  ever,  and  for  ever.  Oh,  chev 
the  cud  of  this  blessed  thought;  roll  it  under  your  tongue  as  a 
dainty  morsel ;  sit  down  this  a&moon,  if  you  have  leisure,  uid  think 
of  nothing  but  this — his  great  love  wherewith  he  loves  yon;  and  if 
jou  do  not  feel  your  heart  bubbling  up  with  a  good  matter,  if  yon  do 
not  feel  your  soul  yearning  towards  God,  and  heaving  big  with  strong 
emotions  of  love  to  God,  then  I  am  much  mistaken.  This  is  bo 
powerful  a  truth,  and  you  are  so  constituted  as  a  Christian  as  to  be 
wrought  upon  by  this  truth,  that  if  it  be  believed  and  felt,  the  conse- 
quence must  be  that  you  will  love  him  because  he  first  loved  yoiL 
4iod  bless  you,  brethren  and  sisters,  for  Christ's  sake.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripturk  read  before  Sermon — John  iv.  1—5. 


"•,.1^ 


TEAVAILINQ  FOE  SOULS. 


Deuteeed  ok  Lord'8-dat  Morning,  Septbmbbr  Sbd,  1871»  bt 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT    THE     METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,     NEWINQTON. 


« 


As  BOOB  as  Zion  trarailedt  she  brought  forth  her  children.'  — ^Isaiah  Ixvi.  8. 


Israel  had  fallen  into  the  lowest  condition,  bnt  an  inward  yearning  of 
heart  was  felt  in  the  midst  of  God's  people  for  the  retnm  of  the  divine 
blessing  ;  and  no  sooner  had  this  anxious  desire  become  intense  than  God 
heard  the  voice  of  its  cry,  and  the  blessing  came.  It  was  so  at  the  time  of 
the  restoration  of  the  captives  from  Babylon,  and  it  was  most  evidently 
80  in  the  days  of  our  Lord.  A  faithful  company  had  continued  still  to 
expect  the  coming  of  the  Lord's  anointed  messenger;  they  waited  till 
he  should  suddenly  come  in  his  temple ;  the  twelve  tribes  represented  by 
an  elect  renmant  cried  dav  and  night  unto  the  Most  High,  and  when  at 
last  their  prayers  reachea  the  fulness  of  vehemence,  and  their  anxiety 
wrought  in  them  the  deepest  agony  of  spirit,  then  the  Messiah  came  ; 
the  light  of  the  Gentiles,  and'  the  glory  of  Israel.  Then  began  that 
age  of  blessedness  in  which  the  barren  woman  did  keep  house  and 
became  the  joyful  mother  of  children.  The  Holy  Ghost  was  given,  and 
multitudes  were  born  to  the  church  of  God,  yea,  we  may  say,  a  nation  was 
bom  in  a  day.  The  wilderness  and  the  solitary  place  were  glad  for  them, 
and  the  desert  rejoiced  and  blossomed  as  the  rose.  We  are  not,  however, 
about  to  enter  into  the  particular  application  of  our  text  as  Isaiah  uttered 
it :  the  great  declarations  of  revelation  are  applicable  to  all  cases,  and, 
once  true,  they  stand  fast  for  ever  and  ever.  Earnestly  desiring  that 
God  may  give  a  large  spiritual  blessing  to  his  church  this  morning, 
through  the  subject  to  which  my  mind  has  been  directed,  I  shall  first 
ask  you  to  note  that  in  order  to  the  oliaining  of  an  increase  to  the  church 
(here  must  he  travail;  and  that,  secondly,  this  travail  is  frequently  foU 
lowed  ly  surprising  results,  I  shall  then  have  to  show  why  both  the  travail 
and  the  result  are  desirable,  and  pronounce  woe  on  those  who  stand  back 
and  hinder  it,  and  a  blessing  on  such  as  shall  be  moved  by  Oods  otan 
Spirit  to  travail  for  souls, 

L  It  is  clear  from  the  text,  '^  As  soon  as  Zion  travailed,  she  brought 
forth  her  children,"  that  there  must  be  the  travail  before  there 
will  be  the  spiritual  birth. 

ITo.  1,009. 


494  METROPOLITAN  TABEBNACLi  PUIJPIT. 

Let  mc  first  esfablt'sh  this  fact  from  history.  Before  there  has  fidlena 
great  benediction  upon  God's  people,  it  has  been  preceded  by  gKd 
searchings  of  lieart.  Israel  was  so  oppressed  in  Egypt,  that  it  wooU 
have  been  a  very  easy,  and  almost  a  natural  thing  for  the  people  to 
become  so  utterly  crushed  in  spirit  as  to  submit  to  l^  hereditary  oond- 
slaves,  making  the  best  they  could  of  their  miserable  lot :  bat  God 
would  not  have  it  so  ;  he  meant  to  bring  them  out  **  with  a  high  hand 
and  an  outstretched  arm."  Before,  however,  he  began  to  work  he  made 
them  begin  to  cir.  Their  sighs  and  cries  came  up  into  the  ears  of  Ood, 
and  he  stretchea  out  his  hand  to  deliver  them.  Doubtless,  many  a 
heart-rending  appeal  was  made  to  heaven  by  mothers  when  their  babes 
were  torn  from  their  breasts  to  be  cast  into  the  riyer.  With  frihat 
bitterness  did  they  ask  God  to  look  on  his  poor  people  Israel,  and 
avenge  tliem  of  their  oppressors.  The  young  men  bowed  nnderthe 
cruel  yoke  and  groaned,  while  hoary  sires,  smarting  under  ignominious 
lashes  from  the  taskmaster,  sighed  and  wept  before  the  Qod  of  Israel. 
The  whole  nation  cried,  "  0  God  visit  us ;  God  of  Abraham,  of  Isaac, 
and  of  Jacob,  remember  thy  covenant,  and  deliver  us."  This  travail 
brought  its  result ;  for  the  Lord  smote  the  field  of  Zoan  with  mighty 
plagues,  and  forth  from  under  the  bondage  of  the  sons  of  Misraim  the 
children  of  Israel  marched  with  joy. 

As  we  shall  not  have  time  to  narrate  many  instances,  let  as  take  a 
long  leap  in  history  to  the  days  of  David.  The  era  of  the  son  of  Jesse 
was  evidently  a  time  of  religious  revival.  God  was  honoured  and  his 
service  maintained  in  the  midst  of  Judeea's  land  in  the  days  of  the  royal 
bard;  but  it  is  clear  to  readers  of  the  Scriptures  that  David  was 
the  subject  of  spiritual  throes  and  pangs  of  the  most  intense  kind. 
His  bosom  throbbed  and  heaved  like  that  of  a  man  made  fit  to  be  the 
leader  of  a  great  revival.  What  yearnings  he  had,  he  thirsted  after 
God,  after  the  living  God !  What  petitions  he  poured  forth  thai  God 
would  visit  Zion,  and  make  the  vine  which  he  had  planted  to  fiooriah 
once  again.  Even  when  his  own  sins  pressed  heayil^  upon  him,  be 
could  not  end  his  personal  confession  without  entreating  the  Lord  to 
build  the  walls  of  Jerusalem,  and  to  do  good  in  his  good  pleasure  unto 
Zion.  Now,  David  was  only  the  mouth  of  hundreds  of  others,  who 
with  equal  fervency  cried  unto  God  that  the  blessing  might  rest  npon 
his  people.  There  was  much  soul  travail  in  Israel  and  Jadah,  and  the 
result  was  that  the  Lord  was  glorified,  and  true  religion  flourished. 

Remember  also  the  days  oi  Josiah,  the  king.  Yon  know  well  how 
the  book  of  the  law  was  round  neglected  in  the  temple,  and  when  it  was 
brought  before  the  king,  he  rent  his  clothes,  for  he  saw  that  the  nation 
had  revolted,  and  that  wrath  must  come  npon  it  to  the  uttermost.  The 
young  king's  heart,  which  was  tender,  for  he  feared  God,  was  ready  to 
break  with  anguish  to  think  of  the  misery  tJiat  would  come  upon  his 
people  on  account  of  their  sins.  Then  there  came  a  glorious  reforma- 
tion, which  purged  the  land  of  idols,  and  caused  the  passover  to  be 
observed  as  neyer  before.  Travail  of  heart  among  the  godly  prodooed 
the  delightful  change. 
It  was  the  same  with  the  work  of  Nehemiah.  His  book  beghu  wA 
description  of  the  trayail  of  his  heart.  He  was  a  patriot^  a  mia  rf 
onsy  excitable  temperament,  and  keen  sensibility  for  Ood's  honoifft 


TRAVAILING  FOB  SOULa  495 

and  when  his  sonl  had  felt  great  bitterness  and  longing,  then  he  arose 
to  bnlMji  and  a  blessing  rested  on  his  efforts. 

In  the  early  dawn  of  Christian  history,  there  was  a  preimration  of 
the  church  before  it  received  an  increase.  Look  at  the  obedient  dis- 
ciples sitting  in  the  upper  room,  waiting  with  anxious  hope;  every  heart 
there  had  been  ploughed  with  anguish  by  the  death  of  the  Lord,  each 
one  was  intent  to  receive  the  promised  boon  of  the  Spirit.  There,  with 
one  heart  and  one  mind,  they  tarried,  but  not  without  wrestling  prayer, 
and  so  the  Comforter  was  given,  and  three  thousand  souls  were  given 
also.   ' 

The  like  living  zeal  and  vehement  desire  have  always  been  perceptible 
in  the  church  of  God  before  any  season  of  refreshing.  Think  not  that 
Luther  was  the  only  man  that  wrought  the  Reformation.  There  were 
hundreds  who  sighed  and  cried  in  secret  in  the  cottages  of  the  Black 
Forest,  in  the  homes  of  Germany,  and  on  the  hills  of  Switzerland.  There 
were  hearts  breaking  for  the  Lord's  appearing  in  strange  places,  they 
might  have  been  found  in  the  palaces  of  Spain,  in  the  dungeons  of  the 
Inquisition,  among  the  canals  of  Holland,  and  the  urcen  lanes  of 
England.  Women,  as  they  hid  their  Bibles,  lest  their  lives  should  be 
forfeited,  cried  out  in  spirit,  "  0  God,  how  long  ?*'  There  were  pains 
as  of  a  woman  in  travail,  in  secret  places  there  were  tears  and  bitter 
lamentations,  on  the  high  places  of  the  field  there  were  mighty 
strivings  of  spirit,  and  so  at  length  there  came  that  grand  convulsion 
which  made  the  Vatican  to  rock  and  reel  from  its  foundation  to  its 
pinnacle.  There  has  been  evermore  in  the  history  of  the  church  the 
travail  before  there  has  been  the  result. 

And  tliis,  dear  friends,  while  it  is  true  on  the  large  scale,  is  true  also 
in  every  individual  case.    A  man  with  no  sensibility  or  compassion  for 
other  men's  souls,  may  accidentally  be  the  means  of  a  conversion;  the 
good  word  which   he  utters  will  not  cease  to  be  good  because  the 
speaker  had  no  right  to  declare  God's  statutes.    The  bread  and  meat 
which  were  brought  to  Elijah  were  not  less  nourishing  because  the 
ravens  brought  them,  but  the  ravens  remained  ravens  still.     A  hard- 
hearted man  may  say  a  good  thing  which  God  will  bless,  but,  as  a 
rule,  those  who  bring  souls  to  Christ  are  those  who  first  of  all  have 
felt  an  agony  of  desire  that  souls  should  be  saved.     This  is  imaged  to 
ns  in  our  Master's  character.    He  is  the  great  Saviour  of  men,  but 
before  he   could   save  others,  he  learned  in  their  flesh  to  sympa- 
thise with  them.     He  wept  over  Jerusalem,  he  sweat  givat  drops 
of  blood  in  Gethscmanc;  he  was,  and  is,  a  high  priest  who  is  touched 
with  the  feeling  of  our  infiimities.    As  the  captain  of  our  salvation,  in 
bringing  many  sons  unto  glory,  he  was  made  perfect  by  sufferings. 
Even  Christ  went  not  forth  to  preach  until  he  had  spent  niglits  in  inter- 
ccBSory  prayer,  and  uttered  strong  cryings  and  tears  for  the  salvation  of 
his  hearers.     His  ministering  servants  who  have  been  most  useful  have 
always  been  eagerly  desirous  to  be  so.    If  any  minister  can  be  satisfied 
without  conversions  he  shall  have  no  conversions.    God  will  not  force 
usefulness  on  any  man.    It  is  only  when  our  heart  breaks  to  see  men 
£«?ed,  that  we  shall  be  likely  to  see  sinners*  hearts  broken.    The  secret 
of  success  lies  in  all-consuming  zeal,  all-subduing  travail  for  souls. 
Read  the  seimons  of  Wesley  and  of  Whitfield,  and  what  is  there  in 


496  METROrOUTAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

them  ?  It  is  no  severe  criticism  to  say  that  they  are  scarcely  wortbj  to 
have  survived,  and  jet  those  sermons  wrought  marvels,  and  well  they 
might,  for  both  preachers  coald  truly  say — 

**  The  love  of  Christ  doth  me  constrain 
To  seek  the  wandering  souls  of  men ; 
With  cries,  entreaties,  tears,  to  save, 
To  snatch  them  from  the  fiery  wave.*' 

In  order  to  understand  such  preaching,  you  need  to  see  and  hearfte 
man,  you  want  liis  tearful  eye,  his  glowing  countenance,  his  pletding 
tone,  his    bursting    heart.      I   have    heara  of  a  great  preacher  whu 
objected  to  have  his  sermons  printed,  ''  Because,**  said  be,  ''you  cannot 
prmt  nie,^^    That  observation  is  very  much  to  the  point.  A  sonl-winDer 
throws  himself  into  what  he  says.    As  I  hare  sometimes  said,  we  most 
ram  ourselves  into  our  cannons,  we  must  fire  ourselves  at  our  hearerF,  and 
when  we  do  this,  then,  by  God's  grace,  their  hearts  are  often  carried  b) 
storm.    Do  any  of  you  desire  your  children's  conversions?     You  shall 
have  them  saved  when  you  agonise  for  them.     Many  a  parent  who  has 
been  privileged  to  see  his  son  walking  in  the  truth  will  tell  yoa  that 
before  the  blessing  came,  he  had  spent  many  hours  in  prajrer  and  in 
earnest  pleading  with  God,  and  then  it  was  that  the  Lora  ? isited  his 
child  and  renewed  his  soul.    I  have  heard  of  a  young  man  who  had 
grown  up  and  left  the  parental  roof,  and  through  evil  inflaencei  had 
been  enticed  into  holding  sceptical  views.    His  rather  and  mother  were 
both  earnest  Christians,  and  it  almost  broke  their  hearts  to  see  their  ion 
so  opposed  to  the  Redeemer.   On  one  occasion  thej  induced  him  to  go  with 
them  to  hear  a  celebrated  minister.  He  accompanied  them  simply  to  please 
them,  and  for  no  higher  motive.    The  sermon  happened  to  be  upon  the 
glories  of  heaven.   It  was  a  very  extraordinary  sermon,  and  was  caicidated 
to  make  every  Christian  in  the  audience  leap  for  joy.  The  yoang  man  was 
much  gratified  with  the  eloquence  of  the  preacher,  but  nothing  more;  he 
gave  him  credit  for  superior  oratorical  ability,  and  was  inter^ted  in  the 
sermon,  but  felt  none  of  its  power.      He   chanced  to   look  at  his 
father  and  mother  during  the  discourse,  and  was  surprised  to  see  them 
weeping.     He  could  not  imagine  why  they,  being  Christian  people, 
should  sit  and  weep  under  a  sermon  which  was  most  jubilant  in  its 
strain.      When  he  reached  home,  he  said,  "  Father,  we   have  had  a 
capital  sermon,  but  I  could  not  understand  what  conld  make  you  sit 
there  and  cry,  and  my  mother  too  ?"    His  father  said,  "  My  dear  son, 
I  certainly  had  no  reason  to  weep  concerning  myself,  nor  yonr  mother, 
but  I  could  not  help  thinking  all  through  the  sermon  aboat  yon,  for 
alas,  I  have  no  hope  that  you  will  be  a  partaker  in  the  bright  jop 
which  await  the  righteous.     It  breaks  my  heart  to  think  that  yon  will 
be  shut  out  of  heaven.*'    His  mother  said,  '*  The  very  same  thoughts 
crossed  my  mind,  and  the  more  the  preacher  spoke  of  the  joys  of  the 
saved,  the  more  I  sorrowed  for  my  dear  boy  that  he  should  never  know 
what  they  were."    That  touched  the  young  man's  heart,  led  him  to 
seek  his  father's  God,  and  before  long  he  was  at  the  same  commnnioii 
table,  rejoicing  in  the  God  and  Saviour  whom  his  parents  worshipped. 
The  travail  comes  before  the  bringing  forth ;  the  earnest  anxiety,  the 
deep  emotion  within,  precede  our  being  made  the  instruments  ef  the 
salvation  of  others. 


TRAYAIUNO  FOB  EOULB.  497 

I  think  I  have  established  the  fact ;  now  for  a  minute  or  two  let  me 
show  you  the  reasons  far  it  Why  is  it  thac  there  must  be  this  anxiety 
before  desirable  results  are  gained  ?  For  answer,  it  might  suffice  us  to  say 
that  God  has  so  appointed  it.  It  is  the  order  of  nature.  The  child  is 
not  bom  into  the  world  without  the  sorrows  of  the  mother,  nor  is  the 
bread  which  sustains  life  procured  from  the  earth  without  toil :  *'  In  the 
sweat  of  thy  face  shalt  thou  eat  bread,"  was  a  part  of  the  primeval  curse. 
Now,  as  it  is  in  the  natural,  so  is  it  in  the  spiritual  ;  there  shall  not  come 
the  blessing  we  seek,  without  first  of  all  the  earnest  yearning  for  it.  Why, 
it  is  so  even  in  ordinary  business.  We  say,  "  No  sweat  no  sweet,"  "  No 
pains  no  gains,"  "  No  mill  no  meal."  If  there  be  no  labour  there  shall  be 
no  profit.  He  that  would  be  rich  must  toil  for  it :  he  that  would 
acquire  fame  must  spend  and  be  spent  to  win  it.  It  is  ever  so.  There 
must  ever  be  the  travail  and  then  the  desire  cometh.  Ood  has  so  ap- 
pointed it :  let  us  accept  the  decree. 

But  better  still,  he  has  ordained  this  for  our  good.  If  sonls  were  given 
US  without  any  effort,  anxiety,  or  prayer,  it  would  be  our  loss  to  have 
it  Fo,  because  the  anxieties  whicn  throb  within  a  compassionate  spirit 
exercise  his  graces,  they  produce  grateful  love  to  God ;  they  try  his  faith 
in  the  power  of  God  to  save  others;  they  drive  him  to  the  mercy  seat ; 
they  strengthen  his  patience  and  perseverance,  and  every  grace  within 
the  man  is  edacated  and  increased  by  his  travail  fur  souls.  As  labour 
is  now  a  blessing,  so  also  is  soul-travail ;  men  are  fashioned  more  fully 
into  the  likeness  of  Christ  thereby,  and  the  whole  church  is  by  the  same 
emotion  quickened  into  energy.  The  fire  of  our  own  spiritual  life  is 
fanned  by  that  same  breath  which  our  prayers  invite  to  come  from  the 
four  winds  to  breathe  upon  the  slain.  Besides,  dear  friends,  the  zeal  that 
God  excites  within  us  is  often  the  means  of  effecting  the  purpose  which 
we  desire.  After  all,  God  does  noi  give  convei'sions  to  eloquence,  but 
to  heart.  The  power  in  the  hand  of  God's  Spirit  for  conversions  is  heart 
coming  into  contact  with  heart.  Ti*uth  from  the  heart  goes  to  the  heart. 
This  is  God*B  battle  axe  and  weapons  of  war  in  his  crusade.  He  is  pleased 
to  use  the  yearnings,  longings,  and  sympathies  of  Christian  men,  as  the 
means  of  compelling  the  careless  to  think,  constraining  the  hardened  to 
fbely  and  driving  the  unbelieving  to  consider.  I  have  little  confidence 
in  elaborate  speech  and  polished  sentences,  as  the  means  of  reaching 
men's  hearts,  but  I  have  great  faith  in  that  simple-minded  Christian 
woman,  who  must  have  sonls  converted  or  she  will  weep  her  ej^es  out 
over  them ;  and  in  that  humble  Christian  who  prays  day  and  ni^ht  in 
secret,  and  then  avails  himself  of  every  opportunity  to  address  a  loving 
word  to  sinners.  The  emotion  we  feel,  and  the  affection  we  bear,  are  the 
moat  powerful  implements  of  soul-winning.  God  the  Holy  Ghost  usually 
breaks  hard  hearts  by  tender  hearts. 

Besides,  the  travail  qualifies  for  the  proper  taking  care  of  the  off- 
spring. Oed  does  not  conmiit  his  new  bom  children  to  people  who  do 
not  care  to  see  conversions.  If  he  ever  allows  them  to  fall  into 
inch  bands,  they  suffer  very  serious  loss  thereby.  Who  is  so  fit  to 
encourage  a  new-bom  believer  as  the  man  who  first  anguished  before 
the  Lord  for  his  conversion  ?  Those  you  have  wept  over  and  prayed  for 
joa  will  be  sure  to  encourage  and  assist.  The  churcn  that  never  travailed, 
shoold  God  send  her  a  hundred  converts,  would  be  unfit  to  train  them ; 


498  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  FULPIT. 

she  wonid  not  know  what  to  do  with  little  children,  and  would  leave 
them  to  much  pufferin^^.  Let  us  thank  God,  brethren,  if  he  has  giyoi 
us  any  dej^^ce  of  tho  earnest  anxiety  and  sympathy,  which  mark  wml- 
wiiininp^  men  and  women,  and  let  us  ask  to  have  more;  for,  in  proportioD 
as  we  have  it,  we  shall  be  qualified  to  be  the  instruments  in  the  hand  of 
the  Spirit,  of  nursing  and  cherishing  God's  sons  and  daughters. 

Once  more,  there  is  a  great  benefit  in  the  law  which  makes  travail 
necessary  to  spiritual  birth,  because  it  secures  all  the  glory  to  God.  If 
you  want  to  be  lowered  in  your  own  esteem,  try  to  convert  a  child.  I 
would  like  those  brethren  who  believe  so  much  in  free  will,  and  tlie 
natural  goodness  of  the  human  heart,  to  try  some  children  that  I  conld 
bring  to  them,  and  see  whether  they  could  break  their  hearts  and  make 
them  love  the  Saviour.  Why,  sir,  you  never  think  yourself  bo  great  a 
fool  as  after  trying  in  your  own  strength  to  bring  a  sinner  to  the  ^vioar. 
Oh !  how  often  have  I  come  back  defeated  from  arguing  with  an  awakened 
person  whom  I  have  sought  to  comfort :  I  did  think  I  had  some  measure 
of  skill  in  handling  sorrowful  cases,  but  I  have  been  compelled  to  Bay  to 
myself,  **  What  a  simpleton  I  am !  God  the  Holy  Ghost  must  take  this 
case  in  hand,  for  I  am  foiled."  When  one  has  tried  in  a  sermon  to 
reach  a  certain  person  who  is  living  in  sin,  you  learn  aftenvards  that  be 
enjoyed  the  sermon  which  he  ought  to  have  smarted  under;  then,  yon 
say,  ''  Ah,  now  I  see  what  a  weak  worm  I  am,  and  if  good  be  done  God 
shall  have  the  glory."  Your  longing  then  that  others  ahoald  be  saved, 
and  your  vehemence  of  spirit,  shall  secure  to  God  all  the  glory  of  his  own 
work ;  and  this  is  what  the  Lord  is  aiming  at,  for  his  glory  he  will  not 
give  to  another,  nor  his  praise  to  an  arm  of  flesh. 

And  now,  having  established  the  fact,  and  shown  the  reasons  for  it, 
let  us  notice  hsw  this  travail  shows  itself. 

Usually  when  God  intends  greatly  to  bless  a  church,  it  will  begin  in 
this  way : — Two  or  three  persons  in  it  are  distressed  at  the  low  state  of 
affairs,  and  become  troubled  even  to  anguish.     Perhaps  thev  do  not 
speak  to  one  another,  or  know  of  their  common  grief,  but  they  Ibegin  to 
pray  with  flaming  desire  and  untiring  importunity.    The  passion  to  see 
the  church  revived  rules  them.     They  think  of  it  when  they  go  to  rest, 
they  drcnm  of  it  on  their  bed,  they  muse  on  it  in  the  streets.    This 
one  thing  cats  them  up.    They  snfler  great  heaviness  and  continnal 
sorrow  in  heart  for  perishing  sinners;    they  travail  in  birth  for  sonli. 
I  have  hnp]X3ncd  to  become  the  c-entre  of  certain  brethren  in  thift  church; 
one  of  them  said  to  me  the  other  day,  "  0  sir,  I  pray  day  and  night  for 
God  to  prosper  our  church :  I  long  to  see  greater  things,  Ood  is  bleHinj|[ 
us,  but  we  want  much  more."     I  saw  tho  deep  earnestness  of  the  man's 
soul,  and  1  thanked  him  and  thanked  God  heartily,  thinking  it  to  be  a 
sure  sign  of  a  coming  blessing.     Sometime  after,  another  friend,  who 
probably  now  hears  me  speak,  but  who  did  not  know  anything  abont 
the  other,  felt  the  same  yearning,  and  must  needs  let  me  know  it;hetoo 
is  anxious,  longing,  begging,  crying,  for  a  revival;  and  thus  from  three 
or  four  quarters  I  have  had  the  same  message,   and  I  fed   hopefal 
because  of  those  tokens  for  good.    When  the  sun  rises  the  moantain  tops 
first  catch  the  light,  and  those  who  constantly  live  near  to  God  will  be 
the  first  to  feel  the  influence  of  the  coming  refreshing.     The  Ijord  give 
me  a  dozen  importunate  pleaders  and  lovers  of  souls,  and  by  his  grace 


TRAVAILING  FOR  SOULS.  490 

we  will  shake  all  London  from  end  to  end  yet.  The  work  would  go  on 
without  the  mass  of  you,  Cliristians;  mauy  of  you  only  hinder  the  march 
of  the  army,  but  give  us  a  dozen  lion-like,  lamb-like  men,  burning 
with  intense  love  to  Ciirist  and  souls,  and  nothing  will  be  impossible 
to  their  faith.  The  most  of  us  are  not  worthy  to  unloose  the  latchets 
of  ardenb  saints.  I  ofcen  feel  I  am  not  so  myself,  but  I  aspire  and 
long  to  be  reckoned  among  them.  Oh,  may  God  give  us  this  first  sign 
of  the  travail  in  the  earnest  ones  and  twos. 

By  degrees  the  individuals  are  drawn  together  by  sacred  affinity,  and 
the  prayer-meetings  become  very  difFerent.  The  brother  who  talked 
twenty  minubes  of  what  he  called  prayer,  and  yet  never  asked  for  a 
single  thing,  gives  up  his  oration  and  falls  to  pleading  with  mauy  tears 
and  broken  sentences :  while  the  friend  who  used  to  relate  his  expe- 
rience and  go  through  the  doctrines  of  grace,  and  call  that  a  prayer, 
forgets  that  rigmarole  and  begins  agonising  before  the  throne.  And  not 
only  this,  but  little  knots  here  and  there  come  •together  in  their  cot- 
tages, and  in  their  little  rooms  cry  mightily  to  God.  The  result  will  be 
that  the  minister,  even  if  he  does  not  know  of  the  feeling  in  the  hearts 
of  his  people,  will  grow  fervent  himself.  He  will  preach  more  evangelic- 
ally, more  tenderly,  more  earnestly.  He  will  be  no  longer  formal, .  or 
cold,  or  stereotyped ;  he  will  be  all  alive.  Meanwhile,  not  with  the 
preacher  only  will  be  the  blessing,  but  with  his  hearers  who  love  the 
Lord.  One  will  be  trying  a  plan  for  getting  in  the  young  people  ; 
another  will  be  looking  after  the  strangers  in  the  aisles,  who  come  only 
now  and  then.  One  brother  will  make  a  vehement  attempt  to  preach 
the  gospel  at  the  corner  of  the  street ;  another  will  open  a  room  down 
a  ds^k  court ;  another  will  visit  lodging  houses  and  hospitals :  all  sorts 
of  holy  plans  will  be  invented,  and  zeal  will  break  out  in  mauy  directions. 
All  this  will  be  spontaneous,  nothing  will  be  forced.  If  you  want  to 
get  up  a  revival,  as  the  term  is,  you  can  do  it,  just  as  you  can  grow 
tasteless  strawberries  in  winter,  by  artificial  heat.  There  are  ways  and 
means  of  doing  that  kind  of  thing,  but  the  genuine  work  of  God  needs 
no  such  planning  and  scheming ;  it  is  altogether  spontaneous.  If  you 
Bee  a  snow-drop  next  Febmary  in  your  garden,  you  will  feel  persuaded 
that  spring  is  on  the  way  ;  the  artificial  fiower-mnker  could  put  as  mauy 
snow-drops  there  as  you  please,  but  that  would  be  no  index  of  coining 
spring.  So  yon  may  get  up  an  apparent  zeal  which  will  be  no  proof  of 
God's  blessing;  but  when  fervour  comes  of  itself,  without  human 
direction  or  control,  then  is  it  of  the  Lord.  When  men's  hearts  heave 
and  break,  like  the  mould  of  the  garden  under  the  influence  of  the 
reviying  life  which  lay  buried  there,  then  in  very  deed  a  benediction  is 
on  the  way.  Travail  is  no  mockery,  but  a  real  agony  of  the  whole 
natare.  May  such  be  seen  in  this  our  church,  and  throughout  the  whole 
Israel  of  God. 

II.  Now,  with  gi'eat  brevity,  let  us  consider  that  the  result  is 
OFTEK  VERY  BUEPBisiNG.  It  is  frequently  surprising  for  rapkiittf,  "  As 
scon  as  Zion  travailed,  she  brought  fortli  her  childi*en."  God's  works 
axe  not  tied  by  time.  The  more  spiritual  a  force  is  the  less  it  lies 
within  the  chdins  of  time.  The  electric  current,  which  has  a  greater 
neameso  to  the  spiritual  than  the  grosser  forms  of  materialism,  is 
inconceivably  rapid  from  that  very  reason,  and  by  it  time  is  all  but 


500  MLTKOPOUTAN  TAB£RNACLE  PULPIT. 

annihilated.  The  influences  of  the  Spirit  of  God  are  a  force  most 
spiritual,  and  more  quick  than  anything  beneath  the  snn.  As  eoohm 
we  agonise  in  soul  the  Holy  Spirit  can,  if  he  pleases,  convert  the  penon 
for  whom  we  have  pleaded.  A^  hile  we  are  yet  speaking  he  hears,  and  be- 
fore we  call  he  answers.  Some  calculate  the  expected  progress  of  a  ehareh 
))y  arithmetic ;  and  I  think  I  have  heard  of  arithmetical  sermons  in  whidi 
tluTc  have  been  ingenious  calculations  as  to  how  many  missionarteB  it 
would  take  to  convert  the  world,  and  how  much  cash  would  be  demanded. 
Now,  there  is  no  room  here  for  the  application  of  mathematics;  spiritaal 
forces  are  not  calculable  by  an  arithmetic  which  is  most  at  home  in  the 
material  universe.  A  truth  which  is  calculated  to  strike  the  mind  of  one 
man  to-day  may  readily  enou«:(h  produce  a  like  effect  upon  a  million  minds 
to-morrow.  The  preaching  u  hich  moves  one  heart  needs  not  to  be  altocd 
to  tell  upon  ten  thousand.  With  God's  Spirit  our  present  instmrnentali* 
ties  will  suffice  to  win  the  world  to  Jesus ;  without  him,  ten  thonsand 
times  as  much  apparent  force  would  be  only  so  much  weakness.  The 
spread  of  truth,  moreover,  is  not  reckonable  by  time.  During  the  ta 
years,  which  ended  in  1870,  such  wondrous  changes  were  wnm^ht 
throughout  the  world  that  no  prophet  would  have  been  belieyed  had  be 
foretold  them.  l»eforms  have  been  accomplished  in  England,  in  the 
United  States,  in  Germany,  in  Spain,  in  Italy,  which,  acccordiog  to  ordi- 
nary reckoning,  would  have  occupied  at  least  one  hundred  yean.  Things 
which  concern  the  mind  cannot  be  subjected  to  those  regulations  of  time 
which  govern  stciunboats  and  railways ;  in  such  matters  God's  messen- 
gers are  flames  of  Are.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  able  to  operate  npon  the 
minds  of  men  instantaneously  :  witness  the  case  of  Paul.  Betweennow 
and  to-morrow  morning  he  could  excite  holy  thought  in  all  the  minds 
of  all  the  thousand  millions  of  the  sons  of  Adam  ;  and  if  prayer  were 
mighty  enough,  and  strong  enough,  why  should  it  not  be  done  on  some 
bright  day  ?  We  are  not  straitened  in  him,  we  are  straitaied  in  our 
own  bowels.  All  the  fault  lies  there.  Oh  for  the  travail  that  wonld 
produce  immediate  results. 

But  the  result  is  surprisiufr,  not  only  for  its  rapidity,  but  for  ike 
greatness  of  if.  It  is  said,  "  Shall  a  nation  be  bom  at  once?"  for  u 
soon  as  ever  Zion  was  in  distress  about  her  children,  tens  of  thoosands 
came  and  built  up  Jerusalem,  and  re-established  the  fallen  state.  So  in 
answer  to  prayer,  God  does  not  only  give  speedy  blessings,  but  greit 
blessings.  There  were  fervent  prayers  in  that  upper  room  "bdiwe 
the  day  of  Pentecost  had  fully  come,"  and  what  a  great  answer  it  wai 
when,  after  Peter's  sermon,  some  three  thousand  were  ready  to  ccmfett 
their  faith  in  Christ,  and  to  be  baptised.  Shall  we  ne?er  see  sQch 
things  again?  Is  the  Spirit  straitened?  Uas  his  arm  waxed  short? 
Nay,  verily,  but  we  clog  and  hinder  him.  He  cannot  do  any  mightj 
work  hero  because  of  our  unbelief;  and,  if  our  unbelief  were  cast  out, 
and  if  prayer  went  up  to  God  with  eagerness,  and  vehemence,  and 
importunity,  then  would  a  blessing  descend  so  copious  as  to  amaase  nsalL 

But  enough  of  this,  for  I  must  needs  pass  on  to  the  next  point. 

III.  This  travail  and  its  result  are  abundantly  dkbtrawi; 
pre-eminently  desirable  at  this  hour.  The  world  is  perishing  for  ]»/k 
of  knowledge.  Did  any  one  among  us  ever  lay  China  on  his  heart? 
Your  ima«;ination  cannot  grapple  with  the  population  of  that  mightj 


TBAVAILINa   FOB  SOULS.  501 

mpire,  without  God,  without  Christ,  strangers  to  the  commonwealth  of 
srael.  But  it  is  not  China  alone ;  there  are  other  vast  nations  lying  in 
arkness ;  the  great  serpent  hath  coiled  himself  around  the  ^lobe,  and  who 
hall  set  the  world  free  from  him  ?  Reflect  upon  this  one  city  with  its 
hree  millions.  What  sin  the  moon  sees !  What  sin  the  Sabbath  sees ! 
lias !  for  the  transgressions  of  this  wicked  city.  Babylon  of  old  could  not 
avebeen  worse  than  London  is,  nor  so  guilty,  for  she  had  not  tiie  fight 
hat  London  has  received.  Brethren,  there  is  no  hope  for  China,  no  hope 
3r  the  world,  no  hope  for  our  own  city,  while  the  church  is  sluggish 
nd  lethargic.  It  is  through  the  church  the  blessing  is  bestowed. 
*hrist  multiplies  the  bread,  and  gives  it  to  the  disciples ;  the  multitudes 
an  only  get  it  through  the  disciples.  Oh,  it  is  time,  it  is  high  lime 
bat  the  churches  were  awakened  to  seek  the  good  of  dying  myriads, 
foreover,  brethren,  the  powers  of  evil  are  ever  active.  We  may  sleep, 
nt  Satan  sleepeth  never.  The  church's  plough  lies  yonder,  rusting  in 
be  furrow :  do  yon  not  see  it,  to  your  shame  ?  But  the  ploagh  of 
atan  goes  from  end  to  end  of  his  great  field,  he  leaves  no  headland, 
at  he  ploughs  deep  whilst  slucrgish  ch arches  sleep.  May  we  be  stirred 
B  we  see  the  awful  activity  of  evil  ispirits  and  persons  who  are  under 
lieir  sway.  How  industriously  pernicious  literature  is  spread  abroad, 
nd  with  what  a  zeal  do  men  seek  for  fresh  ways  of  sinning.  He  is 
minent  among  men  who  can  invent  fresh  songs  to  gratify  the  lascivious 
mj^ne,  or  find  new  spectacles  to  delight  unclean  eyes.  0  God,  are  thine 
demies  awake,  and  only  thy  friends  asleep?  0  Sufferer,  once  bathed 
1  bloody  sweat  in  Gethsemane,  is  there  not  one  of  the  twelve  awake, 
nt  Judas  ?  Are  they  all  asleep  except  the  traitor  ?  May  God  arouse 
8  for  his  infinite  mercy's  sake. 

Besides  this,  my  brethren,  when  a  church  is  not  serving  God,  mischief 
( brewing  within  herself.  While  she  is  not  bringing  others  in,  her  own 
eart  is  becoming  weak  in  its  pulsations,  and  her  entire  constitution  is 
prey  to  decline.  The  church  must  either  bring  forth  children  unto 
lod,  or  die  of  consumption :  she  has  no  alternative  but  that.  A 
burch  must  either  be  fruitful  or  rot-,  and  of  all  things  a  rotting  church 
I  the  most  offensive.  Would  God  we  could  bury  our  dead  churches 
at  of  our  sight,  as  Abraham  buried  Sarah,  for  above  ground  they 
reed  a  pestilence  of  scepticism,  for  men  say,  "Is  this  religion?" 
ad  taking  it  to  be  so,  they  forego  true  religion  altogether. 

And  then,  worst  of  all  is,  God  is  not  glorified.  If  there  be  no 
earning  of  heart  in  the  church,  and  no  conversions,  where  is  the 
»vail  of  the  Redeemer's  soul  ?  Where,  Iramanuel,  where  are  the 
rophies  of  thy  terrible  conflict  ?  Where  are  the  jewels  for  thy  crown  ? 
lion  shalt  have  thine  own,  thy  Father's  will  shall  not  be  frustrated; 
lou  shalt  be  adored,  but  as  yet  we  see  it  not.  Hard  are  men's  hearts, 
nd  they  will  not  love  thee :  unyielding  are  their  wills,  and  they  will 
ot  own  thv  sovereignty.  Oh  !  weep  because  Jesus  is  not  honoured, 
'he  foul  oath  still  curdles  our  blood  as  we  hear  it,  and  blasphemy  usurps 
ie  place  of  grateful  song.  Oh  !  by  the  wounds  and  bloody  sweat,  by 
le  cross,  and  nails,  and  spear,  I  beseech  you,  followers  of  Christ,  be 
i  earnest,  that  Jesus  Christ's  name  may  be  known  and  loved  through 
le  earnest  agonising  endeavours  of  the  Christian  church. 

rV.  And  npw  I  must  come  near  to  a  close,  by,  in  the  fourth  place, 


502  METROPOLITAN  TABEBNAOLS  FULPIT. 

noticing  THE  woe  which  will  surely  come  to  those  who  Hism 
THE  TRAVAIL  OF  THE  CHURCH,  and  BO  prevent  the  bringing  forth  of  her 
children.  An  earnest  spirit  cnnnot  complete  its  exhortations  to  zeal 
without  pronouncing  a  denunciation  upon  the  indifferent.  What  said 
the  heroine  of  old  who  had  gone  forth  against  the  enemies  of  Israel,  when 
she  remembered  coward  si)irit8  ?  "  Curse  ye,  Meroz,  saith  the  angd 
of  the  Lord,  curse  ye  bitterly  the  inhabitants  thereof ;  because  the? 
came  not  to  the  help  of  the  Lord,  against  the  mighty."  Some  sncn 
curse  will  assuredly  come  upon  every  professing  Christian,  who  is  back* 
ward  in  helping  the  church  in  the  day  of  her  soul's  travail.  And  who 
are  tlioy  that  hinder  her  ?  I  answer,  every  worldly  Christian  hinden 
the  progress  of  the  gospel.  Every  member  of  a  church  who  is  living  is 
secret  sin,  who  is  tolerating  in  his  heart  anytliing  that  he  knows  to  be 
wrong,  who  is  not  seeking  eagerly  his  own  personal  sanctificationy  is  to 
that  extent  hindering  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Be  ye  clean  that 
l>e;n'  the  vessels  of  the  Lord,  for  to  the  extent  that  we  maintain  known 
unholinoss,  we  restrain  the  Spirit.  He  cannot  work  by  os  as  long  as 
any  conscious  sin  is  tolerated.  It  is  not  overt  breaking  of  command- 
menlH  that  1  am  now  s])eaking  of, t)rethren,  but  I  include  worldlinesa 
also— a  care  for  carnal  things,  and  a  carelessness  abont  spiritual  thin|^ 
having  enough  grace  just  to  make  us  hope  that  yoa  are  a  Christian, 
but  not  enough  to  prove  you  are ;  bearing  a  shrivelled  apple  here  and 
there  on  the  topmost  bough,  but  not  much  fruit ;  this  I  mean,  tliis 
partial  barrenness,  not  complete  enough  to  condemn,  yet  complete 
enough  to  restrain  the  blessing,  this  robs  the  treasury  of  the  chnrch, 
and  hinders  her  progress.  0  brethren,  if  any  of  you  are  thus  described, 
repent  and  do  your  first  works;  and  God  help  you  to  be  foremost  in 
proportion  as  yon  have  been  behind. 

Thoy  are  also  guilty  who  district  the  mind  of  the  church  from  the 
subject  in  hand.  Anybody  who  calls  off  the  thoughts  of  the  chorck 
from  soul-saving  is  a  mischief  maker.  I  have  heard  it  said  of  a 
minister,  **  lie  greatly  influences  the  jwlitics  of  the  town."  Well,  it  is  a 
very  doubtful  good  in  my  mind,  a  very  doubtful  good  indeed.  If  the  man, 
keeping  to  his  own  calling  of  preaching  the  gospel,  happens  to  influence 
these  meaner  tilings,  it  is  well,  but  any  Christian  minister,  who  thinks 
that  he  can  do  two  things  well,  is  mistaken.  Let  him  mind  soul-winning, 
and  nob  turn  a  Christian  church  into  a  political  club.  Let  us  fight  cot 
our  ])olitics  somewhere  else,  but  not  inside  the  church  of  God.  There 
our  one  business  is  soul-winning,  our  one  banner  is  the  cross,  our  one 
leader  is  the  crucified  King.  Inside  the  church  there  may  be  minor 
things  that  take  off*  the  thou;ihts  of  men  from  seeking  souls, — little 
things  that  can  be  made  beneath  the  eye  that  is  microscopical,  to 
swell  into  great  offences.  0  my  brethren,  let  us  while  souls  arc  perishiog 
waive  personal  differences.  *'It  must  need  be  that  offences  come,  but 
woe  unto  him  by  whom  the  offence  cometh  ;**  but  after  all  what  can 
there  he  that  is  worth  taking  notice  of,  compared  with  glorifying  Christ. 
If  our  Lord  and  master  would  be  honoured  by  your  being  a  door-mat  for 
his  sitints  to  wipe  their  feet  on,  you  would  be  honoured  to  be  in  the 
position  ;  and  if  there  shall  come  gh»ry  to  God  by  your  patient 
endurance,  even  of  insult  and  contumely,  be  glad  in  your  heart  that  yoft 
are  permitted  to  be  nothing  that  Christ  may  be  all  in  all.  We  must  by  no 


TBAVAILIKG  FOB  SOULS.  503 

neans  turn  aside  to  this  or  that;  not  even  golden  apples  most  tempt  us 
in  this  race !  There  lies  the  mark,  and  until  it  is  reached,  we  must 
neyer  pause,  but  onward  press,  for  Christ's  cause  and  crown. 

Alove  all,  my  brethren,  we  shall  be  hindering  the  travail  of  the 
church  if  we  do  not  share  in  it.  Many  church-members  think  that  if 
they  do  nothing  wrong,  and  make  no  trouble,  then  they  are  all  right. 
Not  at  all,  sir ;  not  at  all.  Here  is  a  chariot,  and  we  are  all  engaged 
to  drag  it.  Some  of  you  do  not  put  out  your  hands  to  pull ;  well,  then, 
the  rest  of  us  have  to  labour  so  much  the  more ;  and  the  worst  of  it 
ia  we  have  to  draw  you  also.  While  you  do  not  add  to  the  strength 
which  draws,  you  increase  the  weight  that  is  to  be  drawn.  It  is  sdl 
very  well  for  jrou  to  say,  "  But  I  do  not  hinder ;"  you  do  hinder,  you 
cannot  help  hmdering.  If  a  man's  leg  does  not  help  him  in  walking, 
it  certainly  hinders  him.  Oh,  I  cannot  bear  to  thmk  of  it.  That  I 
should  be  a  hinderance  to  my  own  soul's  growth  is  bad  indeed ;  but 
that  I  should  stand  in  the  way  of  the  people  of  Ood  and  cool  their 
courage,  and  damp  their  ardour — my  Master,  let  it  never  be  !  Sooner 
let  me  sleep  among  the  clods  of  the  valley,  than  be  a  hinderance  to  the 
meanest  work  that  is  done  for  thy  name. 

y.  And  now  I  shall  close,  not  with  this  note  of  woe,  but  with  A 
WORD  OP  BLESSING.  Depend  upon  it  there  shall  come  a  great  blessing 
to  any  of  you  who  feel  the  soul  travail  that  brings  souls  to  God. 
Tour  own  heart  will  be  watered.  You  know  the  old  illustration,  so 
often  used  that  it  is  now  almost  hackneyed,  of  the  two  travellers,  who 
passed  a  man  frozen  in  the  snow,  and  thought  to  be  dead  ;  and  the 
one  said,  ''  I  have  enough  to  do  to  keep  myself  alive,  I  will  hasten 
on  ;"  but  the  other  said,  **  I  cannot  pass  a  fellow  creature  while 
there  is  the  least  breath  in  him."  He  stooped  down  and  began  to  warm 
the  frozen  man  by  rubbing  him  with  great  vigour ;  and  at  last  the  poor 
fellow  opened  his  eves,  came  back  to  life  and  animation,  and  walked  along 
with  the  man  who  had  restored  him  to  life  ;  and  what  think  you  Ttas  one 
of  the  first  sights  they  saw  ?  it  was  the  man  who  must  needs  take  care  of 
himself  frozen  to  death.  The  good  Samaritan  had  preserved  his  own 
life  by  rubbine  the  other  man  ;  the  friction  he  had  given  had  caused 
the  action  of  bis  own  blood,  and  kept  him  in  vigour.  You  will  bless 
yourselves  if  you  bless  others. 

Moreover,  will  it  not  be  a  joy  to  feel  that  you  have  done  what  you 
oonld  ?  It  is  always  well  on  a  Sunday  evening  for  a  preacher  to  feel 
when  he  gets  home,  '*  Well,  I  may  not  have  preached  as  I  should  wish, 
but  I  have  preached  the  Lord  Jesus  and  preached  all  my  heart  out,  and 
I  conld  do  no  more.*'  He  sleeps  soundly  on  that.  After  a  day  spent 
in  doing  all  the  good  you  can,  even  if  you  have  met  with  no  success, 
?on  can  lean  your  head  on  Christ's  bosom  and  Mi  asleep,  feeling  that 
if  souls  be  not  gathered,  yet  yon  have  your  reward.  If  men  are  lost, 
it  is  some  satisfaction  to  us  that  they  were  not  lost  because  we 
fiuled  to  tell  them  the  way  of  salvation.  But  what  a  comfort  it  will  bd 
to  you  supposing  you  should  be  successful  in  bringing  some  to  Christ. 
Why  it  will  make  all  the  bells  of  your  soul  to  ring.  There  is  no  greater 
\aj  except  the  joy  of  our  own  communion  with  Christ,  than  this  of 
bringing  others  to  trust  the  Saviour.  Oh  seek  this  joy  and  pant  after 
L    And  what  if  you  diould  see  your  own  children  converted?    You 


604  MKTROPOIilTAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

have  long  hoped  for  it,  bat  year  hopes  hare  been  disappointed ;  God 
means  to  give  yoa  that  choice  blessing  when  you  live  more  netrly 
to  him  yoarself.  Yes,  wife,  the  husband's  hearfe  will  be  woa 
when  your  heart  is  perfectly  consecrated.  Yes,  mother,  the  eirl 
sliall  love  the  Saviour  when  you  love  him  better.  Yes,  teacher,  God 
means  to  bless  your  class,  bat  not  until  first  of  all  he  has  made  you  fit  to 
receive  the  blessing.  Why,  now,  if  your  children  were  to  be  conTerted 
through  your  teaching,  you  would  be  mightily  proud  of  it:  GodknowB 
you  could  not  bear  such  success,  and  does  not  mean  to  give  it  until  be 
has  laid  you  low  at  his  feet,  and  emptied  you  of  yourself,  and  filled  yoa 
\\ith  himself. 

And  now  I  ask  the  prayers  of  all  this  church,  that  Ood  would  send 
us  a  time  of  revival.  I  have  not  to  complain  that  I  have  laboured 
in  vain,  and  spent  my  strength  for  nought ;  far  from  it.  I  btve 
not  even  to  think  that  the  blessing  is  withdrawn  from  the  preaching 
of  the  word,  even  in  a  measure,  for  I  never  had  so  many  cases  of  con- 
version in  my  life,  as  I  have  known  since  I  have  been  restored  from 
sickness ;  I  have  never  before  received  so  many  letters  in  so  short  a 
time,  telling  me  that  the  sermons  printed  have  been  blest^  or  the  ser- 
mons preached  here  ;  yet  I  do  not  think  we  ever  had  so  few  conversions 
from  the  regular  congregation.  I  partly  account  for  it  from  the  fact, 
that  you  cannot  fish  in  one  pond  always  and  catch  as  many  fish  as  at 
first.  Perhaps  the  Lord  has  saved  all  of  you  he  means  to  save;  som^ 
times,  I  am  afraid  he  has;  and  then  it  will  be  little  use  my  keeinngon 

f  reaching  to  you,  and  I  had  better  shift  quarters  and  try  somewhere  else. 
t  would  be  a  melancholy  thought  if  I  believed  it : — I  do  not  believe  it, 
I  only  fear  it.    Surely  it  is  not  always  to  be  true  that  strangers,  who  drop 
in  here  only  once,  are  converted,  and  you  who  are  always  hearing  the  gocpel 
remain  unaifected.    Strange,  but  may  it  not  be  strangely,  lamentablj 
true  of  you  ?   This  very  day  may  the  anxiety  of  your  Christian  friends  be 
excited  for  you,  and  then  may  you  be  led  to  oe  anxious  for  TonrselTei) 
and  give  your  eyes  no  slumber  till  you  find  the  Saviour.    "Yon  know 
the  way  of  salvation ;  it  is  simply  to  come  with  your  sins  and  rest  them 
on  the  Saviour;  it  is  to  rely  upon  or  trust  in  the  atoning  blood.    Oh 
that  you  may  be  made  to  trust  this  morning,  to    the  praise  of  the 
glory  of  his  grace.     The  elders  mean    to  meet  together  to-mcwrow 
evening  to  have  a  special  hour  of  prayer ;  I  hope,  also,  the  mothers 
will   meet  and  have  a  time  of  wrestling,  and  that   every  member 
of  the  church  will  try  to  set  apart  a  time  for  supplication  this  week, 
that  the  Lord  may  visit  again  his  church,  and  cause  ns  to  rejoice  inhii 
name.    We  cannot  go  back ;  we  dare  not  go  back.     We  liave  pnt  onr 
hand  to  the  plough,  and  the  curse  will  be  upon  us  if  we  tnni  bide. 
Ilcmember  Lot's  wife.      It  must  be  onwara  with  ns  ;  backward  it 
cannot  be.    In  the  name  of  God  the  Eternal,  let  ns  gird  up  our  kutf 
by  the  power  of  his  Spirit,  and  go  onward  conquering  through  the  blood 
of  the  Lamb.    We  ask  it  for  Jesus*  sake.    Amen. 


POBTION  OF  SCBIPTURK  HEAD  BEFORR  SEBXOHr — ^Isaiah  IZfL 


/ 


^tiJttti^fs&im  Wcmacle  fttljil. 


LIGHT    FOB   THOSE    WHO    SIT   IN    DARKNESS. 


DeLIV£RED  ok  LoBD'S-DAY  MORNINGy  SePTEMBEB  10th,  1871,  B7 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT     THB     MBTROPOLITAN     TABERNACLE,     NEWIKGTON. 


*'  The  land  of  Zabnlon,  and  the  land  of  Nephthalim,  by  the  way  of  the  sea,  beyond 
Jordan,  Galilee  of  the  Gentiles ;  the  people  which  sat  in  darkness  saw  great  light ; 
mnd  to  them  which  sat  in  the  region  and  shadow  of  death  light  is  sprung  up/'— • 
Matthew  iv.  15, 16. 

Pull  of  love  to  the  place  where  he  had  been  brought  up,  our  Lord 
had  gone  to  Nazareth,  and  in  the  Synagogue  he  had  preached  the 
gladdest  tidings ;  but,  alas,  the  greatest  of  prophets  and  the  Lord  of 
prophets,  received  no  honour  in  his  own  country.  "  He  came  unto 
his  own  and  his  own  received  him  not."  Expelled  the  city  by  violence, 
the  patient  one  turned  his  footsteps  another  way;  yet,  even  when 
justly  angry,  love  guided  his  footsteps.  He  must  go,  for  the  Nazarenes 
nad  proved  themselves  unwortliy,  but  whither  shall  he  go?  He  will  go 
to  the  outcasts,  to  that  part  of  1 1 is  country  which  was  most  neglected,  to 
tiiat  region  where  the  population  was  mixed  and  degenerate  so  as  to  be 
called,  not  Galilee  of  the  Jews,  but  Galilee  of  the  Gentiles,  where  from  dis- 
tance from  Jerusalem  little  was  known  of  the  worship  of  the  temple,  where 
«Tor  was  rampant,  where  men's  minds  were  enveloped  in  darkness, 
and  their  hearts  in  the  gloom  of  dealhsbade.  The  loss  of  Nazareth 
shall  be  the  gain  of  Galilee.  Even  his  judgment  upon  a  place  is  over- 
ruled in  mercy,  and  even  thus  to  day  there  are  some  in  this  house  who 
have  often  had  Jesus  preached  to  them  from  their  very  childhood, 
hot  until  this  hour  they  have  refused  obedience  to  the  gospel's 
command.  What  if  he  should  now  turn  away  from  them  ;  I  pray 
he  may  not  have  done  so  already.  Yet,  in  turning  away  from  them, 
he  will  deal  with  others  in  mercy.  As  the  casting  away  of  the  Jews 
was  the  salvation  of  the  Gentiles,  so  the  leaving  of  these  privileged  ones 
shall  open  a  door  of  mercy  and  hope  to  those  who  have  not  enjoyed 
the  privilege  aforetime.  To  you  who  are  not  familiar  with  the  gospel 
sound,  to  you  who  count  yourselves  more  unworthy  than  the  rest  of 
mankind,  to  you  desponding  and  despairing  ones  who  write  bitter  things 
sgainst  yourselves,  to  you  is  the  gospel  sent.  As  aforetime,  the  Lord 
[Hreached  to  Zabulon  and  Nephthalim,  and  the  people  who  sat  in  dark- 
less saw  a  great  light,  even  so  is  he  this  day  proclaimed  among  you. 
No.  1,010. 


506  MSTBOPOLITAN  TABEENACLE  FULPIT. 

From  the  text  it  appears  that  some  are  in  grecder  darkneBS  than  oOun ; 
and  that,  Becondly,  for  such  there  is  a  hope  of  Hght ;  but  that,  thirdly, 
tlie  light  which  will  come  to  them  lies  all  in  Christ ;  and,  fourth  I  j  (joyful 
news !)  t/uit  light  is  already  sprung  up  all  around  them :  they  hare  bnt  to 
open  their  eyes  to  delight  in  it. 

I.  Some  bouls  are  in  grkater  darkness  than  others.  It  appeaft 
from  the  text  that  it  was  so  in  Christ's  days,  and  certainly  it  is  so  now. 
Divine  sovereignty  runs  throngh  all  God's  dealings.  He  doeg  not  even 
distrihute  the  privilcjre  of  hearing  the  gospel  to  all  alike,  for  some  landi 
are  as  yet  untro'lden  by  the  missionary's  foot,  while  here  at  the  comer  of 
all  our  streets  the  gospel  is  preached  to  us.  Some,  from  the  Terr 
circumstances  of  their  birth  and  parentage,  have  never  attended  the 
vi'orship  of  God,  while  other-^jCven  before  they  had  the  discretion  tochooie, 
were  cxirried  in  their  parents'  arms  to  the  place  where  prayer  is  wont 
to  be  made.     God  distributcth  his  grace  and  privileges  even  as  he  wills. 

In  the  text,  those  pt'rsons  who  were  more  deplorably  circumstanced 
than  others  are  described  first  as  being  in  darkness — **  The  people  that 
sat  in  darkness  ;"  by  which  is  meant,  first,  ignorance.  The  GalilcanB 
were  notoriously  ignorant :  few  teachers  of  the  law  had  been  among 
them ;  they  did  nut  know  even  the  letter  of  the  law.  So  are  there 
many,  to  whom  the  gospel,  even  in  the  theory  of  it,  is  a  thing 
scarcely  known.  They  may  have  gone  to  places  of  worship  in  this 
country  from  their  youth  up,  and  have  never  heard  the  gospel,  for  the 
gospel  is  a  rare  thin^'  in  some  synagogues;  you  shall  hear  philosophy, 
you  shall  hear  ceremonialism  and  sacramentarianism  cried  np,  bnt  the 
blessed  truth,  **  Jk»lieve,  and  live,"  is  kept  in  the  background,  so  that 
men  may  come  to  full  a::e,  ay,  and  ^I'cn  to  old  age,  in  Christian  England, 
and  yet  the  plan  of  salvation  by  the  riglitconsncss  of  Jesns  Christ  may 
be  an  unknown  thing  to  them.     They  sit  in  the  darkness  of  ignorance. 

The  consetiuence  is,  that  another  darkness  follows,  the  darkness 
of  error.  Men  who  know  not  the  truth,  since  they  must  have  some 
faith,  seek  out  many  inventions  ;  for,  if  they  are  not  tanght  of  God, 
they  soon  become  taught  of  Satan,  and  apt  scholars  are  they  in  his 
school.  Galilee  was  noted  for  the  heresies  which  abounded  there. 
But  what  a  mercy  it  is  that  God  can  save  heretics.  Those  who 
have  received  false  doctrine,  and  added  darkness  to  darkness  in  so 
doing,  can  yet  be  broui;ht  into  the  glorious  light  of  truth.  Though 
they  may  have  denied  the  Deity  of  Christ,  though  they  may  have 
doubted  the  inspiration  of  Scripture,  though  they  may  have  fallea 
into  many  traps  and  pitfalls  of  false  doctrine,  yet  the  Divine  Shepherd 
when  lie  seeks  his  lost  sheep,  can  find  them  out  and  bring  fchem 
home  again. 

In  consequence  of  being  in  the  darkness  of  ignorance  and  error,  theic 
j)eople  were  wrapt  in  the  gloom  of  discomfort  and  sorrota.  Darkness 
is  an  expressive  type  of  sorrow.  The  mind  that  knows  not  God,  knows 
not  the  heart's  best  rest.  There  is  no  solace  for  our  griefs  like  the 
gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  those  who  are  ignorant  of  it  are  tossed  abort 
upon  a  stormy  sea,  without  an  anchorage.  Glory  be  to  God;  whet 
sorrow  has  brought  on  a  midnight,  grace  can  transform  it  intonocA 

This  darkness  of  sorrow  was  no  doubt  attended  with  much  fear.  Te 
love  not  darkness  because  we  cannot  see  what  is  before  ns,  and  therefDH 


LIGHT  FOR  THOSB  WHO  BIT  IK   DABEJSTESS.  507 

we  are  alarmed  by  imaginary  dangers ;  and,  in  the  same  way,  those  who 
are  ignorant  of  the  light  of  Christ  will  frequently  be  the  yictims  of 
Baperstitioos  dread;  ay,  and  true  and  well  founded  fears  will  arise  too, 
for  they  will  dread  death,  and  the  bar  of  God,  and  the  sentence  of  justice. 
Believe  me,  there  is  no  darkness  eo  black  as  the  horror  which  surrounds 
many  an  awakened  conscience  when  it  sees  its  ruin,  but  cannot  find  a 
Saviour ;  feels  its  sin,  and  cannot  see  the  way  by  which  it  may  be  expiated. 

Here,  then,  we  have  considered  one  part  of  this  said  condition; 
perhaps  it  describes  some  of  you. 

It  is  said  next  that  they  '*  sai  in  darkness."  Matthew  did  not  quote 
from  Isaiah  correctly ;  I  think  he  purposely  alters  it.  Isaiah  speaks, 
in  his  ninth  chapter,  of  a  people  that  '^walked  in  darkness  ;"  but  here  the 
evangelist  speaks  of  a  people  who  '*  sat  in  darkness.''  That  is  a  state 
of  less  hopefulness.  The  man  who  walks  is  active,  he  has  some  energy 
left,  and  may  reach  a  brighter  spot;  but  a  man  sitting  down  is  inac- 
tive, and  will  probably  abide  where  he  is.  '*  The  people  that  sat  in 
darkness  *' — as  if  they  had  been  there  a  long  while,  and  would  be  there 
longer  yet.  They  sat  as  though  they  had  been  turned  to  stone.  They  "  sat 
in  darkness,"  probably  through  despair;  they  had,  after  a  fashion,  striven 
for  the  light,  but  had  not  found  it,  and  so  they  gave  up  all  hope.  Their 
disappointed  hearts  told  them  that  they  might  as  well  spare  those  fruit- 
less efforts,  and  therefore  down  they  sat  with  the  stolidity  of  hopelessness. 
Why  should  they  make  any  more  exertion  ?  If  God  would  not  hear 
their  prayers,  why  should  they  pray  any  longer  ?  Being  ignorant  of 
hiB  abounding  grace,  and  of  the  way  of  salvation  by  his  Son,  they 
considered  themselves  as  consigned  to  perdition.  They  *^  sat  in  darkness/' 
Perhaps  they  sat  there  so  long  that  they  reached  a  state  of  insensibility 
and  indifference,  and  this  is  a  horrible  condition  of  heart;  but,  alasl  a 
very  common  one.  They  said,  "  What  matters  it,  since  there  is  no  hope 
for  UB?  Let  it  be  as  fate  appoints,  we  will  sit  still,  we  will  neither  cry 
nor  pray."  How  many  have  I  met  with  who  are  not  only  thus  in  dark- 
neas,  but  are  half-content  to  dare  the  terrible  future,  and  sullenly  to  wait 
till  the  storm-cloud  of  wrath  shall  burst  over  them.  It  is  a  most  sad 
aod  wretched  condition,  but  what  a  blessing  it  is  that  this  day  we  have 
a  gospel  to  preach  to  snch. 

Our  description  is  not  complete,  for  the  text  goes  on  to  speak  of 
them  as  sitting  "i/i  the  region  of  death;"  that  is  to  say,  these  people 
lived  in  a  territory  that  appeared  to  be  ruled  by  death,  and  to  be 
death's  haunt  and  natural  aoode.  Many  at  this  time,  and  in  this  Citv, 
are  tmly  living  in  the  domainof  spiritual  death.  All  around  them  isdeath. 
If  thqr  have  stepped  into  this  house  this  morning,  their  position  is  an  ex- 
oeption  to  their  general  one.  They  will  go  home  to  a  Sabbath-breaking 
hrasehold;  they  hear  habitually  oaths,  profane  language,  and  lascivious 
aongs  ;  and  thus  they  breathe  the  reek  of  the  charnel-house.  If  they 
have  a  good  thought,  it  is  ridiculed  by  those  about  them.  They  dwell 
■8  among  the  tombs,  with  men  whose  mouths  are  open  sepulchres, 
pouring  forth  aU  manner  of  offensiveness.  How  sad  a  condition! 
It  seems  to  such  poor  souls,  perhaps,  being  now  a  little  awakened,  that 
areiything  about  them  is  prophetic  of  death.  They  are  afraid  to  take  a 
rtep  lest  the  earth  should  open  a  door  to  the  bottomless  pit.  I  remember 
irefi,  when  I  was  under  conviction,  how  all  the  world  seemed  in  league 


508  METROPOLITAN  TABEBXAOLE  FULPIT. 

acrainst  mc,  the  beasts  of  the  field  and  the  stones  thereof.  I  wondered 
then  the  heavens  could  refrain  from  falling  upon  me,  or  the  earth  from 
opening  her  mouth  to  swallow  me  up.  I  was  under  sentence  of  difioe 
wrath,  and  felt  as  if  [  were  in  a  condemned  cell,  and  all  creation  were 
but  the  walls  of  mj  dungeon.     **  Thcjsat  in  the  region  of  death." 

But  it  is  added  that  they  sat  "  in  the  shadow  of  death ;"  that  isi  under 
its  cold,  i)oisonou9,  depressing  shade;  as  though  grim  death  stood orer 
them  in  all  thcj  did,  and  his  shadow  kept  from  them  the  light  of 
heaven.  They  are  sitting  there  this  morning:  they  are  saying  to  them- 
selves, "  Preacli,  sir,  as  you  may,  you  will  never  comfort  me  :  yoo  may 
tell  me  of  love  and  mercy,  but  I  shall  never  be  cheered  thereby:  Ian 
chilled  through  my  Ycry  marrow,  as  though  the  frost  of  death  hvi 
smitten  me:  I  am  unable  now  to  hope,  or  even  to  pray,  ercn  mj 
desires  are  all  but  dead.     Like  a  frozen  corpse  is  my  soul." 

And  it  is  implied,  too,  that  to  such  death  itself  is  very  near,  for  those 
who  are  in  the  shadow  of  a  thing  arc  near  to  the  thing  itself;  and  the 
sinner,  bewildered  and  amazed  at  the  guilt  of  his  sin,  is  only  sure  of 
one  thing,  and  that  is,  that  he  is  in  immediate  danger  of  being  cast  into 
hell.  I  have  known  some  afraid  to  shut  their  eyes  at  night,  lest  tbej 
should  open  them  in  torments  ;  otheis  have  been  afraid  to  goto  their 
beds,  lest  their  couch  should  become  their  cofSn ;  thej  have  not  known 
what  to  do,  by  reason  of  depression  of  spirit.  Job's  language  has  ben 
theirs,  *'My  soul  is  weary  of  my  life."  It  is  clear,  to  me  that 
the  descri[)tion  of  the  text  very  accurately  pictures  many  of  the  soni 
of  men.  I  pray  God  that  none  of  you  ]>oor  darkened  soals  may  be 
so  foolish  as  to  try  to  exclude  yourself  from  it,  though  sach  ii 
the  perversity  of  despondency  that  I  greatly  fear  yon  may  do  lO. 
However  small  we  make  the  meshes  of  the  gospel  net,  there  are  certain 
little  fish  that  will  find  a  way  of  escaping  from  its  blessed  toils,  though 
we  try  to  meet  the  character,  we  miss  it  through  the  singular  dexterity 
of  despair.  The  fact  is  that  when  a  man  is  sin-sick,  his  soul  abhorreth  aU 
manner  of  meat,  and  unless  the  beloved  physician  shall  interpose,  he 
will  die  of  famine  with  the  bread  of  life  spread  out  before  him.  Dear 
friends,  may  the  Lord  visit  yon  with  his  saving  health,  and  give  to  the 
saddest  of  you  joy  and  peace  in  believing. 

II.  Having  given  the  description  of  those  in  the  darkness,  let  oi 
now  pass  on  to  the  second  point.     Fob  those  who  are  is  ▲  WOBBI 

CONDITION  THAN  OTHERS  THERE  IS  HOFE  AND  LIGHT. 

To  the  benighted  land  of  Zabulon  and  Naphtali  the  gospel  came,snd 
evermore  to  souls  enwrapt  in  gloom  the  gospel  has  come  as  a  cheering 
and  guiding  light ;  and  there  are  good  reasons  why  it  should  be  M. 
For,  first,  among  such  people  the  gospel  has  reaped  very  rich  froit. 
Among  barbarous  nations  Christ  has  won  great  trophies.  The  poor 
Karens  arc  wonders  of  grace,  the  cannibals  of  the  South  Sea  IiuuMb 
are  miracles  of  mercy,  and  among  the  once  enslaved  Ethiopians  there  sn 
warm  and  loving  hearts  which  rejoice  in  Jesu's  name.  Id  this  City,  I 
will  venture  to  say,  that  no  churches  reflect  more  hononr  npoa  the 
Master's  name  than  those  which  have  been  gathered  from  among  the 
destitute  districts.  What  wonders  God  has  done  by  that  blessed  choidi 
in  Q  olden  Lane,  under  our  dear  brother  Orsman  ?  What  oonvers  ont 
have  taken  place  in  connection  with  the  mission  churches  of  St  GUm' 


LIGHT  FOB  THOSE  WHO  SIT  HT  DARKNESS.  509 

nd  Whitechapel  ?  chorches  made  of  the  poorest  of  the  poor  and  the 
)we8t  of  the  low.  God  is  glorified  when  the  thief  and  the  harlot  are 
'ashed  and  cleansed  and  made  obedient  to  the  law  of  Christ.  When 
iiose  who  are  healed  stand  at  the  pastor^s  side,  even  ribald  tongues  are 
[lent,  or  are  made  to  exclaim,  "What  hath  God  wrought?"  The 
Eime  is  true  of  persons  mentally  depressed,  who  are  despairing  of 
lemselves;  many  such  have  been  converted.  Some  of  as  were  brought 
erj  low  before  we  found  the  Saviour ;  lower  we  could  not  well  have 
een:  we  were  emptied  like  a  dish  that  a  man  wipes  and  turns  upside 
own  ;  we  had  not  even  a  drop  of  hope  left  in  us;  but  we  rejoice  in 
ihrist  to-day,  and  we  say  to  despairing  souls,  we  are  personal  witnesses 
lat  Christ  has  saved  such  as  you  are,  he  has  in  our  case  caused  light 
>  shine  on  those  who  sat  in  darkness,  and  out  of  death*s  cold  shade 
ito  life*8  fall  light  he  has  brought  us  as  prisoners  of  hope ;  and,  therefore, 
e  can  do  the  same  with  you.  Be  of  good  courage,  there  is  hope  for 
on, 

m 

It  is  a  farther  consolation  to  sad  hearts,  that  many  promises  are 
lade  to  snch  characters,  even  to  those  who  are  most  dark.  How  pre- 
ions  is  that  word,  '^  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy 
iden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  Is  not  that  made  for  yon,  ye 
ordened  and  labouring  sinners?  What  say  you  to  that  gracious 
ord — "When  the  poor  and  needy  seek  water,  and  there  is  none,  and 
leir  tongue  faileth  for  thirst,  I  the  Lord  will  hear  them,  I  the  God  of 
BOob  will  not  forsake  them  ?"  Is  there  no  light  in  that  word  of  love — 
Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and  the  anrighteoas  man  his  thoughts: 
id  let  him  return  unto  the  Lord,  and  he  will  have  mercy  upon  him ; 
id  to  our  God,  for  he  will  abundantly  pardon  ?  "  Is  there  no  music 
I  this  passage — '*  Who  is  a  God  like  unto  thee,  that  pardoneth  iniquity, 
nd  passeth  by  the  transgression  of  the  remnant  of  his  heritage  ?  he 
iaineth  not  his  anger  for  ever,  because  be  delighteth  in  mercy.  He 
ill  turn  again,  he  will  have  compassion  upon  us;  he  will  subdue  our 
iqnities;  and  thou  wilt  cast  all  their  sins  into  the  depths  of  the  sea  ?  " 
recollect  when  my  soul  was  stayed  for  weeks  on  that  one  short  word, 
Whosoever  ealieih  upon  the  Lord,  shall  be  saved."  I  knew  I  did  call 
i  his  name,  and  therefore  I  hoped  to  see  his  salvation*  Many  have 
id  hold  and  rested  themselves  on  this  faithful  saying,  "  Him  that 
naeth  to  me,  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  He  will  receive  any  "  him  " 
r  *•  her*'  in  all  the  world  that  comes,  be  he  or  she  ever  so  defiled.  That 
BO  is  a  rich  word,  '*  He  is  able  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost  that  come 
ato  God  by  him,  seeing  he  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them.** 
rhst  a  word  was  that  of  our  Master  when  he  commanded  his  disciples 
» preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature,  beginning  at  Jerusalem.  They 
ere  to  commence  their  labours  amongst  his  murderers,  amongst  hypo- 
itical  Pharisees  and  proud  Herodians ;  they  were  to  begin  where  the 
ml  reigned  most  supreme,  and  to  present  Christ  to  the  worst  sinners 
rat.  See  you,  then,  that  great  sinners,  so  far  from  being  excluded,  are 
ist  those  to  whom  the  good  news  is  to  be  first  published.  Be  of  good 
onfort,  then,  ye  that  sit  in  darkness :  there  are  special  promises  for 

Moreover,  remember,  that  the  conversion  of  the  more  deplorably 
irk  and  despairing  brings  the  highest  degree  of  glory  to  God.    When 


510  METBOPOUTAK  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

his  glory  passes  by  great  sin,  then  it  is  mercy  indeed.  Where  it  is  greatly 
displayed,  it  is  greatly  extolled.  Many  are  saved  by  Christ,  in  whom  tht 
change  is  not  very  apparent,  and  consequently  but  little  fame  is  brought 
to  the  good  Physician  through  it ;  bat,  oh,  if  he  will  have  mercy  upon 
yonder  mourner,  who  has  been  these  ten  years  in  despair  ;  if  he  will 
say,  "  Woman,  thou  art  loosed  from  thine  infirmities,"  the  whole  pariah 
will  ring  with  it !  If  Jesus  will  come  and  save  that  black,  ignoraot 
sinner,  whom  everybody  knows  because  he  has  become  a  pest  and  a 
nuisance  to  the  town;  if  such  a  demoniac  has  the  devil  cast  out  of  him, 
how  all  men  will  say,  "  This  is  the  finger  of  God."  Yes,  a  poor  wretdi 
brought  back  again,  as  the  sixty-eighth  Psalm  has  it,  *'  from  Bashan,an(i 
from  the  depths  of  the  sea,"  is  a  splendid  trophy  to  the  conquerin:; 
power  of  Almighty  grace.  God's  great  object  is  to  glorify  his  great 
name;  and,  as  this  is  best  accomplished  when  his  mercy  delivers  the 
worst  cases,  there  is  surely  hope  for  those  who  sit  in  darkntss,  bound 
in  affliction  and  iron. 

Moreover,  when  they  happily  behold  the  light,  such  persons  frequently 
become  eminently  useful  to  others.  Their  experience  aids  them  m  con- 
soling others,  and  their  gratitude  makes  them  eager  to  do  so.  0  sweet 
light,  how  .precious  art  thou  to  blind  eyes,  when  they  are  newly  openei 
You  do  not  know  what  it  is  to  be  blind  :  thank  God  that  yoa  do  not: 
there  are  some  here,  however,  who  painfully  know  what  constant  darkness 
is  ;  it  is  a  grievous  privation  :  but,  when  their  eyes  are  opened,  as  they 
will  be  in  another  state,  and  they  see  that  best  of  sights,  the  Sang  in  hu 
beuuty,  how  sweet  will  light  be  to  them  ! 

*^  Nights  and  days  of  total  blindness 
Are  their  portion  here  below ; 
Beams  of  love  t'rom  eyes  of  kindness, 
Never  here  on  earth  they  know. 
But  on  high  they  shull  behold 
Angels  tuning  harps  of  goki ; 
Rapture  to  the  new-born  sight ; 
Jesus  in  celestiHl  light  I 

So,  when  the  spiritual  eye  has  long  been  dim,  and  we  have  mourned 
and  wept  for  sin,  but  could  not  behgld  a  Saviour,  light  is  sweet  l)€yimd 
expression.  And,  because  it  is  so  sweet,  there  is  a  necessity  withm  the 
enlightened  soul  to  tell  out  the  joyful  news  to  others.  When  a  man 
has  deeply  felt  the  evil  of  sin,  and  has  at  length  obtained  mercy,  be 
cries  with  David,  "  Then  will  I  teach  transgressors  thy  ways,  and  sinners 
bhall  be  converted  unto  thee."  John  Bunyan's  impulse  when  he  foand 
the  Saviour  was  to  tell  the  crows  on  the  ploughed  ground  about  it,  and 
he  lived  to  do  better  than  talk  to  crows,  for  day  by  day,  from  gene- 
ration to  generation,  his  works  proclaim  the  Friend  of  sinners,  who 
leads  them  from  the  City  of  Destruction  to  the  Celestial  glory.  Zealoni 
saints  are  usually  those  who  once  were  in  great  darkness  ;  they  see  what 
grace  has  done  for  them,  and  for  that  very  reason  they  feel  sn 
attachment  to  their  dear  Lord  and  Master,  which  they  might  never  ha^ 
felt  if  they  had  not  once  sat  in  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death.  So, 
poor  troubled  ones,  for  these  reasons,  and  fifty  more  I  might  bring  tf 
time  did  not  fail  me,  there  is  hope  for  you. 

III.  Bat  now,  the  best  part  of  our  disconrse  oomea  under  the  tfaitd 


LIQHT  FOB  TH08B  WHO  BIT  IN  DARKNESS.  511 

ead.  The  true  light  for  a  bottl  in  darkness  is  all  in  Christ. 
[ear  ye  the  text.  ^'The  people  which  sat  in  darkness  saw  great 
ght."  Now  Christ  is  not  only  light,  but  great  light;  he  reveals 
reat  things,  he  manifests  great  comforts,  saves  us  from  great  sin  and 
reat  wrath,  and  prepares  us  for  great  glory.  He  is,  however,  a  Saviour 
[lat  must  be  seen.  **  The  people  that  &at  in  darkness  saw  great  light." 
light  is  of  no  use  unless  it  be  seen.  Faith  must  grasp  the  blessings 
'hich  the  Savioar  brings.  ''  Look  unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  ye 
nds  of  the  earth."  We  must  see  the  Saviour  with  a  glance  of  faith, 
hen  have  we  light.  Let  us  iConsider  how  clearly  Christ  Jesus  him- 
slf  is  the  light  of  every  believing  eye,  and.  delivers  the  most  troubled 
Dul  from  its  misery.  In -him » is  light,  and  the  light  is  the  light 
f  men.  Jesus  perbonally  is  the  day-dawn,  and  the  morning  without 
loads. 

First,  there  is  li^ht  in  Christ*s  nams  for  a  troubled  sinner.  What  is 
t?  Jesus.  Jesus,  a  Saviour.  I  am  a  sinner  lost  and  ruined,  but  I 
ejoice,  for  Jesus  has  eome  to  seek  and  to  save  that  wliich  was  lost. 
ly  sins  trouble  me,  but  he  shall  «ave  his  people  from  their  sins.  Satan 
nnoys  me,  but  he  has  oome  to  destix)y  the  works  of  the  devil.  He 
s  not  a  nominal^  bat  a  real  Saviour.'  We  know  captains  and  colonels 
rho  have  no  troops,  and  never  saw  fighting,  but  not  so  the  Captain  of 
ur  salvation;'- he  brings  many  sons  unto  glory.  If  a  man  is  called  a 
nilder,  we  expect  him  to  build ;  if  a  merchant,  we  expect  him  to  trade; 
nd  as  Jesus  is  a  Saviocu*,  he  will  carry  on  his  sacred  business,  he 
rill  save  multitudes.  Why,  surely  there  is  comfortable  hope  here. 
)o  you  not  Bee  the  dawning  au/^^he  name  of  Saviour?  Surely,  if  he 
omes  to  save,  and  you  need^avin?,  there  is  ii  blessed  suitability  in  you 
>r  one  another/  -A  prisoueF  at  the  bai*  is^lad  to  meet  one  who  is  by 
irofession  an  advocate  f  a  ship  ouet  of  its  t^ack  welcomes  a  pilot ;  a 
raveller  lost  on  the  jnoors  is  delighted  if  he  meets  one  who  is  by 
rade  a  guide;  and  so  a^inne^Bhould  rejoice  at  the  bare  mention  of  a 
lavionr.  - 

There  18' similar  encouragement  in  the  second  name,  Christy  for  it 
leans  anointed<.^  Our  Lord  Jesus  is  not  an  amateur  Saviour,  who  has 
ome  here  without  a  commission  from  God ;  he  is  not  an  adventurer, 
rho  sets  up  on  bis  ow&  acoount  to-do  a  kind  of  work  for  which  he  is 
ot  qualified :  no,  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  hira,  for  the  Lord 
ath  anointed  bim  to  this  work  of >  saving  souls.  He  is  Jesus  Christ, 
rhoni  Qod  hath  sent.  Him  hath  God  the»  Father  sealed.  He  spake 
ot  of  himself,  but.  God  was  with  him,  and  in  him.  Why,  beloved 
rieud,  now  that  I  am  in  the  light  I  can  see  a  whole  sunful  of  splendour 
1  that  doable  name  Jesus  Christ,  s^d  yet  I  fear  that  those  who  are  in 
arkness  may  not  perceive  it^  Whom  God  anoints  to  save,  must  surely 
e  both  able  and  willing  to  save  the  guilty.  This  name  is  as  the  morning 
tar  ;  look  at  it,  and  kdirwrthat  day  is  near.  It  has  such  joy  in  it  that 
lisery  itself  ought  to  leap  with  holy  mirth  at  the  sound  of  it. 

It  is  our  delightful  task  to  add  that  there  is  light  for  those  who 
it  in  darkness  in  our  Lord's  person  and  nakire.  Mark  right  well 
ho  this  Jesus  Christ  is.  He  is  in  the  constitution  of  his  person 
oth  God  and  man,  divine  and  -human,  equal  with  Ood  and  fellow 
ith  man.    Do  you  not  see  in  this  fact  the  love  of  God,  that  be  should 


512  METBOPOUTAK  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

be  willinc:  to  take  humanity  into  union  with  himself?  If  Qod  becomes 
man,  he  does  not  hate  men,  but  has  love  towards  them.  Do  you  not  aee 
the  suitability  of  Christ  to  deal  with  you,  for  he  is  like  yourself  a  man, 
touched  with  the  feeling  of  your  infirmities ;  of  a  human  mother  bora, 
he  hung  at  a  woman's  breast,  he  suffered  hunger  and  thirst  and  vetri- 
ness,  and,  dead  and  buried  in  the  tomb,  he  was  partaker  in  oar  doom  m 
well  as  our  sorrow?  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  most  tmly  a  man,  be  ii 
bone  of  your  bone  and  flesh  of  your  flesh.  0  sinner,  look  into  the 
face  of  the  man  of  sorrows  and  you  must  trust  him.  Since  he  is  alao 
Ood,  you  therein  see  his  power  to  carry  on  the  work  of  salvation.  He 
touches  you  with  the  hand  of  his  humanity,  but  he  touches  the  Almighty 
with  the  hand  of  his  Deity.  He  is  man,  and  feels  yonr  needs  ;  he  n 
God,  and  is  able  to  supply  them.  Is  anything  too  tender  for  his  heart 
of  love  ?  Is  anything  too  hard  for  his  hand  of  power  ?  When  the  Lord 
himself,  that  made  the  heavens  and  digged  the  foundations  of  the  earth, 
comes  to  be  your  Saviour,  there  remains  no  difficulty  in  year  being 
saved.  Omnipotence  cannot  know  a  difficulty,  and,  O  sinner,  to  an 
omnipotent  Saviour  it  is  not  hard  to  save  even  you.  A  look  of  faith 
will  give  you  perfect  pardon.  A  touch  of  the  hem  of  the  Redeemer*! 
garment  will  heal  you  at  once.  Come,  then,  and  trust  the  incamaie 
God.    Cast  yourself  into  his  arms  at  once. 

There  is  light,  moreover,  in  his  qfficeft,  and,  indeed,  a  brightness  of 
glory  which  a  little  thought  will  soon  perceive.  What  are  his  offices  ? 
1  cannot  stay  to  mention  a  tithe  of  them,  but  one  of  them  is  thai  of 
Mediator.  Your  soul  longs  to  speak  to  God  and  find  acceptance  with 
him,  but  you  are  afraid  to  venture  into  his  terrible  presence.  I  wonder 
not  at  your  fear,  for  ^*  even  our  God  is  a  consuming  fire.*'  Bat  be  of 
good  comfort,  the  way  of  access  is  open,  and  there  is  One  who  will  go 
in  unto  the  King  with  you,  and  open  his  mouth  on  your  behalf.  Jesoi 
has  interposed  and  filled  the  great  gulf  which  yawned  between  the 
sinner  and  his  righteous  judge.  His  blood  has  paved  the  crimson  way; 
his  cross  has  bridged  each  stream  ;  his  person  is  the  highway  for  than 
who  would  draw  near  to  God.  Now,  as  Christ  Jesus  is  the  Medittor 
between  God  and  man,  and  yon  want  one,  take  him  and  you  will  hire 
light  at  once. 

You  desire,  also,  this  day  a  sacHfice,  to  make  atonement  for  yoor 
iniquities;  that  also  yon  will  find  in  Christ.  God  must  pnnish  tin, 
every  transgression  must  receive  its  just  recompense  of  reward ;  hot) 
lo,  Christ  has  come,  and  as  the  scape-goat  he  has  carried  sin  away ;  as 
the  sin-offering  he  has  removed  transgression.  Is  not  this  good  news? 
But  I  hear  you  say  that  your  sins  are  too  many  and  great.  Do  jon 
then  foolishly  think  that  Christ  is  a  sin-bearer  for  the  innocent?  That 
would  be  ridiculous.  Do  you  suppose  that  Christ  bore  little  sins  only? 
That  is  to  make  him  a  little  Saviour.  Beware  of  this.  Nay,  but  moon- 
tain  sins,  heaven-defying  sins,  were  laid  on  him  when  he  hung  apoQ 
the  tree,  and  for  these  he  made  effectual  atonement.  Is  there  no  light 
in  all  this  ? 

Moreover,  to  mention  only  one  other  office,  our  TiOrd  is  an  Intercessor. 
Perhaps,  one  of  your  greatest  difficulties  is  that  you  cannot  pray.  Yoa 
say,  '*  I  cannot  put  a  dozen  words  together  ;  if  I  groan,  I  fear  I  do  not 
feel  in  my  heart  what  I  ought  to  fecL*'    Well,  there  is  One  who 


LIGHT  FOR  TH06E  WHO  SIT  IN  DARKNESS.  513 

pray  for  you  if  yon  cannofc  for  yoarself.  Give  him  your  canse  to  plead, 
and  do  not  doubt  but  that  it  shall  sacceed.  God  grant  you  grace,  as 
yon  see  each  office  of  Christ,  to  perceive  that  it  has  a  bright  side  for 
sinners.  I  doubt  not,  light  streams  continaally  from  every  part  of  the 
snn  to  cheer  the  worlds  that  revolve  around  it ;  so,  from  the  whole  of 
Christ,  there  issues  forth  comfort  for  poor  and  needy  souls.  He  de- 
lighteth  in  mercy.  He  is  a  Saviour  and  a  great  one.  He  is  all  love,  all 
tenderness,  all  pity,  all  goodness ;  and  the  very  chief  of  sinners,  if  they 
do  but  see  him,  shall  see  light. 

Once  again,  if  you  want  light,  think  of  his  character^  as  the  meek  and 
lowly  Saviour.  Little  children  loved  him;  he  called  them  and  they 
willingly  came,  for  he  was  meek  and  lowly  of  heart.  0  sinner,  could 
he  refuse  thee  ?  Do  you  think  he  could  give  you  a  hard  word  and  send 
you  about  jour  business,  if  you  were  to  seek  mercy  to  day  ?  It  could 
not  be  ;  it  is  not  in  the  nature  of  him,  who  was  both  the  Son  of  God 
and  the  Son  of  Man,  ever  to  repel  a  heart  that  fain  would  cling  to  him. 
Until  he  has  once  acted  harshly  to  a  coming  sinner,  you  have  no  right 
to  dream  of  his  rejecting  you,  if  you  come  to  him. 

Think  for  a  minute  of  his  life.  He  was  '^separate  from  sinners,** 
we  are  told,  and  yet  it  is  elsewhere  said  of  him,  **  this  man  receiveth 
sinners,  and  eateth  with  thom."  Friend  of  sinners  was  his  name,  and 
is  still.  Think  of  that  self-denjing  life  spent  among  the  sick  and  the 
sinful  for  their  good.  And  then  think  of  his  death,  for  here  the  light 
of  grace  is  focussed ;  the  cross,  like  a  burning-glass,  concentrates  the 
light  and  heat  of  Christ's  love  upon  the  sinner.  See  him  agonizing  in 
the  garden  for  sins  that  were  not  his  own :  see  him  scourged  with  awful 
flagellations  for  transgressions  in  which  he  had  no  share  :  behold  him 
blading  and  dying  on  the  tree  for  his  enemies;  sufferer  for 
iniquities  in  which  he  never  was  a  participator,  for  in  him  was  no  sin. 
It  must  be  true  that  God  can  save  me,  if  Christ  has  died  in  the  stead  of 
the  guilty.  This  argument  has  killed  my  unbelief.  I  cannot  disbelieve, 
when  I  see  incarnate  God  suffering  for  the  guilty,  the  just  for  the  unjust, 
to  bring  them  to  God. 

'^  Sinners !  come,  the  Saviour  see, 
Hands,  feet,  si^e,  and  temples  view  ; 
See  him  bleeding  on  the  tree, 
See  his  heart  on  fire  for  you ! 

View  awhile,  then  haste  awi^, 
Find  a  thousand  more,  and  say : 
Come,  ye  sinners  I  come  with  me. 
View  him  bleeding  on  the  tree." 

I  wish  it  were  in  my  power  to  convey  the  light  which  I  see  in  the 
crou  into  the  mental  eyeballs  of  all  my  hearers,  but  I  cannot;  Qod  the 
Hply  Ghost  must  do  it  Yet,  beloved,  if  ever  yon  get  light,  it  will  be 
in  this  way :  Christ  must  be  a  great  light  to  you.  Nobody  ever 
found  light  by  raking  in  his  own  inward  darkness ;  that  is  indeed  seek- 
ing the  living  among  the  dead.  You  may  rake  as  long  as  ever 
{on  will  among  the  embers  of  your  depravity  before  you  will 
nd  a  spark  of  good  there.  Away  from  self,  away  from  your  own 
xesolntions,  away  from  your  own  prayers,  repentances,  and  faith;  away  to 


514  MbTROPOLIT^  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Christ  on  the  cross  mDst  yon  look.  All  your  hope  and  help  are  laid  on 
Imraanacrs  shoulders.  You  are  nothing.  Not  a  rag  nor  a  thread  of 
your  own  righteousness  will  do ;  Christ's  robe  of  righteousness  rnoA 
cover  you  from  head  to  foot.  Blow  out  your  paltry  candles,  put  oat  the 
sparks  which  you  have  vainly  kindled,  for  behold  the  Sun  is  risra! 
*'  Arise,  shine ;  for  thy  light  is  come,  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  is  risen 
upon  Ihee."  Ye  want  no  other  light  than  that  of  Jesus:  dream  of  no 
other.  Give  up  self,  give  up  self-hope,  be  in  utter  despair  of  anything 
that  you  can  ao,  and  now,  whether  you  sink  or  swim,  throw  yourself 
into  the  8ca  of  Christ's  love :  rest  in  him  and  you  shall  never  pensh, 
neither  shall  any  pluck  you  from  his  hands. 

•*  Cast  your  deadly  *  doing'  down, 
Down  at  Jesus*  feet, 
8tand  in  him,  in  bim  alone. 
Gloriously  complete." 

IV.  But,  lastly,  we  would  say  to  every  poor  soul  in  darkness,  yon 
need  be  in  darkness  no  longer  ;  for  uqht  is  all  around  you  :  it  has 
already  **  sprung  up." 

AVhat  a  mercy,  my  dear  despairing  hearer,  that  you  are  not  in  hell ! 
You  might  have  been  there  :  many  no  Worse  than  you  are  there ;  and  yet 
here  you  are  in  the  land  of  hope.  This  day  God  does  not  ded  with  yon 
according  to  the  law,  but  after  the  gospel  fashion  ;  you  are  not  come  to 
Sinai  this  morning,  no  burning  mountain  is  before  you,  and  no  tones  of 
thunder  peal  from  it;  you  are  come  unto  Mount  Zion,  where  the  Me- 
diator of  the  new  cov«^nant  speaks  peace  and  pardon.  I  have  no 
commission  to  curse  you,  but  I  have  distinct  authority  from  my  Master 
to  bid  you  come  ana  receive  his  blessing.  On  Zion*s  top  to-day  yc 
have  come  to  the  blood  of  sprinkling  ;  you  might  have  been  called  to 
the  blood  of  your  own  execution  I  No  devils  are  around  you,  but  an 
inimmcrable  company  of  angels,  who  wish  you  well.  See  that  ye  refuse 
not  him  that  speaketh.  Remember,,  dear  hearers,  that  to-day  the  gospel 
command  is  sent  to  you  all ;  you  that  are  most  despairing,  you  are 
bidden  to  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  *'  Prove  that,"  say  you.  I 
prove  it  thus  :  he  bade  his  disciples  go  into  all  the.  world  and  pr^uA^e 
gospel  to  every  creature  ;  you  are  a  creature,  therefore  we  preach  it  to 
you.  And  what  was  the  .gospel  ?  AVhy,  just  this;  "  He  that  belieTeth 
and  is  baptised,  shall  be  saved :  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned.** 
That  gospel,  then,  comes  to  you — God  commandeth  all  men,  every where^ 
to  repent.  0  what  mercy  it  is  -  that,  the  light  of  the  gospel  shines  around 
you  still  1  Will  you  shut  your  eyes  to  it?  I  bjeseedi  you,  donotso 
wickedly. 

Moreover,  the  provisions  of  the  gospel,  which  axe  foil  of  light  and 
love,  arc  uU  around  you  at  thia  moment.  If  you  will  now  believe 
in  Christ  Jesus,  every  sin  that  you..have  committed  shall  be  forgiven 
you  for  his  namesake  ^  you  shall  be  to  God  as  though  yon  had  never 
sinned ;  the  precious  blood  shall  make  you  as  white  as  snow.  "  Bat 
that  will  not  suffice,"  says  one,./'  for  God  rigjiteously  demands  obedience 
to  his  holy  law,  and  I  havanot  kept  his  commandments,  and  therefore 
am  weighed  in  the  balances  and  found  wanting:.''  Yon  shall  have  a 
perfect  righteousness  in  one  moment  if  jou  believe  in  Jesna,  '*  evea  as 


LIGHT  FOB  TH03B  WHO  SIT   IN  DARKNESS.  515 

David  also  describefch  the  blessedness  of  the  man  nnto  whom  Qod 
impnteth  righteousness  without  works."     Happy  is  the  man  to  whom 
Jesus  Christ  is  made  wisdom  and  righteonsness,  and  he  is  so  to  everj 
one  that  believeth.    "  There  is  therefore  now  no  condemnation  to  them 
which  are  in  Christ  Jesus."    "  Ah,"  say  you,  "  but  I  have  a  bad  heart  and 
an  evil  nature."    If  thou  believest,  thy  nature  is  chanjred  already,  "A 
new  heart  also  will  I  give  them,  and  a  right  spirit  will  I  put  within 
them."     "  They  shall  also  walk  in  my  judgments,   and  observe  my 
statutes,  and  do  them."     He  can  change  you  so  that  you  shall  scarcely 
know  yourself ;  you  shall  be  a  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesus ;  old  things 
shall  pass  away  and  all  things  shall  become  new.    He  will  take  away  the 
heart  of  stone,  and  glye  you  a  heart  of  flesh.   **  Alas,"  say  you,  "  even  this 
is  not  enough,  for  I  shall  never  hold  on  in  the  ways  of  righteousness, 
but^hall  go  back  nnto  perdition."  Hear,  0  thou  trembler,  these  gracious 
words:   "I  will  put  my  fear  in  their  hearts,  and  they  shall  not  depart 
from  me.'*    And  what  saith  our  Lord  himself  ?    He  saith,  "  They  shall 
never  perish,  neither  shall  any  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand."    "  The 
water  that  I  shall  give  him  shall  be  in  him  a  well  of  water  springing  up 
unto  everlasting  life."    **  But  what,  if  I  go  astray,"  says  one.    Then  he 
will  heal  your  backslid ings,  receive  you  graciously,  and  love  you  freely. 
"He  restoreth  my  soul."    He  will  not  suffer  even  his  wandering  sheep 
to  perish,  but  once  again  will  he  put  them  in  the  right  way.    "  Ah,  but 
my  soul-poverty  is  deep,  and  my  wants  will  be  too  qreat."    How  can 
yon  say  this?     Is  he  not  the  God  all  sufficient  ?     Has  the  arm  of  the 
Lord  waxed  short?    Did  he  not  furnish  a  table  in  the  wilderness ?   Is  it 
not  written,  "  My  God  shall  supply  all  your  need  ?"    He  shall  cause  all 
grace  to  abound  towards  you.     "  Fear  not,  thou  worm  Jacob,  I  will 
help  thee,  saith  the  Lord."     "  Ah,  but,"  saith  one,  "  I  shall  surely  be 
afraid  to  die,  for  I  am  afraid  of  it  even  now."    "  He  thaji  liveth  and 
believeth  in  me,  though  he  were  dead,  yet  shall  he  live."    "  When  thou 
passest  through  the  rivers,  I  will  be  with  thee."     Death  is  swallowed  up 
m  victory.     Having  loved  his  own  which  are  in  the  world,  he  will  love 
them  to  the  end.     Thou  shalt  have  such  faith  in  dying  moments  that 
thou  shalt  say  :  "0  death,  where  is  thy  sting  ?  0  grave,  where  is  thy 
victory  ?"     •* But  you  do  not  mean  me"  saith  one.    I  mean  you  that 
sit  in  darkness,  you  that  are  ignorant,  you  that  are  depressed,  you 
that  have  no  good  thing  of  your  own,  you  that  cannot  help  yourselves, 
yon  lost  ones,  you  condemned  ones,  I  mean  you.    And  this  is  God's 
message  to  you :  "God  sent  not  his  Son  into  the  world  to  condemn 
the  world,  but  that  the  world  through  him  might  be  saved."     "  Whom 
God  hath  set  forth  to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  his  blood,  to 
declare  his  righteousness  for  the  remission  of  sins  that  are  past,  through 
the  forbearance  of  God ;  to  declare,   I  say,  at  this  time  his  righteous- 
ness :  that  he  might  be  just,  and  the  justifier  of  him  which  believeth 
in  Jesus."    "  He  that  believeth  on  him  is  not  condemned."    Oh,  come, 
ye  guilty ;  for  he  is  ready  to  forgive  you.    Come,  ye  filthj ;  the  fountain 
isr^y  for  your  cleansing.     Come,  ye  sorrowful,  since  joy  is  prepared ; 
his  oxen  and  fatlings  are  killed,  for  all  things  are  ready  ;  come  to  the 
feast  of  love.     But  I  hear  you  say,  "  I  must  surely  do  something." 
Have  done  with  your  doings,  and  take  Christ's  doinirs.    **  Oh,  but  I 
do  not  feel  as  I  should."    Have  done  with  your  feelings:    Christ's 


i 


516  XETBOPOLITAK  TABBBNACLB  PULPIT. 

feelings  on  the  cross  mnst  saye  yon,  not  your  own  feelings.    ''  Oh,  bofc 
I  am  BO  Tile."     He  came  to  saye  the  yile. 

**  Come,  in  all  thy  filthy  garments. 

Tarry  not  to  cleanse  or  mend  ; 
Come,  in  all  thy  destitution. 

As  thou  art,  and  he*ll  befriend. 
By  the  tempter's  vain  allurements^ 

Be  no  longer  thou  beguiled  : 
God  the  Father  waits  to  own  thee 

As  his  dear  adopted  child." 

•*  But  I  liavo  been  an  adulterer,  I  have  been  a  thief,  I  have  been  a 
whoremonger,  and  everything  that  is  bad.*'  Be  it  so,  yet  it  is  a  faithfW 
saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesas  came  into  the 
world  to  save  sinners.  All  manner  of  sin  and  of  blasphemy  shall  be  for- 
given unto  men.  It  is  true  that  you  are  much  worse  than  you  think  yon 
are :  you  may  tell  me  you  are  horribly  bad,  but  you  have  no  idea  how 
bad  you  are :  the  hottest  place  in  hell  is  your  desert ;  but  it  is  to  yon  the 
mercy  is  sent ;  to  you,  0  man,  to  you,  0  woman,  to  you  who  baye  defiled 
yourself  with  all  manner  of  unmentionable  enormities,  even  to  you,  thus 
saith  the  Lord,  *'  I  have  blotted  out  thy  sins  like  a  cloud  and  like  a  thick 
cloud  thy  trauFgressions ;  return  unto  me  and  I  will  have  mercy  apon 
thee."  I  cannot  say  more.  I  wish  I  had  the  power  to  speak,  I  was  about 
to  say,  with  the  tongues  of  men  and  of  angels,  but  I  have  such  a  blessed 
message  to  deliver  to  you,  that  I  feel  it  need  not  goodly  words,  themes- 
sage  itself  is  all  that  is  needed  if  the  Spirit  bless  it.  Ob,  do  not  reject 
it,  I  beseech  you,  you  guilty  ones !  you  despairing  ones,  do  not  turn  frem 
it,  put  not  away  from  you  the  kingdom  lest  you  prove  yonrselfes  un- 
worthy, and  bring  upon  yourselves  wrath  unto  the  uttermost. 

If  ye  be  willing  and  obedient,  ye  shall  eat  the  good  of  the  land. 
Receive  t  he  Lord  Jesus  as  your  Saviour,  now,  on  the  spot.  May  God  the 
Holy  Spirit  lead  you  to  do  this,  for  Jesus'  sake.    Amen. 


Portions  of  Scripturk  read  before  Sermon — Matthew  iv.  12—25; 

and  chapter  v.  1 — 12. 


toplitnii  ^nhttmtk 


JOB'S  EEGBET  AND  OUR  OWN. 


JVERED  OJSf  L0BD*8-DAT  MORNINO,  SePTEMBBR  17TH,  1871,  BT 

C.  H.  SPUKGEON, 

AT  THE  MKTROPOUTAN  TABERNACLB,  NBWINGTON. 


thftt  I  were  as  in  months  past,  as  in  the  days  when  God  preserred  me; 
is  candio  shined  upon  my  head,  and  when  by  his  light  I  walked  through 
IS ;  as  1  was  in  the  days  of  my  youth,  when  the  secret  of  Gk>d  was  upon 
jmacle.'* — Job  xxix.  2,  3,  4. 

»  here  refers  to  the  temporal  prosperity  which  he  had  lost,  we 
;  condemn  him  for  his  comphiint,  neither  can  we  commend  him. 
at  the  expression  of  a  natural  regret,  which  would  be  felt  by  any 

lio  ha<l  exj}erienced  such  great  reverses.  But  there  is  eyervwhere 
expressions  which  he  uses  such  a  strain  of  spirituality,  that  we 
;lined  to  believe  that  he  had  more  reference  to  the  condition  of 
irt  til  an  to  the  state  of  his  property.  His  soul  was  depressed; 
[  lost  the  light  of  God's  countenance;  his  inward  comforts  were 
ng,  his  joy  in  the  Lord  was  at  a  low  ebb,  this  he  regretted  fwr 
ban  anything  besides.  No  doubt  he  deplored  the  departure  of 
)rosperou8  days  when,  as  he  words  it,  his  root  was  spread  out  by 
ters,  and  the  dew  lay  all  night  upon  his  branch;  but, much  more 

bemoan  that  the  lamp  of  the  Lord  no  more  shone  upon  his  head, 
e  secret  of  God  was  not  upon  his  tabernacle.  As  his  spiritual 
)  are  far  more  instructive  to  us  than  his  natural  ones,  we  will 
II  our  attention  to  them.  We  may,  without  violence,  appropriate 
vords  to  ourselves;  for  I  fear  that  many  of  us  can  with  great 
3ty  take  up  our  wailing  and  mourn  for  the  days  of  our  espousals, 
ppy  days  of  our  first  love.  I  shall  have  to  trouble  you  with 
divisions  this  morning;  but  I  shall  be  brief  upon  each  one,  and 

that  our  thoughts  may  be  led  onward,  and  rendered  practically 
able  to  us,  by  the  blessing  of  God's  Spirit 
iCt  us  begin  by  saying,  that  regrets  such  as  those  expressed  in 
t  are  and  ought  to  be  very  BirrsR.    If  it  be  the  loss  of  spiritual 

that  we  regret,  then  may  we  say  from  the  bottom  of  our  hearts, 
bat  I  were  as  in  months  past.'' 

a  great  thing  for  a  man  to  be  near  to  God  ;  it  is  a  yery  choice 
re  to  be  admitted  into  the  inner  circle  of  communion,  and  to  be- 
lod*8  familiar  friend.  Great  as  the  privilege  is,  so  great  is  the 
3.  1,011. 


518  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

loss  of  it.  No  darkneefi  is  so  dark  as  that  wTiich  falls  on  ejm  aocoi- 
tomed  to  the  light.  The  poor  man  who  was  always  poor  is  scarcelj  poor, 
but  he  who  has  fallen  from  the  summit  of  greatness  into  the  depths  of 
poverty  is  poor  indeed.  The  man  who  has  never  enjoyed  commnnion 
with  God  knows  nothing  of  what  it  mnst  be  U)  lose  it;  bat  he  who 
has  once  been  pressed  upon  the  Saviour's  bosom  will  mourn,  as  long  as 
he  liveth,  if  he  be  deprived  of  the  sacred  enjoyment.  The  m^cies 
which  Job  deplored  in  our  text  are  no  little  ones.  First,  he  complains 
that  he  had  lost  the  consciousness  of  divine  preservation.  He  says, 
'*  Oh  that  I  were  as  in  months  past,  as  in  the  days  when  Ood  preserred 
me."  There  are  days  with  Christians  when  they  can  see  God's  hand 
all  around  them,  checking  them  in  the  first  approaches  of  sin,  and  set- 
ting a  hedge  about  all  their  ways.  Their  conscience  is  tender,  and 
the  Spirit  of  God  is  obeyed  by  them ;  they  are,  therefore,  kept  in  all  their 
ways,  the  angels  of  God  watching  over  them,  lest  they  dash  their  foot 
against  a  stone.  But  when  they  fall  into  laxity  of  spirit,  and  walk  at  a 
distance  from  God,  they  are  not  so  preserved.  Though  kept  from  final 
and  total  apostasy,  yet  they  are  not  kept  from  very  grievons  sin  ;  for, 
like  Peter  who  followed  afar  off,  they  may  be  left  to  deny  their  Master, 
even  with  oaths  and  cursings.  If  we  have  lost  that  conscious  preser- 
vation of  God,  which  once  covered  us  from  every  fieir  dart;  if  we  no 
longer  abide  under  the  shadow  of  the  Almighty,  and  feel  no  longer 
that  his  truth  is  our  shield  and  buckler,  we  have  lost  a  joy  worth 
worlds,  and  we  may  well  deplore  it  with  anguish  of  hearL 

Job  had  also  lost  divine  consolation^  for  he  looks  back  with  lamen- 
tation to  the  time  when  God's  candle  shone  upon  his  head,  when  the 
sun  of  God's  love  was  as  it  were  in  the  zenith,  and  cast  no  shadow; 
when  he  rejoiced  without  ceasing,  and  triumphed  from  morning  to 
night  in  the  God  of  his  salvation.  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  our 
strength,  the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  IsraeFs  excellency ;  it  is  the  heaven  of 
heaven,  it  is  heaven  even  upon  earth  ;  and,  consequently,  to  lose  it,  is 
n  calamity  indeed.  Who  that  has  once  been  satisfied  with  favour,  and 
full  of  the  blessing  of  the  Lord,  will  be  content  to  go  into  the  dry  and 
thirsty  land,  and  live  far  off  from  God?  Will  he  not  rather  cry  out 
with  David,  "My  soul  thirsteth  for  God;  when  shall  I  come  and 
appear  before  God?'*  Surely  his  agonising  prayer  will  be,  "  Eestore 
unto  me  the  joy  of  thy  salvation,  and  uphold  me  with  thy  free  SpiriL" 
liove  to  God  will  never  be  content  if  his  face  be  hidden.  Until  the 
curtain  be  drawn  aside  and  the  King's  face  be  seen  through  the  lattices, 
the  true  spouse  will  spend  her  life  in  sighing  ;  mourning  like  a  dove 
bereaved  of  its  mate. 

Moreover,  Job  deplored  the  loss  of  divine  ilkmincUion.  "By  his 
light,"  he  says,  "  I  walked  through  darkness,"  that  is  to  say,  perplexity 
ceased  to  be  perplexity  ;  God  shed  such  a  light  upon  the  mrsteritB  w 
Tirovidence,  that  where  othera  missed  their  path,  Job,  made  wise  by 
heaven,  could  find  it.  There  have  been  times  when,  to  our  paiient 
faith,  all  things  have  been  plain.  "If  any  man  will  do  his  will,  he 
shull  know  of  the  doctrine ;  "  but,  if  we  walk  far  off  from  God,  then, 
straightway,  even  the  precious  truth  of  God  is  no  more  clear  to  ns,  and 
the  dealings  of  God  with  us  in  providence  appear  to  be  like  a  mau^ 
He  is  wise  as  Solomon  who  walks  with  God,  bat  he  is  a  veiy  fool  who 


J0B*8  BJEBGRET  AND  OUR  OWN.  5i9 

iia^tg  his  own  understanding.  All  the  wit  that  we  have  gathered  by 
observation  und  experience  will  not  supply  us  with  suiTiciency  of 
common  sense,  if  we  turn  away  from  God.  Israel,  without  consnlting 
God,  made  a  league  with  her  enemies;  she  thouglit  the  case  most  plain 
when  she  entered  into  hasty  alliance  with  the  Gibeonites,  but  she  was 
duped  by  cunning  because  she  asked  not  counsel  of  the  Lord.  In 
the  simplest  business  we  shall  err,  if  we  seek  not  direction  from  the  Lord ; 
yet,  where  matters  are  most  complicated,  we  shall  walk  wisely,  if  we  wait 
for  a  voice  from  the  oracle,  and  seek  the  good  Shepherd's  guidance.  We 
may  bitterly  lament,  therefore,  if  we  have  lost  the  Holy  Spirit's  light. 
If  now  the  Lord  answereth  us  not,  neither  by  his  word,  nor  by  his  pro- 
vidence, if  we  wander  alone,  crying  Oh  that  I  knew  where  I  mi^^ht  find 
him,  wc  are  in  an  evil  case,  and  may  well  sigh  for  the  days,  when  by  his 
light  we  walked  through  darkness. 

Moreover,  Job  had  lost  divine  communion:  so  it  seems,  for  he  mourned 
the  days  of  his  youth,  when  the  secret  of  God  was  upon  his  tabernacle. 
Who  shall  tell  to  another  what  the  secret  of  God  is?  Believing  hearts 
know  it,  but  they  cannot  frame  to  pronounce  aright  the  words  that  could 
explain  it,  nor  can  they  convey  by  language  what  the  secret  is.  The 
Lord  manifests  himself  unto  his  people  as  he  doth  not  unto  the  world. 
We  could  not  tell  the  love  passages  that  there  are  between  believers  and 
their  Lord ;  even  when  they  are  set  to  such  sweet  music  as  the  Song 
of  Solomon,  carnal  minds  cannot  discern  their  delights.    1'hey  cannot 

?longii  with  our  heifer,  and  therefore  they  read  not  our  riddle.  As 
aul  in  heaven  saw  things  which  it  were  unlawful  for  a  man  to  utter, 
so  the  believer  sees  and  enjoys  in  communion  with  Christ  what  it 
would  not  only  be  unlawful  but  impossible  for  him  to  tell  to  carnal 
men.  Such  pearls  are  not  for  swine.  The  spiritual  discerneth  all 
thiuirs,  but  he  himself  is  discerned  of  no  man.  Now,  it  is  a  high 
privilege,  beyond  all  privileges,  to  enter  into  familiar  intercourse  with 
the  Most  High,  and  the  man  who  has  once  possessed  it,  and  has  lost 
it^  has  a  iMtterer  cause  for  regret  than  if,  being  rich,  he  had  lost  his 
wealth;  or  being  famous,  he  had  lost  esteem;  or  being  in  health,  ho 
were  suddenly  brought  to  the  bed  of  languishing.  No  loss  can  equal 
the  lo8»  of  thee,  my  God  I  No  eclipse  is  so  black  as  the  hiding  of  thy 
face  I  No  storm  is  bo  fierce  as  the  letting  forth  of  thine  indignation  I 
It  is  grief  upon  grief  to  find  that  thou  art  not  with  me  as  in  the  days 
of  old.  Wherever,  then,  these  regrets  do  exist,  if  the  men's  hearts  are 
as  they  should  be,  they  are  not  mere  hypocritical  or  superficial  expres- 
sions, but  they  express  the  bitterest  experiences  of  our  human  existence. 
^  Oh  that  I  were  as  in  months  past "  is  no  sentimental  sigh,  but  the 
voice  of  the  innermost  spirit  in  anguish,  as  one  who  has  lost  his  first- 
born. 

II.  But,  secondly,  let  me  remind  von  that  these  regrets  are  not 
nfBViTABLB;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  not  absolutely  necessary  that  a  Chris- 
tian man  should  ever  ftel  them,  or  be  compelled  to  express  them. 
It  has  grown  to  be  a  tradition  among  us,  that  every  Chriatiaa 
mnat  backslide  in  a  measure,  and  that  growth  in  gracd  cannot  be  '^^ 
brokenly  sustained.  It  is  regarded  by  many  as  a  law  of  nature,  that 
first  love  must  grow  cold,  and  our  early  zeal  must  necessarily  decline. 
do  not  believe  it  for  a  moment,  *'  The  path  of  ti.e  just  is  as  the  shin* 


520  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

light,  which  shincth  more  and  more  nnto  the  perfect  day;**  and,  were 
we  watchful  and  careful  to  live  near  to  God,  there  is  no  reason  whr  cor 
Rpiritual  life  should  not  continuously  make  progress  both  in  strength 
and  beauty.  There  is  no  inherent  necessity  in  the  divine  life  itsdf 
compelling  it  to  decline,  for  is  it  not  written,  *'  It  shall  be  in  him  a  well 
of  water,  springing  up  unto  everlasting  life;"  "  ont  of  his  belly  shall  flow 
rivers  of  living  water/*  Grace  is  a  living  and  incormptible  seed  that 
liveth  and  abide th  for  ever,  and  there  is  nowhere  impressed  upon  the 
divine  life  a  law  of  pining  and  decay.  If  we  do  falter  and  faint  in  the 
onward  path,  it  is  our  sin,  and  it  is  doubly  sinful  to  forge  excnses  for  it. 
It  is  not  to  be  laid  upon  the  back  of  some  mystenons  necessity  of  the 
new  natnre  that  it  should  be  so,  but  it  is  to  be  brought  as  a  char|:e 
against  ourselves.  Nor  do  outward  circumstances  ever  fumisb  a  jnsti- 
fication  to  us  if  we  decline  in  grace ;  for,  under  the  worst  conditiona, 
believers  have  grown  in  grace :  deprived  of  the  joys  of  Christian 
fellowship,  and  denied  the  comforts  of  the  means  of  grace,  believen 
have  nevertheless  been  known  to  attain  to  a  high  degree  of  likenett 
to  Christ  Jesus:  thrown  into  the  midst  of  wicked  companions,  and 
forced  to  hear,  like  rigliteous  Lot,  the  filthy  conversation  of  theungodlj, 
yet  Christian  men  have  shone  all  the  brighter  for  the  sarronndiiig 
darkness,  and  have  been  able  to  escape  from  a  wicked  and  perverse 
generation.  Certain  is  it,  that  a  man  may  be  an  eminent  Oiristian, 
nnd  be  among  the  poorest  of  the  poor :  poverty  need  not^  therefore, 
make  us  depart  from  Qod  ;  and,  it  is  equally  certain,  that  a  man  may 
be  rich,  and  for  all  that  may  walk  with  Qod  and  be  distinguished  for 
great  grace.  There  is  no  lawful  position  of  which  we  may  say,  "  It 
compels  a  man  to  decline  in  grace." 

And,  brethren,  there  is  no  period  of  our  life  in  which  it  is  neceasaij 
for  us  to  go  back.  The  young  Christian,  with  all  the  stren^  of  bu 
natural  passions,  can  by  grace  be  strong  and  overcome  the  Wicked  Om; 
the  Christian  in  middle  life,  surrounded  with  the  world*s  cares,  can 
prove  that  "this  is  the  victory  which  overcometh  the  world,  even 
our  faith."  The  man  immersed  in  business  may  still  be  baptised  of  the 
Holv  Ghost.  Assuredly,  old  age  offers  no  excuse  for  decline:  "they 
shall  still  bring  forth  fruit  in  old  age ;  they  shall  be  fat  and  flonrishiD^; 
to  show  that  the  Lord  is  upright."  No,  brethren,  as  Christ  said  to  hii 
disciples,  when  they  wonld  fain  have  sent  the  multitude  away  to  bay 
meat,  "  they  need  not  depart ; "  so  would  he  say  to  the  whole  company 
of  the  Lord's  people,  "ye  need  not  depart ;"  there  is  no  compalsion 
for  decline  in  grace,"  lour  sun  need  not  stand  still,  your  moon  need 
not  wane.  If  you  cannot  add  a  cubit  to  your  spiritual  stature,  at  any 
rate,  it  need  not  decrease.  There  are  no  reasons  written  in  the  book  « 
your  spiritual  nature  why  you,  as  a  believer,  should  lose  fellowship  with 
God,  and,  if  you  do  so,  take  blame  and  shame  to  yourself,  bat  ao  not 
ascribe  it  to  necessity.  Do  not  gratify  your  corruptions  by  sappoiing 
that  they  are  licensed  to  prerail  occasionally,  neither  vex  your  graoM 
by  conceiving  that  they  are  doomed  to  inevitable  defeat  at  a  certam 
season.  The  spirit  that  is  in  us  lusteth  to  evil,  but  the  Holy  Spirit  is 
able  to  subdue  it,  and  will  subdue  it,  if  we  yield  ourselves  to  him. 

III.  But,  now,  I  am  compelled  to  say  that  the  regrets  expressed  io  o«r 
text  are  exceedingly  common,  and  it  is  only  here  and  there  that  we  niflit 


J0B*8  EEG»tBT  AND  OUB  OWN.  521 

with  a  believer  who  has  not  had  canse  to  use  them.  It  ought  not  to 
be  80,  but  it  is  so.  How  g^rievously  often  will  the  pastor  hear  this 
among  the  other  bleatinj^s  of  the  sheep :  '*  Oh  that  I  were  as  in  months 
pasty  at  in  the  days  when  God  preserved  mo  :" 

^  What  peaceful  hours  I  then  enjoyed. 
How  sweet  their  memory  atill ; 
But  they  have  lefl  an  aching  void 
The  world  can  never  fill.  * 

The  eomraenness  of  this  lamentation  may  be  somewhat  accounted 
for,  by  the  oniversal  tendemoy  to  undervalue  the  present  and  exaggerate 
Ihe  excellence  of  the  past.  Have  you  never  noticed  this  in  natural 
things,  we  are  prone  to  cast  a  partial  eye  upon  some  imaginary  "  good 
old  times  7"  It  is  gone,  and  therefore  it  was  good ;  it  is  here,  and  there- 
fore it  is  dubiooB.  In  the  middle  of  the  summer,  we  feel  that  the  heat  is 
so  relaziag  that  a  frost  would  be  the  most  delightful  thing  conceivable  ; 
we  loTe,  we  say,  the  bracing  air  of  winter ;  we  are  sure  it  is  much  healthier 
for  OS :  yet,  usually,  when  winter  arrives,  and  the  extreme  cold  sets  in,  we 
are  all  most  anxious  for  the  advent  of  spring,  and  we  feel  that  somehow  or 
other  the  frost  is  more  trying  to  us  than  the  heat.  Personally.  I  met 
with  an  illustration  of  this  tendency  the  other  day.  I  went  down  a 
ateep  diff  to  the  sea  shore,  and  during  the  descent  every  step  tried  my 
weaK  knees,  and  I  felt  that  going  down  hill  was  the  most  difficult 
travelling  in  the  world.  Soon  I  had  to  return  from  the  sands,  and  climb 
the  steep  path  again ;  aod,  when  I  began  to  pant  andpuff  with  the  difficult 
ascent,  I  chang^  my  opiuion,  and  felt  that  I  woula  a  ^reat  deal  sooner 

Kdown  than  come  up.  The  fact  is,  that  whatever  is  with  us  we  think  to 
the  worse,  and  whatever  was  with  us  we  conceive  to  be  the  better. 
We  may,  therefore,  take  some  discount  from  our  regrets;  for,  peradven- 
tore,  were  we  more  conscious  of  the  benefit  of  the  present  state,  and 
did  we  make  less  prominent  the  difficulty  of  it,  we  should  not  sigh  to 
be  as  we  were  in  months  past. 

Then,  again,  regrets  may  in  some  cases  arise  from  a  holy  jealonsv. 
The  Christian,  in  whatever  state  he  is,  feels  his  own  imperfection  mucL, 
and  laments  his  conscions  shortcomings.  Looking  back,  he  observes 
with  joy  the  work  of  grace  in  his  soul,  and  does  not  perhaps  so  readily 
reooUect  the  tlien  existing  deficiencies  of  nature;  hence,  ne  comes  to 
think  that  tlie  past  was  letter  than  the  present.  He  is  afraid  of  back- 
sliding, and  therefore  he  jealously  fears  that  he  is  so  ;  he  is  so  anxious 
to  live  nearer  to  God,  so  aissatisfied  with  his  present  attainments,  that 
he  dares  not  believe  that  he  advances,  but  fears  that  he  has  lost  ground. 
I  know  this  in  my  own  experience,  for  when  lying  sick  I  have  frequently 
lamented  that  pain  has  distracted  my  mind,  and  taken  off  my  attention 
from  the  word  of  God,  and  I  have  longed  for  those  seasons  of  health 
when  I  could  read,  meditate,  and  study  with  pleasure;  but,  now  that  I 
Lave  risen  up  from  the  sick  bed,  and  am  growing  strong  again,  I 
Ireqnently  look  bat*k  to  the  long  nights  and  quiet  days  spent  in  my 
sick  chamber,  and  think  that  it  was  better  with  me  then  than  now,  fi  r 
now  I  am  apt  to  be  cumbered  with  much  serving,  and  then  I  was  shut 
in  with  Qua.  Many  a  man  is  really  strong  in  Christ;  but,  because  he 
does  not  feel  all  the  juvenile  vivacity  of  his  earl^  days,  he  fears  that 
spiritual  decreptitnde  has  come  upon  him.    He  is  now  Jar  more  solid 


522  METROPOLITAN  TABBRNAOLB  PULPIT. 

and  steadfast,  if  not  qnite  bo  qnick  and  impnIsWe  ;  bat,  the  p[ood  m«a 
in  his  holy  jealousy  marks  most  the  excellencies  of  his  juirenile  pietj, 
and  forgets  that  there  were  grave  deficiencies  in  it;  while,  in  his  (nresrat 
state,  lie  notes  the  deficiencies,  and  fears  to  hope  that  he  posseswes  any 
excellencies.  We  are  poor  judges  of  our  own  condition,  and  nsuallj 
err  on  one  side  or  the  other.  All  graces  may  not  flourish  at  the  same 
time,  and  defalcations  in  one  direction  may  be  more  than  balanced  by 
advantages  in  another.  We  may  b^t  deeper  in  humility  if  we  are  not 
higher  in  delight.  We  may  not  glitter  so  much,  and  yet  there  may 
be  more  real  gold  in  us.  The  leaf  may  not  be  so  green,  but  the  frait 
may  be  more  ripe.  The  way  may  be  rougher,  and  yet  be  nearer 
heaven.  Godly  anxiety,  then,  may  be  the  cause  of  many  regrets  whick 
are,  nevertheless,  not  warranted  by  any  serious  declension. 

And,  let  me  ad  ),  that  very  often  these  regrets  of  ours  alK>nt  the  past 
are  not  wise.    It  is  impossible  to  draw  a  fair  comp  irison  between  the 
various  stages  of  Christian   experience,    bo  as  to  give  a  jadidoos 
preference  to  one  above  another.    Consider,  as  in  a  parable,  the  seasons 
of  the  year.    There  are  m  iny  persons  who,  in  the  midst  of  the  beanties 
of  spring,  say,  ''Ah,  bnt  how  fitful  is  the  weather  1     These  March 
winds  and  April  showers  come  and  go  by  such  fits  and  atart^  that 
nothing  is  to  be  depended  upon.    Give  me  the  safer  glories  of  sammer." 
Yet,  when  they  feel  the  heat  of  summer,  and  wipe  the  sweat  from  their 
brows,  they  say,  "Afcer  all,  with  all  the  full-blow  of  beauty  aroond 
ns,  we  admire  more  the  freshness,  verdure,  and  vivacity  of  spring.  The 
snowdrop  and  the  crocus,  coming  forth  as  the  advance  gB^rd  of  the 
army  of  flowers,  have  a  superior  charm   about  them."      Now,  it  is 
idle  to  comp:ire  spring  with  summer;  they  differ,  and  have  each  its 
beauties.     We  are  in  autumn  now,  and  very  likely,  instead  of  priainj 
the  i>ecaliar   treasures  of  autumn,  some  will  despise   the  peaceful 
iSabbath  of  the  year,  and  mournfully  compare  yon  fading  leaves  to 
funeral  sermous  replete  with  sadness.     Such  will  contrast  summer  and 
intunm,  and  exalt  one  above  another.     Novv,   whoever  shall  claim 
precedence  for  any  season,  shall  have  me  for  an  opponenL    Th^r 
iirc  all   beautiful   in   their  season,  and  each  excels  after  ita  kind. 
Kven  thus  it  is  wrong  to  compare  the  early  seal  of  the  yoang  Ohriatiao 
with  the  mature  and  mellow  experience  of  the  older  believer,  and  make 
preferences.    Each  is  beautiful  according  to  its  time.    You,  dear  young 
friend,  with  your  intense  zeal,  are  to  be  commended  and  imitated; 
but  very  much  of  your  fire  1  am  afraid  arises  from  -novelty,  and  yon 
are  not  so  strong  as  you  are  earnest ;  like  a  newborn  river,  you  ara 
swift  in  current,  but  nei:her  deep  nor  broad.      And  yea,  my  more 
advanced  friend,  who  are  much  tried  and  buffeted,  to  yon  it  is  not 
easy  to  hold  on  your  way  under  proat  inward  struggles  and  severe 
depressions,  but  your  dee})er  sense  of  weakness,  your  firmer  grasp  of 
truth,  your  more  iutense  fellowship  with  the  Lord  Jesas  in  his  safferin(i;8, 
yoar  patience,  and  your  steadfastness,  are  all  lovely  in  the  eyes  of  the 
Lord  your  God.    Be  thankful  each  of  you  for  what  you  have,  for  by  tho 
grace  of  God  you  are  what  you  are. 

After  making  all  these  deductions,  however,  I  cannot  conceive  that 
they  alto;;ethcr  account  for  the  prevalence  of  these  i^grets;  I  am 
afraid   the  &ct  arises  from  the   sad    truth  that  many  of   ua  have 


J0B*8  BBORGT  AND  OUR  OWN.  52$ 

actually  deteriorated  in  ^race,  have  decayed  in  spirit,  ^nd  deojenerated. 
in  heart.  Alas  I  in  manycases,  old  corruptions  have  fought  desperately, 
and  for  awhile  canned  a  partial  relapse.  Grace  has  become  ^eak,  and 
sin  has  seized  the  occasion  for  attack;  so  that  for  a  time  the  battle  is 
turned,  and  Israel's  banner  is  trailed  m  the  nrire.  With  many  professors, 
I  am  afraid,  prayer  isnegiected,  world liness is  uppermost,  sin  has  come 
to  the  front,  nature  leads'' the  yan, 'and  grace  and  holiness  are  in  the 
background.     It  should^not  be  so,  bat  I  am  afraid,  ah,  sadly  afraid  it 

is  80.  -         '  '     .  -    -' 

IV.  I  will  more  foHy  speark'upon  this  mutter  under  the  fbarth  head. 
Since  these  recrrets  ftre  exceeDmgly  common,  it  is  to  be-  feared  that  in . 
some  CRses  th^  are  very  sadly  kbedful.  Now)  kt  the  blast  of  the 
winnowing  fan  be  f«lt  through  the  congregation;  Behold,  the  Lord 
himself  winnows  this  heap.  Are  there*  not  many  amon<]^  us  who  once 
walked  humblywitbGod,  and  near  to  hkn,  who  l)»ve  f^ll«n  into  carnal 
security?  Have  we^ot  taken^^t -for  pranted  that  all  is  well  with  us,  and 
are  we  not  settled  upon  our  lees  Kke  Moab  of  old?  v  How  little  of  heart- 
searching*  and  self-examination  are  practised  Bow-a^d)iys*I  How  little 
enquiry  as  tawhethi?r>the  root  of  the  matter  is  really  in  n«  H  Woe  unto 
those  who'take  their  safety  for  granted,  and  sit  down  in  God's  house 
and  say,  **  The  temple  of-  the  Lord/  the  temple  of  the  Lord  are  we.*' 
Woe  unto -them  that  are  at  ease  in  Zion.  Of  aM  etf^mies,  one  of  the 
most  iQF*\i^  dreaded^is -presumption.  To  be  seciireiu  Ohrist  is  a 
blessing;  to  be  fle<mre'i»  ourselves  is  a  curse.  Whei^e 'Oirmal  security 
reit>n8,  the  Spirit  of  Ood  withdraws.  He  i8w4th<the  hutiiiyle  and  contrite, 
but  "he  is'notmvith  the  proud  and'self-Sfifficient.  My  brethren,  are  we  all 
dear  in  ihi^respeclr?  '  Do  not  many*t)f  6od*s -people* also  need  to  be- 
moan their  wopidiine^ts  ?  OnceOhristwasalt^t^ith  you,  lirethren  ;  is  it 
EO  now?  Once  you  despised  the  world,  and  contemned  alike  its 
pleasures  and  itr frowns ;  but  now,  my  bretliren,  are  not^he  chains  of 
worldly  custom  upon  you?  Are  you  not  many  of  you  enslaved  by 
fashion,  and^eaten  up  with  frivolity  ?-  Do -you  net,  some  of  you,  run  as 
greedily  as*worl4ling«B  after  the  queMionable  enjoyments  of  this  present 
life?  6nghtp these  things  to  be  sof  Can  they  remain  se  una  your 
flouls  enjoy  the  laordV-smiie?  '  **  Ye  cannot*  server  God  atid  mammon.** 
**  If  any  tfmn  h)ve  the*warld,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  *not  in  him." 
Ton  cannot  be  Ohrist^s*  disciples,  and  be  in-fellow  ship  with  the  ungodly. 
Come  ye  out  froor  among  them ;  be  ye  separate;  toiich  not  the  unclean 
thing;  then  shall  ye  4snow  right  joyfully  that  the  Lord  is- a  Father  to 
]roD,  and  that -jon -are  bis  sons  and'-dnughters.  But^br^hren,  have  ye 
fifone  unto  Jesus  without'the  camp,  and  do  ye  abide  th«re  with  him  ? 
jsthe  line  of  your  separaiion  visible— ay^»  it  ^i>tin*j?.  de^  there  any 
separation  at  all!  >  Is  it  not  often  the  case  that  tl^e  fvofessed  people 
of  God  are  mixed  up  with  the  eons  of  men  so  that  you  camot  discern  the 
one  from  the  other  ?  If  it  be  so  with  anyone  of  •uS)*-  let  him  bumble 
liioieelf,  and  let  him  cry  in  bitterness/'*  Oh  that  I  were  as  in  months 
past." 

Brethren  and  sister.^,  feel  ye  the  breatlM)f  ibe  winnowinp:  fen  again. 
How  is  it  with  you  as  to  privHte  prayer?  Are  there  not  l)elievers,  and 
we  hope  true  believers  too,  who  are  lax  in  devotion  ?  The  morning 
prayer  is  brief,  but  alas  I  it  is  not  fervent^  the  evening  prajer  is  too 


524  METBOPOLITAlf  TABERNACLE  FULPIT. 

oflen  sleepy;  ejaculations  are  few  and  far  between ;  commnnion  with 
heaven  is  distant,  suspended,  almost  non-existent  in  many  cases.  Look 
TO  to  this,  mj  brethren,  let  each  man  commune  with  his  own  heart,  and 
be  still.  Think  not  of  others  jusc  now,  but  let  each  one  consider  hii 
ways.  How  is  it  with  vonr  lore  to  the  souls  of  sinners  ?  There  was  a 
time  when  yoa  would  have  done  anything  to  bring  a  man  to  Christ, 
when  any  exertion  you  could  have  put  forth  would  have  been  mad« 
spontaneously,  without  the  need  of  incessant  exhortations ;  are  yon  as 
ready  to  speak  for  Jesus  now  as  you  once  were  ?  Do  you  watch  to 
bring  soals  to  him  ?  Does  the  tear  tremble  in  your  eye,  now,  as  it  onoe 
did  for  lost  souls,  perishing  without  Christ  ?  Alas,  upon  how  many  hu 
a  hardening  influence  operated.  Ah,  and  this  is  troe  even  of  us, 
ministers.  We  have  grown  professional  in  our  service,  and  now  we 
preach  like  automatons,  wound  up  for  a  sermon,  to  ran  down  when  the 
discourse  is  over,  and  we  have  little  more  cai'e  for  the  souls  of  men 
than  if  they  were  so  much  dirt.  Trifles  of  criticism,  fancies  of  speco- 
lation,  or  fopperies  of  oratory,  fascinate  too  many  who  should  be  wise 
to  win  souls.   Ood  forgive  us  if  we  have  fallen  into  so  deplorable  a  state. 

Ah,  and  how  many  of  6od*s  people  must  confess  that  their  conacieoce 
is  not  so  tender  now  as  it  used  be.  The  time  was  when,  if  you  said 
half  a  word  amiss,  you  would  hide  away  to  weep  over  it ;  when,  in 
business,  if  there  had  been  a  little  mistake,  and  anything  that  might  be 
construed  into  want  of  integrity,  you  would  have  felt  ashamed  for  a 
week  that  such  a  thing  had  happened  ;  but  now — ah,  professors  bear 
ye  this — some  of  you  can  be  disnonest  and  speak  words  that  bolder  on 
lasciviousness,  and  be  as  others  are,  yet  your  heart  does  not  smite  yon, 
but  you  come  to  the  communion  table  and  feol  you  have  a  right  to  be 
there,  and  listen  to  the  Word  of  God,  and  take  comfort  from  it,  when 
rather  you  should  be  ashamed  and  confounded. 

Let  me  enquire  whether  there  are  not  many  of  us  whose  seal  is  almost 
gone  ?  We  once  loved  the  Saviour  intensely,  and  his  canse  we  eagerly 
sought  to  serve,  but  now  we  take  matters  easily,  and  do  not  travail  in 
birth  for  souls.  Some  rich  men  were  wont  to  give  most  freely  to  the 
cause  of  God,  but  now  covetonsness  has  palsied  the  hand  of  generosity. 
Even  poor  Christians  are  not  always  so  ready  with  their  two  mites  ai 
they  were  in  better  days.  You  were  wont  to  labour,  too,  but  thai 
Sunday  School  class  sees  you  no  longer;  no  street  preaching  now ;  no 
tract  distributing  now ;  all  forms  of  Christ's  service  you  have  renonnoed, 
for  you  fancy  you  have  done  enough.  Alas,  poor  sluggard !  Has  the 
sun  shone  long  enough  ?  Has  God  given  you  your  daily  bread  long 
enough  ?  Oh,  cease  not  working,  brethren,  till  God  ceases  to  be  mercifu 
to  you.  "  On,  on,  on,"  "  forward,  forward,  forward,"  is  the  very  motto 
of  the  Christian  life.  Let  none  of  us  talk  of  finality,  for  we  have  not  yet 
attained.  Till  life  is  over,  our  zeal  should  still  glow,  and  our  li^ors 
for  Christ  should  multiply. 

Are  there  not  other  signs  of  declension,  that  some  of  us  might,  with 
but  a  very  slight  examination,  discover  in  ourselves  ?  Is  not  brotherlj 
love,  in  manv  Christians,  very  questionable  ?  Have  they  not  forgotten, 
altogether,  the  family  ties  which  bind  all  Christians  to  one  another  ? 
And,  with  brotherly  love,  has  not  love  to  the  Gospel  gone  too,  so  that 
now  with  many,  one  doctrine  is  almost  as  good  as  another?     If  a  man 


J0B*8  BEOBET  AND  OUB  OWN.  525 

can  talk  well,  and  ia  an  orator,  they  enjoy  hiB  ministry  whether  he 
ad^cates  truth  or  error.  Once  they  coula  go  to  the  little  meeting 
house,  where  Christianity  was  preached  faithfully  though  in  an  uncouth 
Btyle,  but  now  they  must  have  the  help  of  organs  or  they  cannot  praise 
God ;  and  there  must  be  millinery  and  genuflexions,  or  else  they  cannot 
pray  to  him  ;  and  they  must  listen  to  oratory  and  elocution,  or  else 
they  cannot  accept  God*s  word.  He  is  sickly  who  cannot  dine  without 
made  dishes  and  spiced  meats,  but  he  is  a  healthy  man  of  God  who  can 
eat  heaven's  bread  and  heaven's  meat,  even  when  it  is  not  served  on  a 
lordly  dish.  Might  not  many  of  us  blush,  if  we  were  to  think  how  low 
our  graces  are,  how  weak  our  faith,  how  few  our  good  works,  and  our 
gracious  words  with  which  we  should  bear  testimony  to  his  name, 
xes,  in  thonsands  of  cases,  Christians  need  not  be  stopped  if  they  were 
to  commence  this  mournful  cry,  "  Oh  that  I  were  as  in  the  days  of  my 
youth,  when  the  secret  of  God  was  upon  my  tabernacle.** 

V.  But,  I  must  pass  on  to  observe  that  these  regrets  by  themselves 
ABB  USELESS.  It  IS  unprofltable  to  read  these  words  of  Job,  and  say, 
"Just  so,  that  is  how  I  feel,"  and  then  continue  in  the  same  way.  If  a 
man  has  neglected  his  business,  and  so  has  lost  his  trade,  it  may  mark 
a  turn  in  his  affairs  when  he  says,  "  I  wish  I  had  been  more  industri- 
ous;*' but  if  he  abides  in  the  same  sloth  as  before,  of  what  use  is  his 
regret?  If  he  shall  fold  his  arms  and  say,  "  Oh  that  I  had  dug  that 
plot  of  land  ;  oh  that  I  had  sown  that  field ;  **  no  harvest  will  come 
because  of  his  lamentations.  Up,  man,  up  and  labour,  or  you  will  have 
the  8luggard*8  reward,  rags  and  poverty  will  still  be  your  portion. 
If  a  man  be  in  declining  health,  if  drunkenness  and  riot  have 
broken  down  his  constitution,  it  may  mark  a  salutary  reform  in  his  his- 
tory if  he  confesses  his  former  folly  ;  but  if  his  regrets  end  in  mere 
expressions,  will  these  heal  him  ?  I  trow  not.  So  neither  will  a  man, 
affected  by  spiritual  decline,  be  restored  by  the  mere  fact  of  his  knowing 
himself  to  be  so.  Let  him  go  to  the  beloved  physician,  drink  of  the 
waters  of  life  again,  and  receive  the  leaves  of  the  tree  which  are  for  the 
healing  of  the  nations.  Inactive  regrets  are  insincere.  If  a  man  really 
did  lament  that  he  had  lost  communion  with  God,  he  would  seek  to 
regain  it.  If  he  doth  not  seek  to  be  restored,  he  is  adding  to  all  his 
former  sins  this  of  lying  before  God,  in  uttering  regrets  that  he  does  not 
feel  in  bis  soul. 

I  have  known  some,  I  fear,  who  even  satisfied  themselves  with  expres- 
Bione  of  regrets.  "Ah,**  say  they,  "  I  am  a  deep  experienced  man,  I 
can  go  where  Job  went ;  I  can  ntoum  and  lament  as  Job  did."  Ke- 
member,  many  have  been  on  Job's  dunghill,  who  knew  nothing  of  Job*8 
God  ;  many  have  imitated  David  in  his  sinp,  who  never  followed  him  in 
bis  repentance.  They  have  gone  from  their  sin  into  hell  by  the  way  of 
preBnmption,  whereas  David  went  from  it  to  heaven  by  the  road  of  re- 
pentance and  forgiveness.  Never  let  us,  merely  because  we  feel  some 
nneiifiiness  within,  conclude  that  this  suffices.  If  in  the  dead  of  the 
bight  yon  should  hear  thieves  in  your  house,  yon  would  not  congratulate 
yourself  because  you  were  awake  to  hear  them.  You  would  waive  all 
iinch  comfortable  refleciions  till  the  rogues  were  driven  out  and  your 

Koperty  was  safe  ;  and  so,  when  you  know  things  are  amiss  with  you, 
uol  say,  "  I  am  satisfied,  because  I  know  it  is  so.**    Up,  man,  and 


'526  HLTROPOLIT^  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

with  all  the  strength  that  God's  Holy  Spirit  can  gi?eyon,  strive  todrire 
out  these  traitois  from  your  bosom,  for  they  are  robbing  joar  sooid 
her  best  treasures. 

VI.  Brethren,  these  regrets  when  they  are  necessary  are  very  hdk- 
BLINQ.  Meditate  now  for  a  minute.  Think,  dear  brother^  what  wai 
thy  position  in  thy  happiest  times,  in  those  days  that  are  now  past 
Had  you  any  love  to  spare  then  ?  Yon  were  zealons  ;  were  you  too 
zealous  ?  You  were  gracious  ;  were  you  too  gracious  ?  Nay,  in  cor 
best  estate,  we  were  very  far  short  of  what  we  ought  to  be,  and  yet  we 
have  gone  back  from  even  that.  It  was  a  poor  attainment  at  the  best, 
have  we  fallen  even  from  that.  During  the  time  we  have  been  going 
back,  we  ou<^^ht  to  have  gone  forward.  What  enjoyments  we  have  lo^ 
by  our  wanderings !  What  progress  we  have  missed !  As  John  Bunyaa 
well  puts  it,  when  Christian  fell  asleep  and  lost  his  roll,  he  had  to  go 
back  for  it,  and  he  found  it  very  hard  going  back,  aud,  moreover,  he  bad 
to  go  on  ai^ain,  so  that  he  had  to  traverse  three  times  the  loadhe  need 
only  have  travelled  once,  and  then  he  came  in  late  at  the  gates  of  the 
palace  Beauiilul,  and  was  afraid  of  the  lions,  of  which  he  would  hate 
nad  no  fear  had  not  the  darkness  set  in.  We  know  not  what  we  lose, 
when  we  lose  growth  in  grace. 

Alas,  how  niuih  the  church  has  lost  through  ns»  for  if  the  Chris- 
tian becomes  poor  in  grace,  he  lessens  the  charch*s  wealth  of  grace. 
We  have  a  coninion  exchequer  as  a  church,  and  evf'ry  one  who  takes 
away  his  proportion  from  it  robs  the  whole.  Dear  brethren,  how 
accountable  are  many  of  us  for  the  low  tone  of  religion  in  the  world, 
especially  tlio^e  of  us  who  occnpy  the  foremost  ranks.  If  grace 
be  at  a  low  ebb  with  ns,  others  say,  "  Well,  look  at.  so  and  so ; 
I  am  as  good  as  he.*'  So  much  in  the  church  do  we  take  the  cae 
from  one  another,  (hat  each  one. of  us  is  in  a  measure  responsible 
for  the  low  state  of  the  whole.  Some  of  ns  are  very  quick  to  see 
the  faults  of  others  ;  may  it  not  be  that  these  faults  are  our  owa 
children  ?  Those  who  have  little  love  to  others  generally  discova 
that  there  is  little  love  in  the  church,  and  I  notice  that,  those  who 
complain  of  the  inconsistencies  of  others,  are  usually  the  most 
inconsistent  persons  themselves.  Shall  I  be  .^  robber  of  my  fellow 
Christians?  Shall  I  be  an  jnjury  to  the^cause  of  Christ?  Shall 
I  be  a  comfort  unto  sinners  in  their  sin  ?  Sliall  I  rob  Christ  of  his 
glory, — I,  who  was  saved  from  such  depths  of  sin,— rl,  who  have  been 
favoured  with  such  enjoyments,  of  his  presence, — {,  that  have  been  on 
Tabor's  top  with  him,  and  seen  l^m  transfigured, — I,  that  have  been  in 
his  banqueting  |)ouse,  and  have  drunk  out  of.the  flagons  of  his  love,— 
shall  I  be  so  devoid  of  .grace,  that  I.  shall  even  injure  his  cliil* 
dren,  and  make  hjs  enemies  to  bl^i^phen^.  ?  Wretuh.that  I  am,  to  do 
this  1  Smite  your  breast,  cny  brptlier,.  if  such  has  beeo  your  sin;  go 
home  and  smite  your  breast  again,  .an4  ask  Opd  to  s<nite  it^  till,  with  • 
broken  hea^\ypu.cry  repentinglv  for  restoration,  and  then  again  go 
forth  as  a  burning  and  a  shining  light,  to  serve  ypvgr  Master  better  than 
before.  .    .  /.    /   * 

VII.  These  regrets,  then,  are  humbling,  and  they^may  be  madev^ 
PROFITABLE  in  many  other  ways.    First,  they  shew  as  what  homan 

'  nature  is.  Have  we  gone  back  so  far  ?  0,  brethren^  we  might  havegoM 


job's  beobet  and  oub  own.  527 

ek  to  perdition :  we  should  have  done  so,  if  it  had  not  been  for  the 
»ce  of  God.  What  a  mar?el  it  is  that  God  has  borne  with  oar  ill 
inners,  when  he  might  justly  have  laid  the  reins  on  our  necks,  and 
fifered  us  to  rush  on  in  the  road  which  we  so  often  hankered  after, 
e  you  not,  dear  brethren,  what  a  body  of  death  we  carry  with  us,  and 
lat  a  terrible  power  it  possesses?  When  you  see  the  mischief  that 
rruption  has  already  done,  never  trust  yourself,  but  look  for  new 
ace  every  day. 

Learn  again  to  prize  what  spiritual  blessings  yet  remain.  If  yon 
ve  such  bitter  regrets  for  what  you  have  lost,  hold  fast  what  is  still 
urs.  Slip  back  no  further,  for  if  these  slips  have  cost  you  so  much, 
ke  heed  that  they  do  not  ruin  you.    To  continue  presumptuous  may 

a  proof  that  our  profession  is  rotten  throughout :  only  a  holy 
ilousy  can  remove  the  suspicion  of  insincerity.  Let  your  previous 
lings  teach  you  to  walk  cautiously  for  the  future.  Be  jealous,  for 
u  serve  a  jealous  God.  Since  grey  hairs  may  come  upon  you,  here 
d  there,  and  yon  may  not  know  it,  search,  watch,  try  yourself  day 

day,  lest  yon  relapse  yet  more. 

This  should  teach  us  to  live  by  faith,  since  our  best  attainments  fail 
We  rejoice  to-day,  but  we  may  mourn  to-morrow.  What  a  mercy 
is  that  our  salvation  does  not  depend  on  what  we  are  or  what  we 
»].  Christ  has  finished  our  salvation  ;  no  man  can  destroy  what  he 
8  completed.  Our  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God,  and  is  safe  there; 
ne  can  plack  us  out  of  Jehovah's  hands.  Since  we  so  frequently  run 
round,  it  is  clear  that  we  should  be  wrecked  altogether,  if  we  went  to 
i  in  a  legal  vessel  with  self  for  our  pilot;  let  us  keep  to  the  good  ship 

free  grace,  steered  by  immutable  faithfulness,  for  none  other  can 
ing  us  to  the  desired  haven.  But  oh,  let  that  free  grace  fill  us  with 
lent  gratitude.  Since  Christ  has  kept  us,  though  we  could  not  keep 
rselves,  let  us  bless  his  name,  and,  overwhelmed  with  obligations,  let 

rise  with  a  solemn  determination  that  we  will  serve  him  better  than 

have  ever  done  before;  and  may  his  blessed  Spirit  help  us  to  make 
i  deteriiiinution  a  fact. 

VIII.  So,  to  close ;  these  regrets  ought  not  to  bb  continual  :  they 
ght  to  be  removed,  decidedly  removed,  by  an  earnest  effort,  made  in 
•d*s  strength,  to  get  back  to  the  position  which  we  occupied  before, 
d  to  attain  something  better  still. 

Dear  brethren  and  sisters,  if  any  of  you  desire  now  to  come  into  the 
jher  life,  and  to  feel  anew  your  first  love,  what  shall  I  say  to  you  7 

>  back  to  where  you  started.    Do  not  stay  discussing  whether  you 

>  a  Christian  or  not.  Go  to  Christ  as  a  poor  guilty  sinner.  When 
i  door  to  heaven  seems  shut  to  me  as  a  saint,  I  will  get  through  it  as 
inner,  trusting  in  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus.  Come  and  stand 
lin,  as  though  all  your  sins  were  on  yon  still,  at  the  cross's  foot, 
eie  still  may  be  seen  the  dropping  blood  of  the  infinitely  precious 
mement.  Saviour,  I  trust  thee  again:  guilty,  more  guilty  than  I 
B  beftire,  a  sinful  child  of  God,  I  trust  thee :  "  wash  me  throughly 
m  mine  iniquities,  and  purge  me  from  my  sin.**  You  will  never  have 
ir  graces  revived,  unless  you  go  to  the  cross.  Begin  life  again.  The 
i  air  for  a  man  to  breathe  when  he  is  sickly  is  said  to  be  that  of  his 
Lhplace :  it  was  at  Calvary  we  were  bom  ;  it  is  only  at  Calvary  we 


528  H£TaOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

can  be  restored  when  we  are  declininij.  Do  .the  first  works.  As  a  shiner^ 
repair  to  the  Saviour,  and  ask  to  be  restored.  Then,  as  a  farther  meaci 
of  health,  search  out  the  cause  of  yanr  declension^  Probablj  it  was  s 
neglect  of  private  prayer.  Where  the  disease  be«fan',  there  most  the 
remedy  be  aj)plied.     Pray  more  earnestly,  more  frequently,  more  im- 

Cortaniitely.  Or,  was  it  a  neglect  of  hearing  the  word*?  Were  you  enticed 
y  novelty  or  cleverness  away  from  &  really  searchi^g^  and  instructive 
ministry  ?  Go  back,  and  feed  on  wholesome  food  again  :  perhaps  that 
may  cure  the  disease.  Or,  have  you  been  too  grasping  after  the  world? 
Brother,  you  loved  God  when  you  had  bat  one  shop,  you  have  two  now,i»nd 
are  giving  all  your  time  and  thoughts  to  business,  and  your  bodI  is  getting 
lean.  Man  alive,  strike  off  some  of  that  business,  for  it  is  a  bad  busi- 
ness that  makes  your  soul  poor,  l-  would  not  check  industry  or  en- 
terprise for  a  single  moment ;  let  a  man  do  all  he  can,  but  not  at  the 
ex})ense  of  his  soul.  Push,  but  do  not  push  down  your  soul.  You  may 
buy  gold  too  dear,  and  may  attain  a  hiii:h  position  in  this  world  at  a  cost 
which  you  may  have  to  rue  all  your  days.  Where  the  mischief  began, 
there  apply  the  remedy.  And  oh,  I  urge  upon  yon,  and  most  of  all  upon 
myself,  do  not  make  excuses  for  yourselves ;  do  not  palliate  your  faults; 
do  not  say  it  must  be  so;  do  not  compare  yourselves  among  yourselves, 
or  you  will  be  unwise;  but  to  the  perfect  image  of  Christ  let  your 
hearts  aspire,  to  the  ardour  of  your  divine  Redeemer,  who  loved  not 
himself,  but  loved  you;  to  the  intense  fervour  of  his  apostles,  who 
laid  themselves  upon  the  altar  of  God  for  his  sake,  for  Christ's  sake, 
and  for  yours.  Aspire  to  this,  and  may  we  as  a  church  lire  near  to 
God,  and  grow  in  grace,  then  shall  the  Lord  add  to  us  dailj  of  such  as 
shall  be  saved. 

There  are  some  here  who  will  say,  "  I  do  not  comprehend  this 
sermon :  I  have  no  cause  to  look  back  with  regret.  I  have  always  been 
much  the  same  as  I  am.  I  know  nothing  of  religion."  The  day  shall 
come  when  you  will  envy  the  least  and  most  trembling  believer.  1\) 
you  caieless,  Christless  sinners,  the  day  shall  come  when  you  will  cry  to 
the  rocks  lor  mercy,  and  beg  them  to  conceal  you  from  the  eyes  of  him 
whom  now  you  dare  despise.  I  beseech  you  be  not  high  minded, 
lift  not  up  your  horn  on  high,  speak  not  so  exceeding  piondly,  bot 
before  the  Christ  of  God,  and  ask  him  to  ^ive  you  the  new  life;  for 
even  if  that  new  life  have  declined  and  beconte  sickly,  it  is  better  than 
the  death  in  which  you  dwell.  Go  and  seek  grace  of  him  who  alone 
can  give  it,  and  he  will  grant  it  to  you  this  day,  for  his  infinite  mercjii 
sake.    Amen. 


Portions  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Rey.  ii.,  iii.  1— (J. 


Mb.  Spuroeox  takes  occasion  to  inform  his  weekly  readers  thai  the  funds  mini 
for  sustaining  the  Orphans  under  his  care  at  Stock  well  are  gnu'uilly  diininisfani^ 
«nd  assistance  will  be  very  seasonable.  About  200  fatherloM  boys  are  in  ttt 
Orphanage. 


^rirflptttan  iCakmatk  ftrljlt. 


THE  UNBELIEVER'S  UNHAPPY  CONDITION. 


31  pennon 


DeLITBBED  on  LoRD'S-DAY  MOBNINa,  SePTEHBEB  24th,  1S71    BT 

C.  H.  S^URGEO^^ 

AT     THE     METROPOLITAN    TABBRNACIiR,     NEWINGTON. 


I 

I 


"  He  that  beliereth  not  the  Son  shall  not  see  life  ;  but  the  wrath  of  God  abiJcth 
on  him." — John  iii.  36. 

This  is  a  part  of  a  discoarse  bv  John  the  Baptist.  We  have  not  many 
sermons  by  that  mighty  preacher,  but  we  have  just  sufficient  to  prove 
that  he  knew  how  to  lay  the  axe  at  the  root  of  the  ti'ec  by  preaching 
the  hiw  of  God  most  unflinchingly ;  and  also  that  he  knew  how  to  declare 
the  gospel,  for  no  one  could  have  uttered  sentences  which  more  clearly 
contain  the  way  of  salvation  than  those  in  the  text  before  us.  Indeed, 
this  ihiid  chapter  of  the  gospel  according  to  the  evangelist  John  is 
notable  among  clear  and  plain  Scriptures — notable  for  being  yet  clearer 
sind  plainer  than  almost  any  other.  John  the  Baptist  was  evidently  a 
preacher  who  knew  how  to  discriminate— a  point  in  which  so  many  fail — 
he  separated  between  the  precious  and  the  vile,  and  therefore  he  was  as 
God's  month  to  the  people.  He  does  not  address  them  as  all  lost  nor 
as  all  saved,  but  he  shows  the  two  classes,  he  keeps  up  the  line  of 
demarcation  between  him  that  feareth  God  and  him  that  feareth  him 
not.  He  plainly  declares  the  privileges  of  the  believer,  he  saith  he 
hath  even  now  eternal  life ;  and  with  equal  decision  he  testifies  to  the 
sad  state  of  the  unbeliever — "he  shall  not  see  life;  but  the  wrath  of 
God  abideth  on  him.'*  John  the  Baptist  might  usefully  instruct 
many  professedly  Christian  preachers.  Although  he  that  is  least 
in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  greater  than  John  the  Baptist,  and 
onght,  therefore,  more  clearly  to  bear  witness  to  the  truth ;  yet,  there 
are  many  who  muddle  the  gospel,  who  teach  philosophy,  who 
preach  a  mingle-mangle,  which  is  neither  law  nor  gospel ;  and  theso 
might  well  go  to  school  to  this  rough  preacher  of  the  wilderness,  and 
learn  from  him  how  to  cry,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  which  taketh 
away  the  sin  of  the  world."  I  desire  this  morning  to  take  a  leaf  out  of 
tiie  Baptist's  lesson  book ;  I  would  preach  as  he  did  the  gospel  of  the 
Lord  Jesus,  *'  whose  shoes  I  am  not  worthy  to  bear."  It  is  my  earnest 
No.  1,012. 


530  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

desire  to  enjoy  the  deli'f^ht  of  expounding  to  you  the  deep  things  of 
God;  I  feci  a  profound  ])leasure  in  opening  up  the  blessings  of  the 
coYcnant  of  grace,  and  bringing  forth  out  of  its  treasury  things  new 
and  old.  I  should  be  happy  to  dwell  upon  the  types  of  the  Old 
Testament,  and  even  to  toucn  upon  the  prophecies  of  the  New ;  but, 
while  BO  many  yet  remain  unsaved,  my  heart  is  never  content  except 
when  I  am  preaching  simply  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  My  dear 
unconverted  hearers,  when  I  see  you  brought  to  Christ,  I  will  then 
advance  beyond  the  rudiments  of  the  gospel ;  but,  meanwhile,  while  hell 
is  gaping  wide,  and  many  of  you  will  certainly  help  to  fill  it,  I  cannot 
turn  aside  from  warning  you.  I  dare  not  resist  the  sacred  impulse 
which  constrains  me  to  preach  over  and  over  again  to  you  the  glad 
tidings  of  salvation.  I  snail,  like  John,  continue  laying  the  axe  at  the 
root  of  the  trees,  and  shall  not  go  beyond  crying,  "  Repent  ye,  for  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand."  As  he  did,  we  shall  now  declare  the 
sad  estate  of  him  who  believeth  not  the  Son  of  God. 

This  morning,  with  the  burden  of  the  Lord  upon  us,  we  shall  speik 
upon  the  words  of  the  texL  Cm*  first  point  shall  be  a  discoTei? 
of  the  guilty  one,  "  he  that  believeth  not  the  Son.**  Next,  we  shall 
consider  his  offence ;  it  lies  in  "  not  believing  the  Son  ; "  thirdly,  we 
shall  lav  bare  the  sinful  causes  which  create  this  unbelief;  and,  fourthly, 
we  shall  show  the  terrible  result  of  not  believing  in  the  Son:  "fc 
shall  not  see  life,  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him.**  Hay  the 
Spirit  help  us  in  all. 

I.  To  begin,  then,  who  is  the  guilty  one  ?  Who  is  the  unhappy  man 
here  spoken  of?  Is  he  a  person  to  be  met  with  only  once  in  a  centniy? 
Must  we  search  the  crowds  through  and  through  to  find  out  an 
individual  in  this  miserable  plight  ?  Ah !  no ;  the  persons  who  are  here 
spoken  of  are  common  ;  they  abound  even  in  our  holy  assembfies; 
they  are  to  be  met  with  by  thousands  in  our  streets.  Alas,  dbs! 
they  form  the  vast  majority  of  the  world's  population.  Jesus  hatb 
come  unto  his  own  and  his  own  have  not  received  him,  the  Jewish  race 
remain  unbelieving  ;  while  the  Gentiles,  to  .whom  he  was  to  be  alight, 
prefer  to  sit  in  darkness  and  reject  his  brightness.  We  shall  not  be 
talking  this  morning  upon  a  recondite  theme,  with  only  a  remote  rela- 
tion to  ourselves,  but  there  are  many  here  of  whom  we  shall  be  speaking 
and  we  devoutly  pray  that  the  word  of  God  may  come  with  power  to 
their  souls. 

The  persons  here  spoken  of  are  those  who  believe  not  the  Son  of  God. 
Jesus  Christ,  out  of  infinite  mcrcv,  has  come  into  the  world,  has  taken 
upon  himself  our  nature,  and  in  that  nature  has  suflPered  the  just  for  tiK 
nnjust,  to  bring  us  to  God.  By  reason  of  his  suiTerings,  tlie  gwpd 
mesiiatre  is  now  ])roclaimed  to  all  men,  and  they  are  honestly  aseoied 
that ''  whosoever  bclievetli  in  him  shall  nob  i)erisn,  but  have  everlasting 
life.''  The  unhappy  ])ersons  in  this  text  will  not  believe  in  Jesos 
Christ,  they  reject  God's  way  of  mercy ;  they  hear  the  gospel,  but  refn* 
obedience  to  its  command.  Let  it  not  be  imagined  that  these  indi- 
viduals are  necessarily  avowed  sceptics,  for  many  of  them  beliere 
much  of  revealed  truth.  They  believe  the  Bible  to  be  the  woid 
of  God ;  they  believe  there  is  a  God ;  they  believe  that  Jesai 
Christ  is   come  into  the   world  as  a  Saviour;    they   believe  looit 


i 


THE  UNBELIEVER'S  UNHAPPY  CONDITION.  531 

B  doctrines  which  cluster  around  the  cross.  Alas!  tliey  may 
is,  but  yet  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  them,  if  they  believe  wot 
5on  of  God.  It  may  surprise  you  to  learn  that  many  of  thrKc 
ns  are  ?ery  much  interested  in  orthodoxy.  They  believe  (hat 
lave  discovered  the  truth,  and  they  exceedingly  value  Lliosc  tlit;- 
ics,  so  that  they  frequently  grow  very  warm  in  temper  uith  tlio?c 
liffer  from  them.  They  have  read  much,  ruid  they  are  mates 
;nmcnt  in  the  defence  of  what  they  consider  to  be  sound  doctrine, 
cannot  endure  heresy,  and  yet  sad  is  the  fact,  that  believing:  what 
3o,  and  knowing  so  much,  they  have  not  believed  the  Son  of  God. 
lelieve  the  doctrine  of  election,  but  they  have  noD  the  faith  of 
elect :  they  swear  by  final  perseverance,  but  persevere  in  unbolicf, 
confess  all  the  five  points  of  Calvinism,  but  they  have  not  come 
c  one  most  needful  point  of  looking  unto  Jesus,  that  they  may 
.vcd.  They  accept  in  creed  the  truths  that  are  assuredly  believed 
g  us,  but  they  have  not  received  that  faithful  saying,  wortiiy  of  all 
bation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners ;  at 
ate,  they  have  not  received  it  personally  and  practically  for  their 
salvation. 

nust  be  admitted  that  not  a  few  of  these  persons  are  blameless  as 
lir  morals.  You  could  not,  with  the  closest  observation,  find  either 
lesty,  falsehood,  uncleanness,  or  malice  in  their  outward  life ; 
are  not  only  free  from  these  blots,  but  they  manifest  positive 
ences.  Much  of  their  character  is  commendable.  They  frequently 
•urteons  and  compassionate,  generous  and  gentle-minded.  Oftcn- 
,  they  are  so  amiable  and  admirable,  that,  while  lookin;:: 
them,  we  understand  how  our  Lord,  in  a  similar  case,  loved  the 
;  man  who  asked  "what  lack  I  yet?"  The  one  thing  needful 
are  destitute  of,  they  have  not  believed  in  Christ  Jesus,  and 
as  the  Saviour  was  to  see  them  perish,  yet  it  cannot  be  helped, 
oom  is  common  to  all  who  believe  not;  they  shall  not  see  life,  but 
rath  of  God  abideth  on  them. 

many  cases  these  persons  are,  in  addition  to  their  morality,  religious 
IS  after  a  fashion.  They  would  not  absent  themselves  from  the 
service  of  the  place  of  worship.  They  are  most  careful  to  respect 
abbath^  they  venerate  the  Book  of  God,  they  use  a  form  of 
r,  they  join  m  the  songs  of  the  Sanctuary,  they  sit  as  God's 
;  sit,  and  stand  as  God's  people  stand,  but,  alas,  there  is  a  worm  in 
jntreof  that  fair  fruit,  they  have  missed  the  one  essential  thing, 
,  being  omitted,  brings  certain  ruin;  they  have  not  believed  on  the 
f  God.  Ah,  how  far  a  man  may  go,  and  yet,  for  lack  of  this  one 
,  the  wrath  of  God  may  still  abide  upon  him.  Beloved  of 
ts  who  are  hopeful  of  the  conversion  of  their  boy,  esteemed  by 
fians  who  cannot  but  admire  his  outward  conversation,  yet  for  ail 
he  younp:  man  may  be  under  the  frown  of  God,  for  "  God  is  angry 
the  wicked  every  day."  The  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  the  man, 
cr  he  may  be,  that  hath  not  believed  in  Jesus. 
IV,  if  our  text  showed  that  the  wrath  of  God  was  resting  on  the 
ts  in  our  jails,  most  persons  would  assent  to  the  statement,  and 
Tould  wonder  ht  it.  If  our  text  declared  that  the  wrath  of  God  abides 
persons  who  live  in  habitual  unchastity  and  constant  violation  of 


532  HETROPOLITAir  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

all  tlie  laws  of  order  and  respectability,  most  men  would  saj  '*  Amen;" 
but  the  text  is  aimed  at  another  character.  It  is  true  that  God's  wrath 
docs  vest  upon  open  sinners;  but,  oh  sirs,  this  too  is  true,  the  wrath  of 
God  abidcth  upon  those  who  boast  of  their  virtues  but  haye  not  belieTed 
in  Jesus  his  Son.  '^hey  may  dwell  in  palaces;  bat,  if  they  are  not 
believers,  the  wrath  of  God  abidetli  on  tnem.  They  may  sit  in  the 
senate  house  and  enjoy  the  acclamations  of  the  nation;  bnt,  if  they 
believe  not  on  the  Son,  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  them.  Their 
names  may  be  enrolled  in  the  peera<>e,  and  they  may  possess  conntlesB 
wealth,  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  them.  They  may  be  habitul 
in  their  charities,  and  abundant  in  external  acts  of  devotion ;  but,  if 
they  have  nob  accepted  the  appointed  Saviour,  the  word  of  God  bears 
witness,  that  *'  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  them." 

II.  Now  let  us,  with  our  hearts  awakened  by  Ood's  Spirit,  trj  to 
think  upon  their  offence. 

What  is  this  peculiar  sin  which  entails  the  wrath  of  God  upon  these 
people?  It  is  tliat  they  have  not  believed  the  Son  of  Ood.  What  does 
that  amount  to  ?  It  amounts  to  this,  first  of  all,  that  they  refuse  lo 
accept  the  mercy  of  God.  God  made  a  law,  and  his  creatures  were 
bound  to  respect  and  obey  it.  We  rejected  it,  and  tamed  aside  from 
it.  It  was  a  great  display  of  the  heart's  hatred,  but  it  was  not  in  some 
respects  so  thoroughljr  and  intensely  wicked  a  manifestation  of  oimity 
to  God  as  when  we  reject  the  gospel  of  grace.  God  has  now  presented 
not  the  law  but  the  gospel  to  us,  and  he  has  said :  ^  My  creatares, 
yon  have  broken  my  law,  you  have  acted  very  vilely  towards  me. 
I  must  punish  for  sin,  else  I  were  not  God,  and  I  cannot  laj  aside  mj 
justice ;  but  I  have  devised  a  way  by  which,  without  any  injaiy  to  any 
of  my  attributes,  I  can  have  mercy  upon  you.  I  am  read^  to  torgife 
the  past,  and  to  restore  you  to  more  than  your  lost  position,  so  that 
you  shall  be  my  sons  and  my  daughters.  My  only  command  to  pn 
is,  believe  in  my  Son.  If  this  command  be  obeyed,  all  the  blessings  of 
my  new  covenant  shall  be  yours.  Trust  him,  and  follow  him ;  lor, 
behold,  I  give  him  as  a  leader  and  commander  to  the  people.  Accept 
him  as  making  atonement  by  his  substitution,  and  obey  him.**  Nov, 
to  reject  the  law  of  God  shows  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief ;  bat  who  shall 
say  wliat  a  depth  of  rebellion  must  dwell  in  that  heart  which  refuses 
not  only  the  yoke  of  God  but  even  the  gift  of  God.  The  provision  of  a 
Siiviour  for  lost  men  is  the  free  gift  of  God,  by  it  all  our  wants  are  sop- 
plied,  all  our  evils  are  removed,  peace  on  earth  is  secured  tons,  and  glory 
for  ever  with  God :  the  rejection  of  this  gift  cannot  be  a  small  sin.  The 
all-Rceing  One,  when  he  beholds  men  spurning  the  supreme  gift  of  hia 
love,  cannot  but  ref!:ard  such  rejection  as  the  worst  proof  of  the  hatred 
of  tlieir  hearts  against  himself.  When  the  Holy  Spirit  comes  to  con- 
vince men  of  sin,  the  es})ecial  sin  which  he  brings  to  light  is  thus 
described:  **Ofsin,  because  they  believed  not  on  me."  Xot  because 
tlic  heathen  were  licentious  in  their  habits,  barbarous  in  their  wax's,  and 
bloodthirsty  in  their  spirit.  No:  "Of  sin,  because  they  believe  not  on 
me."  Condemnation  has  come  upon  men,  but  what  is  the  condemnation? 
**  That  light  is  come  into  the  world,  and  men  love  darkness  rather  than 
light,  because  their  deeds  are  evil."  Remember,  also,  that  expressive 
text:  *'He  that  believeth  not  is  condemned  already;"  and  what  is  he 


THE  UinXELIEVER'S  UNHAPPY  CONDITION.  533 

condemned  for?  "Because  he  hath  not  believed  in  the  name  of  the 
onlj-begotten  Son  of  God." 

Let  me  remark,  further,  that  in  the  rejection  of  divine  mercy  as 
presented  in  Ciirist,  the  unbeliever  has  displayed  an  intense  venom 
against  God,  for  observe  how  it  is.  He  must  either  receive  tiie  mercy 
of  God  in  Christ,  or  he  must  be  condemned — there  is  no  other  alter- 
native, lie  must  trust  Christ  whom  God  has  set  forth  to  be  the  ])ro- 
pitiation  for  sin,  or  else  he  must  be  driven  from  the  presence  of  God 
into  eternal  punishment.  The  unbeliever  in  effect  says,  **  I  had  sooner 
be  damned  than  I  would  accept  God's  mercy  in  Christ."  Can  we 
conceive  a  grosser  insult  to  the  infinite  compassion  of  the  jrreat  Father  ? 
Suppose  a  man  has  injured  another,  grossly  insulted  him,  and  that 
rei>eatedly,  and  yet  the  injured  person,  finding  the  man  at  Inst  brought 
into  a  wretched  and  miserable  state,  goes  to  him,  and  simply  out  of 
kindness  to  him,  says,  *'  I  freely  forgive  you  all  the  wrong  you  ever  did 
mc,  and  I  am  ready  to  relieve  vour  poverty,  and  to  succour  you  in 
your  distress."  Suppose  the  other  replies,  "No,  I  would  sooner  rot 
than  take  anything  from  you ;  "  would  not  you  have  in  such  a  resolve  a 
clear  proof  of  the  intense  enmity  that  existed  in  his  heart  ?  And  so 
when  a  man  saith,  and  everyone  of  you  unbelievers  do 'practically  say 
so,  "  I  would  sooner  lie  for  ever  in  hell  than  honour  Chnst  by  trusting 
liim,"  this  is  a  very  plain  proof  of  his  hatred  of  God  and  his  Christ. 
Unbclievei*8  hate  God.  Let  me  ask,  for  what  do  you  hate  him  ?  He 
keci^s  the  breath  within  your  nostrils;  he  it  is  that  gives  you  food  and 
raiment,  and  sends  fruitful  seasons.  For  which  of  these  good  things  do 
you  hate  him  ?  You  hate  him  because  he  is  good.  Ah,  then,  it  must 
be  because  you  yourself  are  evil,  and  your  heart  very  far  removed  from 
righteousness.  May  God  grant  that  this  great  and  crying  sin  may  bo 
clearly  set  before  your  eyes  by  the  light  of  the  Eternal  Spirit,  and  may 
you  rei)ent  of  it,  and  turn  from  your  unbelief,  and  live  this  day. 

But  yet  further,  the  unbeliever  touches  God  in  a  very  tender  ]»]ace  by 
liis  unbelief.  No  doubt,  it  was  to  the  great  Maker  a  joyous  thing  to 
fashion  this  world,  but  there  are  no  expressions  of  joy  concerning  it  at 
all  equal  to  the  joy  of  God  in  the  matter  of  human  redemption.  We 
would  be  guarded  when  we  speak  of  him ;  but,  as  far  as  we  can  tell,  the 
gift  of  his  dear  Son  to  men,  and  the  whole  scheme  of  redemption,  is 
I  he  master  work  even  of  God  himself.  He  is  infinite  in  jx)wer,  and 
wisdom,  and  love  ;  his  ways  are  as  high  above  our  ways  as  the  heavens 
arc  above  the  earth ;  but  Scripture,  I  think,  will  warrant  me  in 
saying — 

**  That  in  tbe  grace  which  rescued  man 
His  brightest  form  of  glory  shines ; 
Here  on  t£c  cross  *tis  fairest  writ, 
In  precious  blood  and  crimson  lines.*^ 

Now,  the  man  who  saith, "  There  is  no  God  "  is  a  fool,  but  he  who  denies 
God  thcgloiyof  redemption,  in  addition  to  his  folly,  has  robbed  the  Lord 
of  the  choicest  jewel  of  his  regalia,  and  aimed  a  deadly  blow  at  the 
divine  honour.  I  may  say  of  him  who  despises  the  great  salvation,  that, 
in  despising  Christ,  he  touches  the  apple  of  God's  eye.  "  This  is  my 
bclored  Son,"  saith  God,  "hear  ye  him."     Out  of  heaven  he  saith 


531  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

ir,  and  yet  men  stop  their  ears  and  say,  **  We  will  not  hare  him.**  Nay, 
tliey  wax  wrat]i  against  the  cross,  and  turn  away  from  God's  sa1?ation. 
Do  you  think  that  God  will  always  bear  this?  The  times  of  your 
ignorance  he  hath  winked  at,  but  "nowcomraandeth  all  men  everywlicre 
to  repent."  Will  ye  stand  out  against  his  love  ?  His  love  that  has  been 
so  inventive  in  ingenious  plans  by  which  to  bless  the  sons  of  men? 
Shall  ills  choicest  work  be  utterly  contemned  by  you?  If  so,  it  isiiulc 
\\  o::tkr  that  it  is  written,  "  The  wrath  of  God  abidcth  on  him." 

I  must,  still  further,  unveil  this  matter  by  saying  that  the  unbeliever 
];erpetratcs  an  offence  against  every  person  of  the  blessed  Trinity.  He 
i.^'iy  tliink  that  his  not  believing  is  a  very  small  business,  but,  iudecd,  it 
is  a  barbed  shaft  shot  against  the  Deity.  Take  the  Persons  of  tlx! 
blessed  Trinity,  beginning  with  the  Son  of  God  who  comes  to  us  most 
liearly.  It  is  to  mo  the  most  surprising  thing  I  ever  heard  of  that  "the 
A\ ord  was  made  flesh  and  dwelt  among  us."  I  do  not  wonder  that  in 
liindostan  the  missionaries  are  often  met  with  this  remark  :  "  It  is  too 
guod  to  be  true  that  God  ever  took  upon  himself  the  nature  of  soch  a 
thing  as  Juan  I  "  Yet,  more  wonderful  does  it  seem  to  be  that,  when 
Christ  became  man,  he  took  all  the  sorrows  and  infirmity  of  man,  and, 
in  addition,  was  made  to  bear  the  sin  of  many.  The  most  extrdordiiinnr 
of  all  facts  is  this  :  that  the  infinitely  Holy  should  be  "  numbered  witi 
tlie  transgressors,"  and,  in  the  words  of  Esaias,  should  "  bear  their 
iniquities/'  The  Lord  hath  made  him,  who  knew  no  sin,  to  be  made 
sin  for  us.  AVonder  of  wonders !  It  is  beyond  all  degree  amazin^: 
thut  he  who  distributes  crowns  and  thrones  should  hang  on  a  tree  and 
die,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  bearing  the  punishment  due  to  sinners  for 
guilt.  Now,  knowing  this,  as  most  of  you  do,  and  yet  refusing 
to  believe,  you  do,  in  effect,  say,  "  1  do  not  believe  that  the  inca^ 
n:»te  God  can  Fave."  "Oh  no,"  you  reply,  "we  sincerely  believe 
that  he  can  pave."  Then,  it  must  be  that  you  feel,  •*  I  believe  he 
can,  but  1  will  not  have  him  to  save  me."  Wherein  I  excuse 
you  in  the  first  place,  I  must  bring  the  accusation  more  heavily  in 
the  second.  You  answer  that  **you  do  not  say  yon  will  not  believe 
him."  AVhy  do  you  tSen  remain  in  unbelief?  The  feet  is  you  do  not 
trnFt  him  ;  you  do  noc  obey  him.  I  pray  you  account  for  the  fact. 
'*  May  I  believe  him  ?  "  saith  cne.  Have  we  not  told  yon  ten  thousand 
times  over  that  whosoever  will  may  take  the  water  of  life  freely.  If 
there  be  any  barrier  it  is  not  with  God,  it  is  not  with  Christ,  it  is  witli 
your  own  sinful  heart.  You  are  welcome  to  the  Snviour  now,  and  if 
you  trust  him  now  he  is  yours  for  ever.  But  oh,  unbeliever,  it  appears 
to  be  nothing  to  you  that  Christ  has  died.  His  wounds  attract  vou 
not.  His  groans  for  his  enemies  have  no  music  in  them  to  you.  You 
turn  your  back  upon  the  incarnate  God  who  bleeds  for  men,  and  in  so 
doing*  you  phut  yourselves  out  of  hope,  jndijing  yourselves  unworthy 
of  eternal  life. 

Furthermore,  the  wilful  rejection  of  Christ  is  also  an  insult  to  God 
the  Father.  **  He  that  believeth  not  hath  made  God  a  liar,  because  be 
halh  not  believed  the  record  that  God  gave  of  his  Son."  God  has  him- 
self often  borne  testimony  to  his  dear  Son.  **  Him  hath  God  the 
Father  sot  forth  to  be  a  propitiation  for  our  sins."  In  rejecting  Christ, 
you  reject  God's  testimony  and  God*8  gift.    It  is  a  direct  assault  upon 


THE  UNBELISySB*8  UNHAPPY  CONDITION.  535 

the  truthfnlness  and  loYingkindness  of  the  gracious  Father,  when  yon 
trample  on  or  cast  aside  his  priceless,  peerless  gift  of  love. 

And,  as  for  the  blessed  Spirit,  it  is  his  office  here  below  to  bear  witness 
to  Christ.  In  the  Christian  ministry,  daily  the  Holy  Spirit  cries  to  the 
eons  of  men  to  come  to  Jesns.  He  has  striren  in  the  hearts  of  many  oi' 
you,  given  yon  a  measure  of  conviction  of  sin,  and  a  degree  of  know- 
ledge  of  the  glory  of  Christ,  but  you  have  repressed  it,  you  have  laboured 
to  your  utmost  to  do  despite  to  the  Spirit  of  God.  Believe  me,  this  is 
no 'slight  sin.  An  unbelieyer  is  an  enemy  to  God  the  Father,  to  God 
the  Son,  and  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  Against  the  blessed  Trinity  in 
Unity,  O  unbeliever,  your  sin  is  a  standing  insult:  you  are  now  to 
God's  face  insulting  him,  by  continuing  an  unbelieyer. 

And,  I  must  add,  that  there  is  also  in  unbelief  an  insult  against  every 
attribute  of  God.  The  unbeliever  in  eflFect  declares,  "If  the  justice 
of  God  is  seen  in  laying  the  punishment  of  sin  upon  Christ— I  do 
not  care  for  his  justice,  I  will  bear  my  own  punishment."  The  sinner 
seems  to  say,  **  God  is  merciful  in  the  gift  of  Christ  to  suffer  in  our 
stead — I  do  not  want  his  mercy,  I  can  do  without  it.  Others  may  be 
guilty,  and  they  may  trust  in  the  Redeemer,  but  I  do  not  feel  such  guilt . 
and  I  will  not  sue  for  pardon."  Unbelievers  attack  the  wisdom  of 
God,  for,  whereas  the  wisdom  of  God  is  in  its  fullness  revealed  iu  the 
gift  of  Jesus,  they  say,  "  It  is  a  dogma,  unphilosophical,and  worn-out.'' 
They  count  the  wisdom  of  God  to  be  foolishness,  and  thus  cast  a  slight 
npon  another  of  the  divine  attributes.  I  might  in  detail  mention  every 
one  of  the  attributes  and  prerogatives  of  God,  and  prove  that  your  non- 
acceptance  of  the  Saviour  is  an  insult  to  every  one  of  them,  and  to  God 
himself:  but  the  theme  is  too  sad  for  us  to  continue  upon  it,  acd, 
therefore,  let  us  pass  to  another  phase  of  the  subject,  though  I  fear  it 
will  be  equally  grievous. 

III.  Thirdly,  let  us  consider  the  oauses  of  this  unbelief. 

In  a  great  many,  unbelief  may  be  ascribed  to  a  careless  ignorancB 
of  the  way  of  salvation.  Now,  I  should  not  wonder  if  many  of 
you  imagine  that,  if  you  do  not  understand  the  gospel,  you  ai'e  thei-e- 
fore  quite  excused  for  not  believing  it.  But,  sirs,  it  is  not  so.  You 
are  placed  in  this  world,  not  as  heathens  in  the  centre  of  Africa,  but  in 
enlightened  England,  where  yon  live  in  the  full  blaze  of  gospel  day. 
There  are  places  of  worship  all  around  you,  which  you  can  without 
difficulty  attend.  The  book  of  God  is  very  cheap;  you  have  it  in  your 
houses  ;  you  can  all  read  it  or  hear  it  read.  Is  it  to,  then,  that*^  the 
King  has  been  pleased  to  reveal  himself  to  you,  and  tell  you  the  way  to 
ftalvation,  and  yet  you,  at  the  age  of  twenty,  thirty,  or  forty,  do  not 
know  the  way  of  salvation  ?  What  do  you  mean,  sir  ?  What  can  you 
mean?  Has  God  been  pleased  to  reveal  himself  iu  Scripture,  and 
tell  you  how  to  escape  from  hell  and  fly  to  heaven,  and  yet  have  you 
been  too  idle  to  inquire  into  that  way  ?  Dare  you  say  to  God,  **  I  do 
not  think  it  worth  my  while  to  learn  what  thou  hast  revealed,  neither 
do  I  care  to  know  of  the  gift  which  thou  hast  bestowed  on  men."  How 
can  you  think  that  such  ignorance  is  an  excuse  for  your  sin  ?  WJiat 
could  be  a  more  gross  aggravation  of  it?  If  you  do  not  know,  you 
ought  to  know  ;  if  you  have  not  learned  the  gospel  mesrage,  you  might 
have  learned  it,  for  there  are  some  of  us  whose  language  it  is  not 


586  MKTROFOLITAN  TABEUKAOLE  PULPIT. 

difficult  for  even  the  most  illiterate  to  undeTBtand,  and  who  wonld,ifire 
caught  ourselves  using  a  hard  word,  retract  it,  and  pat  it  into  little 
syllables,  so  that  not  even  a  child's  intellect  need  be  perplexed  hy  onr 
langunge.  Salvation's  way  is  plain  in  the  book ;  those  words,  '*  Believe 
and  live/'  are  in  this  Christian  England  almost  as  l^ble  and  as  uni- 
versally to  be  seen  as  though  they  were  printed  on  the  sky.  Thau 
trust  in  the  Lord  Jesus  saves  the  soul  is  well-known  news.  Bat,  if  yon 
still  say  you  have  not  known  all  this,  then  I  reply,  "  Dear  sir,  do  try 
to  know  it.  Go  to  the  Scriptures,  study  them,  see  what  is  there.  Hear, 
also,  the  gospel,  for  it  is  written,  "  Incline  your  ear  to  oome  onto  me; 
hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live."  *'  Faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing 
by  tlic  word  of  God."  For  your  soul's  sake  I  charge  yon,  be  no  longer 
ignorant  of  that  which  you  must  know,  or  else  must  perish. 

In  some  others,  the  cause  is  indifference.  They  do  not  think  the 
matter  to  be  of  any  very  great  consequence.  They  are  aware  that  they 
arc  not  quite  riqht,  but  they  have  a  notion  that  somehow  or  other  tbev 
will  get  right  at  last ;  and,  meanwhile,  it  does  not  trouble  them.  Oh 
man,  I  pray  thee  as  thy  fellow  creature  let  me  speak  with  thee  a  word  of 
expostulation.  God  declares  that  his  wrath  abides  upon  yon  as  an  no- 
believer,  and  do  you  call  that  nothing  ?  God  says,  "  I  am  angry  with 
you,"  and  you  say  to  him,  "  I  do  not  care,  it  is  of  very  small  importance 
to  mc.  The  rise  or  fall  of  the  consols  is  of  much  more  ocmsequence 
than  whether  God  is  angry  with  me  or  not.  My  dinner  being  done  to  a 
turn  concerns  me  a  great  deal  more  than  whether  the  infinite  Godlove6 
mc  or  hates  me."  That  is  the  English  of  your  condnct,  and  I  pat  it 
to  yon  whether  there  can  be  a  higher  impertinence  against  your 
Creator,  or  a  direr  form  of  arrogant  revolt  against  the  eternal  Ruler. 
If  it  does  not  trouble  you  that  God  is  angty  with  you,  it  ought  to  trouble 
you ;  and  it  troubles  me  that  it  does  not  trouble  you.  We  have  heard  of 
persons  guilty  of  murder,  whose  behaviour  during  the  trial  has  been 
cool  and  self-possessed.  The  coolness  with  which  they  pleaded  **not 
guilty"  has  been  all  of  a  piece  with  the  hardness  of  heart  which  led 
them  to  the  bloody  deed.  He  who  is  capable  of  great  crime  is  also 
incapable  of  shame  concerning  it.  A  man  who  is  able  to  take  pleasure 
and  be  at  ease  while  God  is  angry  with  him  shows  that  his  heart  is  harder 
than  steel. 

In  certain  cases,  the  root  of  this  unbelief  lies  in  another  direction.  It 
is  fed  by  pride.  The  person  who  is  guilty  of  it  does  not  believe  that  he 
needs  a  ^viour.  His  notion  is  that  he  will  do  his  very  best,  attend  the 
church  or  the  meeting-house  very  regularly,  subscribe  oocasionally  or 
frequently,  and  go  to  heaven  partly  by  what  he  does,  and  partly  by  the 
merits  of  Christ.  So  that  not  believing  in  Christ  is  not  a  matter  of 
any  great  consequence  with  him,  because  he  is  not  naked,  and  poor,  and 
miserable ;  but  ne  is  rich,  and  increased  in  goods  in  sraritnal  things. 
To  be  saved  by  faith  is  a  religion  for  harlots,  and  drunkards,  and 
thieves ;  but  for  respectable  persons  such  as  he  is,  who  have  kept  the 
law  from  their  youth  up,  he  does  not  see  any  particular  need  of  laying 
hold  upon  Christ  Such  conduct  reminds  me  of  the  words  of  Cowper:— 

"  Perish  the  virtue,  as  it  ought,  nbhorr'd, 
And  the  fool  with  it  that  insults  his  Lord." 

God  believed  it  needful,  in  order  to  save  man,  that  the  Bedeemor 


THB  UNBELIBYBR'B  UITHAPPT  OONBHION.  537 

should  die ;  yet  yon  self-righteous  ones  evidently  think  that  deatli  a 
Buperflaity :  fi)r  if  a  man  coald  save  himself,  why  did  the  Lord  descend 
and  die  to  saye  him  7  If  there  be  a  way  to  heaven  by  respectability 
and  morality  without  Christ,  what  is  the  good  of  Christ?  It  is  utterly 
useless  to  have  an  expiator  and  a  meditator,  if  men  are  so  good  that 
they  do  not  requii*e  them.  You  tell  Ood  to  his  face  that  he  lies  unto 
you,  that  you  are  not  so  sinful  as  he  would  persuade  you,  that  you  do 
not  need  a  substitute  and  sacrifice  as  he  says  you  do.  Oh,  sirs,  this 
pride  of  yours  is  an  arrogant  rebellion  against  God.  Look  at  your  fine 
actions,  you  that  are  so  good — ^your  motives  are  base,  your  pride  over 
what  you  have  done  has  defiled,  with  black  fingers,  all  your  acts.  In* 
asmuch  as  you  prefer  your  way  to  God*s  way,  and  prefer  your  righteous- 
ness to  God's  righteousness,  the  wrath  of  God  abiaeth  on  you. 

Perhaps  I  have  not  hit  the  reason  of  your  unbelief,  therefore  let  me 
speak  once  more.  In  many  lave  of  sin  rather  than  any  boasted  self- 
righteousness  keeps  them  from  the  Saviour.  They  do  not  believe  in 
JesDS,  not  because  they  have  any  doubt  about  the  truths  of  Christianity, 
but  because  they  have  an  enslaving  love  for  their  favourite  sin.  "  Why,'* 
saith  one,  '^  if  I  were  to  believe  in  Christ,  of  course,  I  must  obey  him — 
to  trust  and  to  obey  go  together.  Then  I  could  not  be  the  dnmkard  I 
am,  I  could  not  trade  as  I  do,  I  could  not  practise  secret  licentiousness, 
I  could  not  frequ^it  the  haunts  of  the  ungodly,  where  laughter  is  oc- 
casioned by  sin,  and  mirth  by  blasphemy.  I  cannot  give  up  these  my 
darling  sins."  Parhaps,  this  sinner  hopes  that  one  day,  when  he  cannot 
any  longer  enjoy  his  sin,  he  will  meanly  sneak  out  of  it,  and  try  to  cheat 
the  devil  of  his  soul;  but»  meanwhile,  ne  prefers  the  pleasures  of  sin  to 
obedience  to  God,  and  unbelief  to  acceptance  of  his  salvation.  0  sweet 
sin  I  0  bitter  sin !  How  art  thou  murdering  the  souls  of  men  !  As 
certain  serpents  before  they  strike  their  prey  fix  their  eyes  upon  it  and 
fascinate  it,  and  then  at  last  devour  it,  so  does  sin  fascinate  the  foolish 
sons  of  Adam  ;  they  are  charmed  with  it,  and  perish  for  it.  It  yields 
but  a  momentary  joy,  and  the  wage  thereof  is  eternal  misery,  yet  are 
men  enamoured  of  it.  The  ways  of  the  strange  woman,  and  the  paths 
of  uncleanness  lead  most  plainly  to  the  chambers  of  death,  yet  are  men 
attracted  thereto  as  moths  by  the  blaze  of  the  candle,  and  so  are  they 
destroyed.  Alas  !  that  men  wantonly  dash  against  the  rocks  of 
dangerous  lusts,  and  perish  wilfully  beneath  the  enchantment  of  sin. 
Sad  pity  it  is  to  prefer  a  harlot  to  the  eternal  God,  to  prefer  a  few 
pence  made  by  dishonesty  to  heaven  itself,  to  prefer  the  gratification 
of  the  belly  to  the  love  of  the  Creator,  and  the  joy  of  being  recon- 
ciled and  sav^.  It  was  a  dire  insult  to  God  when  Israel  set  up  a 
golden  calf,  and  said,  "These  be  thy  gods,  0  Israel."  Shall  the 
image  of  an  ox  that  eateth  grass  supplant  the  living  God  1  He  that 
had  strewn  the  earth  with  manna,  had  made  Sinai  to  smoke  with  his 
presence,  and  the  whole  wilderness  to  tremble  beneath  his  marchings, 
is  he  to  be  thrust  aside  by  the  image  of  a  bullock  that  hath  horns  and 
hoofs  ?  Will  men  prefer  molten  metal  to  the  infinitely  holy  and  glorious 
Jehovah  ?  But,  surely,  the  preference  of  a  lust  to  God  is  a  greater 
insult  still :  to  obey  our  passions  rather  than  his  will,  and  to  prefer 
sin  to  his  mercy ;  this  is  the  crime  of  crimes.  May  God  delive  us  from 
it^  for  his  mercy's  sake* 


538  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  FULPIT. 

IV.  We  have  heavy  tidings  in  the  laat  head  of  my  discoiine, 
THE  TERRIBLE  RESULT  of  Unbelief.  "He  shall  not  see  life,  but 
the  wrath  of  God  abidcth  on  liim.''  "  The  wrath  of  God  I "  No  words 
can  ever  fully  explain  this  expression.  Holy  Whitfield,  when  he  vm 
]jieaching,  would  often  hold  up  his  hands,  and,  with  tears  streaming 
(l'»wii  his  eyes,  would  exclaim,  **0h,  the  wrath  to  come!  the  wrath  to 
c'O.ne  ! "  Then  would  he  pause  because  his  emotions  checked  his  at- 
teiMUce.  The  wrath  of  God !  I  confess  I  feel  uneasy  if  anybody  is  aogiy 
with  me,  and  yet  one  can  bear  the  anger  of  foolish,  hot-tempered  pcr- 
Kms  with  some  equanimity.  But  the  wrath  of  God  is  the  anger  of  one 
>\  ho  is  never  an^j^ry  without  a  cause,  one  who  is  very  potient  and  l<mg- 
snflcriug.  It  takes  much  to  bring  the  choler  into  Jenovab's  face,  yet  is 
he  wroth  with  unbelievers.  He  is  never  wroth  with  anything  becaoieit 
is  feeble  and  little,  but  only  because  it  is  wrong.  His  anger  is  only  hi« 
holiness  set  on  fire.  He  cannot  l>ear  sin ;  who  would  wish  that  he  shoold  ? 
What  right-minded  man  would  desire  God  to  be  pleased  with  evil  ?  That 
were  to  make  a  devil  of  God.  Because  he  is  God,  he  must  be  angry  with 
sin  wherever  it  is.  This  makes  the  sting  of  it,  that  his  wrath  is  just  and 
holy  }inQ:er.  It  is  the  anger,  remember,  of  an  Onmipotent  Being,  who 
can  cnish  us  as  easily  as  a  moth.  It  is  the  anger  of  an  Infinite  Being, 
and  therefore  infinite  anger,  the  heights  and  depths  and  breadths  and 
len<;:ths  of  which  no  man  can  measure.  Only  the  incarnate  God  ev^ 
fully  knew  the  power  of  God*s  anger.  It  is  beyond  all  conccptioo,  yet 
the  anger  rests  on  you  my  hearer.  Alas,  for  you,  if  yon  are  an  unbe- 
liever, for  this  is  your  state  before  God.  It  is  no  fiction  of  mine,  bnt 
the  word  of  inspired  truth  :  "  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him." 

Then  notice  the  next  word,  it  "abideth,*'  this  is  to  say, it  is  upon  ron 
now.  He  is  angry  with  you  at  this  moment,— and  always,  xou  go 
to  sleep  with  an  angry  God  gazing  into  your  face,  you  wake  in  the 
morning,  and  if  your  eye  were  not  dim,  you  would  perceire  his  fh>wning 
countenance.  He  is  angry  with  yon,  even  when  you  are  singing  bis 
praises,  for  you  mock  him  with  solemn  sounds,  upon  a  thoughtless 
tongue ;  angry  with  you  on  your  knees,  for  you  only  pretend  to  pray, 
you  utter  words  without  heart.  As  long  as  you  are  not  a  believer,  he 
must  be  angry  with  you  every  moment.  '*  God  is  angry  with  the 
wicked  every  day.** 

That  the  text  saith  it  abideth,  and  the  present  tense  takes  a  long 
sweep,  for  it  always  will  abide  on  you.  But  may  yon  not^  perhaps, 
escape  from  it,  by  ceasing  to  exist?  The  text  precludes  sudi  an  idea. 
Although  it  says,  that  yon  "'  shall  not  see  life,"  it  teaches  that  God*s 
wrath  is  upon  yon,  so  that  the  absence  of  life  is  not  annihilation. 
Sj'iritual  life  belongs  only  to  believers;  you  are  now  without  that  life, 
yet  you  exist,  and  wrath  abides  on  you,  and  so  it  ever  must  be.  While 
you  shall  not  see  life,  you  shall  exist  in  eternal  death,  for  the  wrath  of 
(iod  cannot  abide  on  a  non-existent  creature.  You  shall  not  see  life, 
but  you  shall  feel  wrath  to  the  uttermost.  It  is  horror  enough  that 
wrath  should  be  on  you  now,  it  is  horror  upon  horrors,  and  hell  upon 
hell,  that  it  shall  be  upon  you  for  ever. 

And  notice  that  it  must  be  so,  because  you  reject  the  only  thmg 
that  can  heal  you.  As  George  Herbert  says,  '*  Whom  oib  and  balsams 
kill,  what  salve  can  cure?**    If  Christ  himself  has  become  a  savour 


THIS  UNBBLIBVEB'S  UNHAPPY  CONDITION.  589 

• 

>f  death  nnto  death  onto  yon,  because  70a  reject  him,  how  can  yon  be 
myed  ?  There  is  but  one  door,  and  if  yon  close  it  by  your  unbelief, 
K>w  can  yon  enter  heaven  ?  There  is  one  healing  medicine,  and,  if 
jTon  refuse  to  take  it,  what  remains  but  death  ?  There  is  one  water 
)f  life,  but  yon  refnse  to  drink  it;  then  must  you  thirst  for  ever. 
Ton  put  from  yon,  yolnntarily,  the  one  only  Redeemer ;  how  then  shall 
^on  be  ransomed?  Shall  Christ  die  agam,  and  in  another  state  be 
iffered  to  yon  once  more  ?  0  sirs,  yon  would  reject  him  then  as  you 
"eject  him  now.  Bnt  there  remaineth  no  more  saciifice  for  sio.  On  the 
;ros8,  Ood's  mercy  to  the  sons  of  men  was  fully  revealed,  and  will  you 
reject  God*8  ultimatum  of  grace;  his  last  appeal  to  von.  If  so,  it  is  at 
^our  own  peril :  Christ  being  raised  from  the  dead,  aieth  no  more ;  he 
shall  come  again,  bnt  without  a  sin  offering  unto  the  salvation  of  his 
people. 

Kemember,  sirs,  that  the  wrath  of  God  will  produce  no  saving  or 
K)ftening  effect  It  has  been  suggested  that  a  sinner,  after  suffering 
]k>d's  wrath  awhile,  may  repent,  and  so  escape  from  it  But  our  obser- 
ration  and  experience  prove  that  the  wrath  of  God  never  soilened 
inybody's  heart  ^et,  and  we  believe  it  never  will:  those  who  are 
ire  suffering  divme  wrath  will  ^o  on  to  harden,  and  harden,  and 
barden ;  the  more  they  suffer,  we  more  they  will  hate :  the  more 
hej  are  punished,  the  more  will  they  sin.  The  wrath  of  God  abiding 
m  you  will  produce  no  good  results  to  you,  but  rather  you  shall  go 
fhmi  evil  to  evil,  further  and  further  from  the  presence  of  God. 

The  reason  why  the  wrath  of  God  abides  on  an  unbeliever  is  partly 
decanse  all  his  other  sins  remain  on  him.  There  is  no  sin  that  shall 
iamn  the  man  who  believes,  and  nothing  can  save  the  man  who  will  not 
oelieve.  God  removes  all  sin  the  moment  we  believe ;  but  while  we 
believe  not,  fresh  cords  fasten  upon  us  our  transgressions.  The  sin  of 
Tndah  is  written  as  with  nn  iron  peu,  and  graven  with  a  point  of  a 
liamond.  Nothing  can  release  you  from  guilt  while  your  heart  remains 
it  enmity  with  Jesus  Christ  your  Lord. 

Bemember  that  God  has  never  taken  an  oath,  that  I  know  of, 
igainst  any  class  of  persons,  except  unbelievers.  ''  To  whom  swarc 
lie  that  they  should  not  enter  into  his  rest,  but  to  them  that  be- 
lieved not?"  Continued  unbelief  God  never  will  forgive,  because 
lis  word  binds  him  not  to  do  so.  Doth  he  swear  an  oath,  and  shall  he 
;o  back  from  it  ?  It  cannot  be.  0  that  you  might  have  grace  to 
relinquish  your  unbelief,  and  close  in  with  the  gospel^  and  be  saved. 

Now,  I  hear  some  one  object,  *' You  tell  ns  that  certain  people  are 
inder  the  wrath  of  God,  but  they  are  very  prosperous."  I  reply,  that 
jTonder  bullock  vrill  be  slaughtered.  Yet  it  is  being  fattened.  And  your 
prosperity,  0  ungodly  man,  is  but  a  fattening  of  you  for  the  slaughter 
>f  justice.  Ay,  but  yon  say,  *•  They  are  verv  merry,  and  some  of  those 
rt'ho  are  forgiven  are  very  sad."  Mercy  lets  them  be  merry  while 
:hey  may.  We  have  heard  of  men  who,  when  driven  to  Tyburn  in  a 
Mirt,  could  drink  and  laugh  as  they  went  to  the  sallows.  It  only 
proved  what  bad  men  they  were.  And  so,  whereas  the  guilty  can  yet 
;ake  comfort,  it  only  proves  their  guiltiness. 

Let  me  ask  what  ought  to  be  your  thoughts  concerning  these 
solemn  truths  which  I  have  delivered  to  you  ?    I  know  what  my 


510  MBTROPOUTAK  TABBBHIGLB  FULPTT. 

thoughts  were ;  they  made  me  go  to  my  bed  unhappy.  Tliey  made  me 
very  grateful  because  I  hope  I  have  believed  in  Jesus  Christ ;  yet  they 
]n;ide  me  start  in  the  night,  and  wake  this  morning  with  a  load  upon 
me.  I  come  here  to  say  to  jon,  must  it  be  so  tlmt  you  will  alvm ■ 
remain  unbeh'cvers,  and  abide  under  the  wrath  of  God  ?  If  it  mnst  oe 
so,  and  the  dread  conclusion  seems  forced  npon  me,  at  any  rat^  do 
I  ok  it  in  the  face,  do  consider  it.  If  yon  are  resolred  to  be  damnof, 
know  what  you  are  at.  Take  advise  and  consider.  O  sirs,  it  caoBoi 
need  any  argument  to  convince  yon  that  it  is  a  most  wretched  thing  to 
be  now  under  the  wrath  of  Goa  Yon  cannot  want  any  argument  to 
s^.ow  that  it  must  be  a  blessed  thing  to  be  forgiven — ^yon  must  see 
that.  It  is  not  your  reason  that  wants  convincing,  it  is  your  heart  thit 
wants  renewing. 

Ti:c  whole  gospel  lies  in  this  nutshell.  Come,  thon  guilty  one,  jiut 
as  thon  art,  and  rest  thyself  upon  the  finished  work  of  the  Saviour,  and 
take  him  to  be  thine  for  ever.  Trust  Jesus  now.  In  your  present 
p  'sition  it  may  be  done.  God's  Holy  Spirit  blessing  your  mind,  yon 
may  at  this  moment  say,  ''  Lord,  I  believe,  help  thou  mine  unbelief." 
Yon  may  now  confide  in  Jesus,  and  some  who  came  in  here  unforgireo, 
may  make  the  angels  sing  because  they  go  down  yonder  steps  saved 
Kouls,  whose  transgressions  are  forgiven,  and  whose  sins  are  coverei 
God  knowcth  one  thing,  that  if  I  knew  by  what  study  and  what  art  I 
c'onld  learn  to  preach  the  gospel  so  as  to  alToct  your  hearts  I  vould 
spare  no  cost  or  pains.  For  the  present,  I  have  aimed  simply  to  warn 
yon,  not  witli  adornment  of  s|)cecn,  lest  the  power  should  be  the  power 
of  man  ;  and  now  I  leave  my  message,  and  commit  it  to  him  who  sball 
jivlj^o  the  quick  and  the  dead.  But  this  know,  if  yc  receive  not  the 
S  11,  I  shall  be  a  swifi  witness  against  you.  God  grant  it  be  not  so,  for 
his  mercy's  sake.     Amen. 


roKTio^s  OF  SciiirruRE  READ  BEFORE  Sermox — Ilcbrcws  iL  14— 18; 

Hebrews  iii. 


»  THE  *»  SWORD  AND  THE  TROWEL."    Edited  by  C.  H.  SPURGEON. 

Ck>NTEKT8   FOR   OCTOBKR,    1871. 


Ti.e  r;istoi'>  Wife.    A  True  Narrative,  Trans-      Spatnnodic  Workew. 

'.ale<)  from  tlio  Gemiaii  by  Mary  Weitbrecht.  '.  Baptist  Country  Mittioo. 
Aiiioiig    the    Rookeries   of   Smithfield.     By      Reviews. 

EUu-ord  I^oocli.  I   MeraorandA. 

0:i  tho  Kelitdon  of  Cliildhood.     By  Vernon 

J.  Cliarlvbwurth,  of  Stockwell  Orpnanage. 
Vmyo.r. 
The  Primitive  Church  of  Ireland. 


Pastors'  ColkM  Acooant. 
ColU'go  Bnildinss  Fond. 
Stockwell  Orphanage. 
Colportsge  ^^sociatioii. 


.\  Visit  to  Christ's  HoHpitol.    Being  a  short  Golden  Lane  Mission. 

SjniKMi  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon.                             <  Annual  Bepott  of  the  SKfCkwell  OrpkaosgB. 

'*  Waiting  fur  tlie  Verdict."— "Tho  Acquittal."  |  (Supplement  Gratis.) 

By  John  Aldis,  jnn.  I 

Price  3d.    Post  free,  4  stamps. 
London :  Passuiore  A  Alabaster,  18,  FMemoster  Bow,  and  all  Bool 


^firflplitaii  i^akmaclc 


OUE  WATCHWORD. 


Deliverkd  on  Lord'8-day  MoRHiNa,  October  1st,  1871,  by 

C.  H.  SPURGRON, 

AT  THB  KBTBOPOLITAN  TABERNAOI^E,  NEWINGTON. 


**  Let  such  u  lore  thy  salTation  saj  continually,  Let  God  be  magnified." — 

Psalm  Ixx.  4. 

These  words  occur  at  least  three  times  in  the  book  of  Psalms,  and 
therefore  we  may  regard  them  as  especially  important.  When  God 
speaks  once,  twice,  thrice,  he  doth  as  it  were  awaken  ns  to  peculiar 
attention,  and  call  for  prompt  obedience  to  what  he  saith.  Let  us  not 
be  deaf  to  the  divine  voice,  out  let  each  one  say, "  Speak  Lord,  for  thy 
servant  heareth." 

You  will  observe  that  in  this,  and  in  the  fortieth  Psalm,  this  holy 
saying  is  put  in  opposition  to  the  ungodly  speeches  of  persecutors,  llie  . 
wick^  say,  "  Aha,  aha,"  therefore  let  those  who  love  God's  salvation 
have  a  common  watchword  with  which  to  silence  the  malicious  mockeries 
of  the  ungodly ;  let  them  say,  "  Let  God  be  magnified."  The  earnest- 
ness of  the  wicked  should  be  a  stimulas  to  the  fervency  of  the  righteous. 
Surely,  if  God's  enemies  do  not  spare  blasphemy  and  profanity,  if  they 
are  always  upon  the  watch  to  find  reasons  for  casting  reproach  upon 
the  name  and  church  of  Christ,  we  ought  to  be  more  than  equally 
vigilant  and  diligent  in  spreading  abroad  the  knowledge  of  the  gospel, 
which  magnifies  the  name  of  the  Lord.  Would  to  God  his  church  were 
half  as  earnest  as  the  synagogue  of  Satan  !  Oh  that  we  had,  in  our  holy 
cause,  a  tithe  of  the  indefatigable  spirit  of  those  Scribes  and  Pharisees, 
who  compass  sea  and  land  to  make  one  proselyte  !  Even  the  arch- 
fiend shames  us  by  his  persevering  industry,  for  he  goeth  up  and  down 
in  the  earth  seeking  whom  he  may  destroy ! 

The  clause  which  we  have  selected  for  our  text  also  follows  im- 
mediately after  another  which  may  be  looked  upon  as  a  stepping-stone 
to  it.  Before  we  can  love  God's  salvation,  we  must  be  seekers  of  it ; 
hence  we  read,  ''Let  all  those  that  seek  thee  rejoice  and  be  glad  in 
tbee."  There  is  a  duty  peculiar  to  seekers,  let  them  see  to  it;  and  then 
there  follows  a  further  obligation  peculiar  to  those  who  have  found 
what  they  sought  for.  Let  joy  and  rejoicing  be  first  realised  by  the 
No.  1,013. 


542  METBOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

seeker  through  his  receivinc:  ix^rsonallj  the  grace  of  God,  and  then  let  qb 
go  on  to  a  statue  further.  The  fresh  convert  has  his  business  mainly 
within  ;  it  will  be  well  for  him  if  his  heart  can,  in  sinceritj,  be  glad  in 
the  Lord.  When  believers  are  young  and  feeble  they  are  not  fit  for 
the  battle ;  therefore,  let  them  tarry  at  home  awhile,  and  nnder  their 
vine  and  fig-tree  eat  the  sweet  fruits  of  the  gospel,  none  making  them 
afraid.  TVe  do  not  send  our  children  to  hard  service  ;  we  wait  till  their 
limbs  are  developed,  and  then  appoint  them  their  share  in  life's  labonn. 
Let  the  newly  called  be  carried  like  lambs  in  the  Saviour's  bosom,  and 
borne  as  on  eagles'  wings.  '^  Let  all  those  that  seek  thee  rejoice  and  be 
glad  in  thee.*'  But  when  men  have  advanced  beyond  the  earliest  stage, 
when  they  are  persuaded  that  Christ  is  theirs,  and  that  they  have  b^ 
adopted  into  the  family  of  God,  then  let  them  cheerfully  accept  active 
service.  Let  it  not  be  now  the  main  concern  with  them  to  possess  a 
joyous  experience  on  their  own  account,  but  let  them  studiously  seek 
the  good  of  their  fellow  creatures,  and  the  glory  of  God.  Strong  men 
have  strength  given  them  that  they  may  bear  burdens  and  perform  la- 
bours; light  is  this  burden  and  blessed  is  this  labour.  Let  them**  say 
continually.  Let  God  be  magnified."  I  shall,  therefore,  hope  that  any- 
thing of  earnest  exhortation  which  shall  be  addressed  to  believers  at 
this  time,  will  come  with  double  power  to  those  of  you  who  are  advanced 
in  the  divine  life.  The  more  you  know  of  Gc  d's  salvation  the  more  you  will 
love  it,  and  the  more  you  love  it  the  more  are  you  bound  to  recognise 
the  sacred  duty  and  privilege  of  saying  continually,  "  Let  God  be  mag- 
nified." May  each  one  of  you  here  be  willing  to  take  up  the  obligation 
if  you  have  enjoyed  the  benefit. 

It  may  simplify  our  discourse  this  morning  if  we  arrange  it  under 
three  heads.  Here  is,  first,  the  character :  **  They  that  love  thy  salva- 
tion.  Here  is,  secondly,  the  saying :  *'  Let  them  say  continually.  Let 
God  be  magnified.  And  here  is,  thirdly,  the  wish,  the  .wish  of  the 
psalmist  and  of  the  psalmist's  Master,  that  all  who  answer  to  the  char- 
acter shall  use  the  watchword,  and  *'  say  continually,  Let  God  be 
magnified." 

I.  We  will  begin,  then,  by  discriminating  the  character. 
The  individuals  here  spoken  of  are  those  who  love  God's  salvation. 
Then  it  is  implied  that  they  arc  persons  who  are  saved,  because  it  is  not 
according  to  nature  to  love  a  salvation  in  which  we  have  no  part.  We 
may  admire  the  salvation  which  is  preached,  but  we  shall  only  love  the 
salvation  which  is  experienced.  We  may  hold  orthodox  views  as  to  sal- 
vation, though  not  ourselves  saved;  but  we  shall  not  have  earnest  affec- 
tion towards  it  unless  we  are  ourselves  redeemed  by  it  from  the  wrath  to 
come.  Saved  ones,  then,  are  meant  here,  and  we  may  add  that  they  are  so 
saved  as  to  be  assured  of  it,  and  consequently  to  feel  the  warm  glow 
of  ardent,  grateful  love.  They  love  God's  salvation  because  they  nave 
grasped  it ;  they  possess  it,  they  know  they  possess  it,  and,  therefore, 
they  prize  it,  and  their  hearts  are  wedded  to  it.  Beloved,  I  hope  that 
the  large  proportion  of  this  congregation  could  say  before  the  heart 
searching  God,  ^*  We  are  saved ;  we  have  come  all  guilty  and  heavy  ^ 
laden  to  the  foot  of  the  cross  ;  we  have  looked  np,  we  have  seen  the 
flowing  of  the  Saviour's  precious  blood,  we  have  trusted  in  him  as  cor 
atoning  sacrifice,  and  by  faith  we  have  received  fbll  pardon  throi^lus 


QUE  WATCHWORD.  548 

rocions  blood."  Happy  people  who  have  this  blessing  and  know  it ! 
lay  no  doubts  ever  beclona  your  sky  I  May  you  clearly  read  your 
itles  to  the  mansions  in  the  skies,  written  legibly  and  indelibly  in  the  pre- 
ions  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  your  Saviour.  You  are  the  persons  to  whom 
e  speak  to-day;  you  knaw^  and  therefore  love  the  salvation  of  God. 

But,  more  than  wis,  to  sustain  and  bring  to  perfection  in  the  renewed 
eart  an  ardent  afPection  towards  the  divine  salvation  of  a  sort  tliat 
ill  continue,  and  become  practically  fruitful,  there  must  be  an 
itelligent  consideration,  and  an  instructed  apprehension  as  to  the  char* 
^ier  of  this  salvation.  It  is  a  great  pity  that  so  many  professors  have 
nlv  a  religion  of  feeling,  and  are  quite  unable  to  explain  and  justify 
leir  faith.  They  live  by  passion,  rather  than  by  prmciple.  Religion 
I  in  them  a  series  of  paroxysms,  a  succession  of  emotions.  They  were 
;irred  up  at  a  certain  meeting,  excited,  and  carried  away,  and  let  us 
ope  they  were  really  and  sincerely  converted :  but  they  have  failed 
>  become  to  the  fullest  extent  disciples  or  learners.  They  do  not  sit  at 
esns'  feet,  they  are  not  Bereans  who  search  the  Scriptures  daily  to  see 
hether  these  things  be  so :  they  are  content  with  the  mere  rudiments,  the 
mple  elements :  they  are  still  little  children  and  have  need  to  be  fed 
itn  milk,  for  they  cannot  digest  the  strong  meat  of  the  kingdom.  Such 
arsons  do  not  discern  so  many  reasons  for  admiring^and  loving  the  sal- 
ition  of  God,  as  the  intelligent  enlightened  Spirit^taught  believer.  I 
onld  to  God  that  all  of  us,  after  we  have  received  Christ,  meditated 
inch  upon  his  blessed  person,  and  the  details  of  his  work,  and  the 
arious  streams  of  blessings  which  leap  forth  from  the  central  fount 
f  Calvary's  sacrifice.  All  Scripture  is  profitable,  but  especially  those 
criptures  which  concern  our  salvation.  Some  things  lose  by  observa- 
on,  they  are  most  wondered  at  when  least  understood ;  but  the 
Dspel  gains  by  study :  no  man  is  ever  wearied  in  meditating  upon  it,  nor 
oes  he  find  his  admiration  diminished,  but  abundantly  increased, 
lessed  is  he  who  studies  the  gospel  both  day  and  night,  and  finds  his 
sart's  delight  in  it.  Such  a  man  will  have  a  steadier  and  intenser  affec- 
on  for  it,  in  proportion  as  he  perceives  its  excellence  and  surpassing 
lory.  The  man  who  receives  the  gospel  superficially,  and  holds  it  as 
matter  of  impression  and  little  more,  being  quite  unable  to  give  a 
»son  for  the  hope  that  is  in  him,  lacks  that  which  would  confirm  and 
itensify  his  love. 

Now,  let  me  show  you,  beloved,  what  it  is  in  salvation  that  the 
loughtful  believer  loves ;  and  I  may  begin  by  saying  that  he  loves, 
38b  of  all,  the  Saviour  himself.  Often  our  Lord  is  called  Salvation, 
9canse  he  is  the  great  worker  of  it,  the  author  and  finisher,  the  Alpha 
id  the  Omega  of  it.  He  who  has  Christ  has  salvation ;  and,  as  he  is 
16  essence  of  salvation,  he  is  the  centre  of  the  saved  ones'  affection. 
[aye  you,  beloved,  carefully  considered  that  Jesus  is  divine,  that  he 
}unts  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God,  being  our  Creator  and  Pre- 
srver,  as  well  as  our  Redeemer  ?  Do  you  fully  understand  that  our 
ord  is  infinite,  eternal,  nothing  less  than  (}od  ;  and  yet  for  our  sakea 
e  took  upon  himself  our  nature,  was  clothed  in  that  nature  with  all  its 
ifirmities,  sin  alone  excepted,  and  in  that  nature  agonized,  bled,  and  died, 
le  just  for  the  unjust,  tnat  he  mi^ht  bring  us  to  God.  Oh,  marvel  of 
tarr els,  miracle  of  miracles  I  The  munortd  Lord  stoops  to  death ;  the 


544  METROPOLITAN  TABEBNAOLE  PULPIT. 

Prince  of  glory  bows  to  be  spit  upon.  Shame  and  dishonour  oonld  not 
make  him  start  back  from  Lis  blessed  parpose,  but  to  the  death  of  the 
cross  he  surrendered  himself.  0,  you  who  are  saved,  do  yon  not  kre 
Christ,  who  is  your  salvation  ?  Do  you  not  feel  a  burning  desire  to 
behold  him  as  he  is  ?  Is  not  his  presence,  even  now,  a  nether  heaven 
to  you  ?  Will  not  a  face  to  face  view  of  his  glory  he  all  the  heami 
that  your  utmost  stretch  of  imagination  can  conceive  ?  I  know  it  is  sa 
Your  heart  is  bound  to  Jesus,  his  name  is  set  as  a  seal  upon  it ;  there- 
fore, I  charge  you  to  say  continually,  **  Let  God  be  magni6ed."  Olory 
be  to  tlie  Father  who  gave  his  Son,  to  the  Son  who  gave  himself,  to  the 
Spirit  who  revealed  all  this  to  us.  Triune  God,  be  thou  extolled  for 
ever  and  ever. 

But  you  love  not  only  the  Saviour's  person,  but  I  am  sure  you  delij^ht 
in  the  plan  of  salvation.  What  is  that  plan?  It  is  summed  up  in  a 
single  word — substitution, 

"  He  bore,  that  we  might  never  bear. 
His  Father's  righteous  ire." 

Sin  was  not  pardoned  absolutely,  else  justice  had  been  dishonoured ; 
but  sin  was  transferred  from  the  guilty  to  the  innocent  One.  "  The 
Lord  hath  laid  on  Aim  the  iniquity  of  us  all."  When  our  iniquity  was 
found  upon  the  innocent  Lamb  of  God,  he  was  '^  smitten  of  God  and 
afflicted,''  as  if  he  had  been  a  sinner;  he  was  made  to  suffer  for  trans- 
gressions not  his  own,  as  if  they  had  been  his  own ;  and  thus  mercy 
and  justice  met  together,  righteousness  and  grace  kissed  each  other. 
Alas  !  there  are  many  who  fight  against  this  plan,  but  I  rejoice  that  I  am 
surrounded  by  warm  hearts  who  love  it,  and  would  dio  for  it.  As  forme, 
I  know  no  other  gospel,  and  let  this  tongue  be  dumb  rather  than  it 
should  ever  preach  any  other.  Substitution  is  the  very  marrow  of  the 
whole  Bible,  the  soul  of  salvation,  the  essence  of  the  gospel ;  we  ought 
to  saturate  all  our  sermons  with  it,  for  it  is  the  life-blood  of  a  gospel 
ministry.  We  must  daily  show  how  God  the  Judge  can  be  "  just^  and 
yet  the  justificr  of  him  that  believeth."  We  must  declare  that  God  has 
made  the  Redeemer's  soul  a  sacrifice  for  sin,  making  him  to  be  sin  for 
us,  who  knew  no  sin,  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God 
in  him.  Our  plain  testimony  must  be,  that  *'  he  was  made  a  curse  for 
us ;"  that  '*  he  his  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree;" 
that  "  he  was  once  offered  to  bear  the  sins  of  many;"  and  that  "  he  was 
numbered  with  the  transgressors,  and  he  bare  the  sin  of  many."  Aboat 
this  we  must  never  speak  with  bated  breath,  lest  we  be  found  unfaithfiil 
to  our  charge.  And  why,  brethren,  should  we  not  joyfully  proclaim 
this  doctrine  ?  for  is  it  not  the  grandest,  noblest,  most  divine,  under 
heaven.  The  plan  so  adorns  all  the  attributes  of  the  Godhead,  and 
furnishes  such  a  safe  footing  for  a  trembling  conscience  to  rest  upon, 
such  a  fortress,  castle,  and  high  tower  for  faith  to  rejoice  in,  diat  we 
cannot  do  otherwise  than  love  it.  The  very  way  and  plan  of  it  is 
dearer  to  our  souls  than  life  itself.  Oh,  then  let  us  always  say,  "Let 
God  be  magnified,"  since  he  devised,  arranged,  and  carried  out  this  God* 
like  method  of  blending  justice  with  mercy. 

But,  beloved,  we  also  love  God's  salvation  when  we  consider  what 
was  /A«  olject  of  it.  The  object  of  it  towards  us  was  to  redeem  unto 
Christ  a  people  who  should  be  zealous  for  good  works.    The  sinna: 


OUa  WATCHWOBD.  543 

lores  a  sfllralion  from  bell,  the  snint  loves  a  snlration  from  sin.  Any- 
body would  desire  to  be.  saved  from  the  pit,  but  it  is  only  a  child  of 
God  who  pants  to  be  saved  from  every  false  way.  We  love  the 
EalvatioQ  of  God  I'ccausc  it  aaves  us  from  selfishnesa,  from  pride,  from 
lust,  from  worldliiiesa,  bilternesa,  malice,  sloth,  and  uncleannese. 
When  that  ealvation  ia  completed  ia  us  we  shall  be  "  without  spot  or 
wrinkle  or  any  such  thing,"  and  shall  be  renewed  ia  holiness  after  the 
image  of  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.  That  its  great  aim  is  our  perfection 
in  holiness  is  the  main  beauty  of  salvation.  Wo  wonid  be  content  to 
be  poor,  but  we  cannoi  be  content  to  be  sinful ;  we  could  be  reBlgned  to 
sicknesB,  but  we  conid  not  be  satieticd  to  remain  in  alienation  from  God. 
We  long  for  perfection  and  nothing  short  of  it  will  content  us,  and, 
because  this  is  guaranteed  to  the  believer  in  the  gospel  of  Christ,  we  love 
his  salvation,  and  we  would  say  continually,  "  Let  God  be  magnified." 

I  minbt  thus  enlarge  upon  every  pail  of  this  salvation,  and  say  that 
it  endears  itself  to  us  under  every  aspect,  and  from  every  point  of  view. 

We  love  his  salvation  because  of  one  or  two  characteristics  in  it 
which  especially  excite  our  deligiit  Foremost  is  the  matchless  love 
displayed  in  it.  Why  should  the  Lord  have  loved  men,  such  in- 
signifiiant  creatures  as  they  are,  compared  with  the  niiiverse?  Why 
should  he  set  his  heart  upon  such  nothings  ?  But  more,  how  could  he 
love  rebellions  men  who  have  wantonly  and  arrogantly  broken  fais laws  ? 
Why  should  he  love  them  so  much  as  to  give  up  liis  only  begotten  7 
These  are  things  we  freely  speak  of,  but  who  among  us  knows  what  is 
their  weight,  "God  commendeth  his  love  toward  us,  in  that  while 
we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us."  I  believe  that  even  in 
heaven,  with  enlarged  faculties,  it  will  be  a  subject  of  perpetual 
wonder  to  us  that  ever  God  could  love  and  save  na  And  shall 
we  not  love  the  salvation  which  wells  up  from  the  deep  fount  of 
the  Father's  everlasting  affection  ?  0  brethren,  our  hearts  must  be 
harder  than  adamant,  and  made  of  hell-hardened  steel,  if  we  can  at  once 
believe  that  we  are  saved  and  yet  not  love,  intensely  love  the  salvation 
vhich  was  devised  by  Jehovah's  heart. 

We  love  his  salvation,  again,  because,  in  addition  to  the  display  of 
vondroDB  love,  it  is  so  safe  a  salvation,  so  real,  eo  true:  we  have  not 
given  heed  to  cunningly  devised  fables ;  we  have  not  chanced  our  souIb 
upon  a  fiction.  We  run  no  risk  when  we  trust  the  Saviour.  Though 
one  of  our  hymns  puts  it: — 


Tliis  is  only  a  condescension  to  the  feelings  of  trembling  unbelievers, 
fur  there  is  no  venture  in  it;  it  is  sure  and  certain.  Did  God  lay  on 
Christ  my  sin  ?  Was  it  really  punished  in  him  ?  Then  there  cannot 
exist,  a  reason  why  I  should  be  condemned,  but  there  are  ten  thousand 
urgnmenta  why  1  shonld  for  ever  be  "  accepted  in  the  beloved."  ■■  Wlio 
ahall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect?  It  is  God  thifcaasti- 
fieth.  Who  ia  he  that  condemneth?  It  is  Christ  that  died.y^ 
that  is  risen  agein,  who  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God. 
maketh  intercession  for  us."  Snbetitntion  is  a  basis  for  intelt^ 
fldence;  it  satisfies  both  the  demau'ls  of  the  law  and  tb«3 


546  ]C£TBOPOLITAN  TABEBNAOLE  PULPFF. 

conscience ;  and  gives  to  believers  a  deep,  settled,  sabstautial  peace, 
which  cannot  he  broken.  We  love  this  salvation  becaase  we  feel  that 
it  places  a  foundation  of  granite  beneath  our  feet  instead  of  the  qnick« 
sand  of  human  merit.  Justice  being  satisfied  is  as  much  oar  Mead  tf 
even  mercy  herself;  in  fact,  all  the  attributes  unite  to  guarantee  ou 
safety. 

We  love  God's  salvation,  too,  because  it  is  so  complete.  Nothing 
remains  unfinished  which  is  necessary  to  remove  sin  from  the  believer 
and  give  him  righteousness  before  God.  As  far  as  atonement  for  sin  is 
concerned,  the  expiation  is  most  gloriously  complete.  Remember  that 
remarkable  expression  of  the  apostle,  where  he  describes  the  priests  as 
continually  standing  at  the  altar,  oftering  sacrifice  year  by  year,  aad 
even  day  by  day,  because  atonement  by  such  means  could  never  be 
finished.  Such  sacrifices  could  never  take  away  sin ;  therefore  must 
they  be  perpetually  olfered,  and  the  priest  must  always  stand  at  the 
altar.  *'  But,"  saith  the-  aposile,  "  this  man  (our  great  Melchisedec), 
after  he  had  offered  one  sacrifice  for  sin  for  ever,  sat  doicn  (for  the  work 
was  accomplished),  sat  down  at  the  right  hand  of  God."  Jesus  has  per- 
formed what  the  Aaronic  priesthood,  in  long  succession,  had  failed  to 
do.  Though  streams  of  blood  might  flow  from  bullock,  and  firom 
goat,  like  Kishon's  mighty  river,  and  though  incense  might  smoke 
till  the  pile  thereof  w^as  high  as  Lebanon,  with  all  her  goodly  cedars, 
what  was  there  in  all  this  to  make  propitiation  for  sin  ?  The  work  ^as 
but  shadowed,  the  real  expiation  was  not  offered ;  it  was  a  fair  picture, 
but  the  substance  itself  was  not  there.  But,  when  our  Divine  Lord  went 
up  to  Calvary,  and  on  the  cross  gave  up  his  bodv,  his  soul,  his  spirit,  a 
sacrifice  for  sin,  he  finished  transgression,  made  an  end  of  sin,  and 
brought  in  everlasting  righteousness.  Herein,  my  brethren,  we  have 
strong  consolation,  the  immutable  things  wherein  it  is  impossible  for 
God  to  lie,  his  word  and  oath,  are  our  immovable  security.  By  the 
atonement  we  are  infallibly,  effectually,  eternally  saved,  for  he  has  be- 
come the  "  author  of  eternal  salvation,  unto  all  them  that  obey  him." 
How  we  love  this  salvation  !  Our  inmost  heart  rejoices  in  it  I  I  rejoice 
to  preach  it,  brethren,  and  I  delight  to  muse  upon  it,  appropriating  it 
to  myself  by  faith  in  solitary  thought.  How  it  makes  the  tears  stream 
down  one's  cheeks  with  joy,  to  think  "  He  loved  me,  and  gave  himself 
for  me :  he  took  my  sins,  and  he  destroyed  them,  they  have  ceased  to 
be,  they  are  annihilated,  they  are  blotted  out  like  a  cloud,  and  like  a  thick 
cloud  have  they  vanished."  Surely,  we  should  have  lost  sanity,  as  well 
as  grace,  if  we  did  not  love  this  salvation,  beyond  the  choicest  joys 
of  earth. 

IL  Thus  I  have  described  the  character,  and  now,  secondly,  we  will 
meditate  on  the  sayikg.  Every  nation  has  its  idiom,  every  language  has 
itfl  shibboleth,  almost  every  district  has  its  proverb.  Behold  the  idiom 
of  gracious  souls,  listen  to  their  household  word,  their  common  proverb^ 
— it  is  this,  **  Let  God  be  magnified  1  Let  God  be  magnified  !  " 

Let  us  proceed  at  once  to  the  consideration  of  it^  I  trust  it  belongs  to 
us,  it  certainly  does  if  we  love  his  salvation. 

Observe  that  this  is  a  saying  which  is  founded  upon  truth  and  justice. 
^  Let  God  be  magnified,"  for  it  is  he  that  saved  us,  and  not  we  our- 
aelves*    We  trace  our  salvation  not  to  our  ministerSi  nor  to  any  pcetea- 


OUR  WATCHWORD,  547 

tious  priestbood.  None  can  divide  the  hononrs  of  grace,  for  the  Lord 
alone  hath  tnmed  oar  captivity.  He  decreed  our  salvation,  planned  it, 
arranged  it,  executed  it,  applied  it,  and  secures  it.  From  beginning 
to  end  salvation  is  of  the  Lord,  therefore,  let  God  be  magnifiea. 
Moreover,  the  Lord  wrought  salvation  that  he  might  be  magnified 
thereby.  It  was  God's  object  in  salvation  to  glorify  his  own  name. 
**Not  for  your  sakes  do  I  this,  0  house  of  Israel.**  Truly  we  desire 
that  the  Lord's  end  aud  purpose  should  be  fully  subserved,  for  it  is  his 
well-deserved  due.  0  thou  who  hast  bled  upon  the  cross,  may  thy 
throne  be  glorious  !  0  thou  who  wast  despised  and  rejected  of  men, 
be  thou  extolled,  and  be  thou  very  high.  Thou  deservest  all  glory, 
great  and  merciful  God.  Such  a  gift,  such  a  sacrifice,  such  a  work; 
thou  oughtest  indeed  to  be  landed  and  had  in  honour  by  all  the  intelligent 
universe.  The  saying  is  settled  deep  in  truth,  and  established  in  right. 
This  saying  is  naturally  suggested  by  love.  It  is  because  we  love  his 
salvation  that  we  say,  *•  The  Lord  be  magnified."  You  cannot  love  God 
without  desiring  to  magnify  him,  and  I  am  sure  that  you  cannot  know 
that  you  are  saved  without  loving  him.  For  here  is  a  wonder,  a  central 
wonder  of  wonders  to  many  of  us,  that  ever  we  in  particular  were 
saved.  I  do  not  think  I  could  be  bo  wonder-struck  and  amazed  at  the 
salvation  of  you  all  as  at  my  own.  I  should  know  it  to  be  infinite 
mercy  that  saved  any  one  of  you,  or  all  of  you,  I  say  I  should  know 
it,  but  in  my  own  case  I  feel  it  is  an  unspeakable  and  inconceivably 
great  mercy  which  has  saved  me ;  and  I  suppose  each  brother  here, 
each  sister  here  will  feel  a  special  love  to  Christ  from  the  fact  of  being 
himself  or  herself  an  object  of  his  love.  We  never  sing,  I  am  sure,  with 
warmer  hearts  any  hymn  in  our  hymn-book  than  that  one — 

**  What  was  there  in  us  that  could  merit  esteem, 
Or  give  the  Creator  delight  P 
'Twas  even  so  Father,  we  ever  must  sing. 
For  so  it  seemed  good  in  thy  sight.** 

The  Lord  might  have  left  as  he  has  left  others  to  carry  out  their  own 
wills,  and  wilfully  to  reject  the  Saviour,  but  since  he  has  made  us 
willing  in  the  day  of  his  power,  we  are  for  ever  beyond  measure  under 
obligations  to  him.  Let  us  say  continually,  '*  The  Lord  be  magnified, 
which  hath  pleasure  in  the  prosperity  of  his  servants." 

Moreover,  this  sajing  of  our  text  is  deeply  sincere  and  practical.  I 
am  sure  David  did  not  wish  to  see  hypocrites  multiplied ;  but  such 
would  be  the  case  if  men  merely  said,  ''Let  God  be  magnified,**  and 
did  not  mean  it.  No  doubt  there  is  a  great  deal  among  professors  of 
mere  expression  without  meaning ;  it  is  sadly  evident  that  mnch  godly 
talk  18  only  talk,  but  it  ought  not  so  to  oe.  You  know,  how  often 
charity  is  assumed,  and  men  say  to  the  naked  and  hungry,  *'  Be  ye 
warmed,  and  be  ye  filled  ;**  but  they  give  nothing  to  the  poor,  except  vain 
words,  which  cannot  profit  them.    So,  too,  often  profjBssors  will  sing:— 

**  Fly  abroad,  thou  mighty  gospel,    - 
Win  and  conquer,  never  cease ;  . 
May  tbj  lasting  wide  dominion 
Multiply  and  still  incre»se.*V 

and  80  on;  but  there  it  ends;  they  hare  said  it,^ut  they  have  doie 


548  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

nothing  for  it.  Now,  a*  lie  k  condemned  as  a  hynocrite  who  merelj 
utters  words  of  charity  without  deeds,  so  is  he  who  shall  say, "  Let 
God  be  magnified,"  but  who  does  not  put  forth  his  hand  and  throw  in  all 
his  energies  to  promote  that  which  he  professes  to  desire.  The  wish 
must  be,  and  oh  I  if  we  are  saved  by  giaoi,  it  will  be  sincere,  intense, 
and  fervent  in  every  believing  heart. 

Moreover,  it  must  not  only  be  sincere,  but  it  must  be  paramounL  I 
take  it  that  there  is  nothing  which  a  Christian  man  should  say  continu- 
ally, except  this,  "Let  God  be  magnified."  That  which  a  roan  may  say 
continually  is  ^ssuredly  the  master- thought  of  his  mind.  Listen  to  the 
cherubim  and  seraphim;  they  continually  do  cry,  **Holy!  Holvl 
Holy  I  Lord  God  of  Hosts  !  "  Why  cry  tliey  thus  continually  ?  Is' it 
not  because  it  is  their  chief  business,  their  highest  delight  ?  So  sboold 
it  be  with  us-,  our  end  and  aim  should  ever  be  to  glorify  him  who 
redeemed  us  by  his  most  precious  blood.  You  are  a  citizen,  but  yon 
are  more  a  Christian.  You  are  a  father,  but  you  are  more  a  child  of 
God.  You  are  a  labourer,  but  you  are  most  of  all  a  servant  of  the 
Most  High.  You  are  wealthy,  but  yet  more  enriched  by  his  covenant. 
You  are  poor,  but  you  are  most  emphatically  rich  if  Christ  is  yours.  The 
first,  chief,  leading,  lordly^  master-thought  within,  you  must  be  this, 
**  Let  God  be  magnified.** 

And,  brethren,  the  text  tells  us  this  must  be  GoniiniuiL  How  earnest 
you  feel  about  the  cause  of  Christ  when  you  have  heard  an  inspiriting 
sermon,  but  how  long  does  it  last  ?  Ah,  those  old  days  of  mission 
enterprise,  when  Exeter  Hall  used  to  be  crowded  because  missionaries  had 
interesting  stories  to  tell  of  what  God  was  doing — what  enthusiasm  there 
used  to  be — where  is  it  now  ?  Where  is  it  blow  ?  Echo  might  well  answer 
**  where  is  it  now  V  To  a  great  degree  it  has  departed.  The  seal  of  many 
rises  and  falls  like  a  barometer.  They  are  hot  as  fire,  and  cold  as  ice, 
in  the  shortest  space  ;  their  fervour  is  as  transient  as  the  flame  of 
thorns,  and  hence  it  is  very  hard  to  turn  it  to  any  practical  account. 
Oh,  for  more  of  the  deep-seated  principle  of  intense  love  to  God's  salva- 
tion, steady  and  aljiding,  which  shall  make  a  man  say  continually,  ''  Let 
God  be  magnified."  We  would  desire  to  wake  up  in  the  morning  with 
this  on  our  lips.  We  would  begin  with  the  enquiry,  "  Wliat  can  I  do 
to  magnify  God  this  dav  ?"  We  would  be  in  business  in  the  middle  of 
the  day,  and  yet  never  lose  the  one  desire  to  magnify  (Jod.  We  would 
return  to  our  family  at  night,  urged  by  the  same  impulse,  **  Hbw  can  I 
magnify  God  in  my  household  ?"  If  I  lie  sick,  I  would  feel  that  I 
must  magnify  God  by  patience  ;  if  I  rise  ftoxsL  that  bed,  !•  would  fed 
the  sweet  obligation  to  magnify  him  by  gratitude;  if  I  take  a 
prominent  position,  I  am  doubly  bound  to  magnify  him  who  makes  me 
a  leader  toliis  flock  ;  and,  if  I  be  unknown  and  obscure  in  the  church, 
I  must  with  equal  zeal  magnify  him  by  a  conscientious  dischai^e  c^the 
duties  of  my  position.  Oh,  to  have  one  end  always  before  us,  and  to 
nress  forward  towards  it,  neither  turning  to  the  ri^ht  hand  nor  to  the 
left.  As  though  we  were  balls  shot  out  of  a  rifled  cannon  we  would 
imsh  on,  never  hesitating  or  turning  aside,  but  flying  with  all  speed 
towards  the  centre  of  the  target.  May  our  spirits  be  impelled  by  a 
divine  energy  towards  this  one  only  thing.  The  Lord^  be  magnified  I 
whether  I  live  or  die^  may  God  be  glorified  in  me.  I 


OIJB  WATCHWORD.  549 

According  to  the  text,  this  saying  should  be  universal  among  ihe 
Minis,  It  should  be  the  mark  of  all  those  that  love  Ood's  salvation, 
pertaining  not  to  a  few  who  shall  be  chosen  to  minister  in  public,  but 
to  all  those  whom  grace  has  renewed  All  of  us,  women  as  well  as 
men,  illiterate  as  well  as  learned,  poor  as  well  as  rich,  silent  as  well  as 
eloquent,  should  after  our  own  ability  say,  "  Let  God  be  magnified." 
Oh,  would  to  God  we  were  all  stirred  up  to  this  1  Our  churches  seem 
to  be  half  alive.  It  is  a  dreadful  thing  to  read  of  the  punishment 
practised  by  ancient  tyrants  when  they  tied  a  living  man  to  a  corpse, 
and  he  had  to  go  about  with  this  corpse  strapped  to  him,  and  rotting 
under  his  nostrils,  and  yet  that  is  too  often  the  condition  of  the  living 
ones  in  our  churches :  they  are  bound  by  ties  -of  church  union  to  a 
portion  of  the  church  which  is  spiritually  dead,  though  not  so  mani- 
festly corrupt  as  to  render  it  possible  for  us  to  cut  it  ofiP*.  The  tares, 
which  we  may  not  root  up,  hamper  and  dwarf  the  wheat.  O  God,  the 
Holy  Ghost,  make  the  church  alive  right  through,  from  the  crown  of  its 
head  to  the  sole  of  its  foot,  so  that  the  whole  church -may  cry  continually, 
"  Let  God  be  magnified." 

You  will  notice  that  the  cry  is  an  absolute  one.  It  does  not  say,  let 
God  be  magnified  by  me  if  he  will  please  to  make  me  successful  in 
business,  and  happv,  and  healthy,  but  it  leaves  it  open.  Only  let  God 
be  magnified,  and  he  may  do  what  he  wills  with  me.  As  a  poor  soldier 
in  the  regiment  of  Christ,  I  only  care  for  this  that  he  may  win  the 
day,  and  if  I  see  him  riding  on  nis  white  horse  and  know  that  he  is 
conquering,  though  I  lie  bleeding  and  wounded  in  a  ditch,  1  will  clap 
my  hands  and  gay,  **  Blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord."  Though  I  be 
poor,  and  despised,  and  reproached,  this  shall  compensate  for  all,  if  i 
can  only  hear  that  *^  him  hath  God  highly  exalted,  and  given  him  a  name 
that  is  above  every  name;  that  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  should 
bow,  of  things  in  heaven,  and  things  in  earth,  and  things  under  the 
earth;  that  every  tongue  should  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  te 
the  glory  of  God  the  Father.^  i  would  close  mv  eyes  in  death,  and 
say,  my  soul  is  satisfied  with  favour  and  hath  all  she  wants  if  Jesus 
be  exalted.  Remember  how  David  put  it :  when  he  had  said  ''  Let  the 
^hole  earth  be  filled  with  his  glory,"  he  added,  ^  Amen  and  amen.  The 
prayers  of  David,  the  son  of  Jesse,  are  ended."  He  desired  no  more 
than  that;  that  was  the  ultimatum  of  his  wishes.    Beloved,  I  trust  it 

the  same  with  us. 

Kor  is  rhere  any  limit  as  to  place  or  persons.  My  heart  says,  "  Let 
God  be  magnified  among  the  Wesleyans  I  The  Lord  be  magnified 
among  the  Independents !  The  Lord  be  magnified  an>ong  the  Episco- 
palians! The  Lord  be  magnified  among  the  Baptists  I "  We  pray  very 
earnestly,  **Let  God  be  magnified  in  the  Tabernacle,"  but  we  would 
not  forget  to  cry,  "Let  God  he  magnified  in  all^parts  of  London,  in  all 
counties  of  England,  and-Scotland,  and  Ireland."  We  desire  no  restriction 
aa  to  race — let  God  be  magnified  both  in  France  and  in  Prussia ;  in 
Turkey  and  in  Italy;  in  the  United 'States  and  in  AusU^lia ;  among 
any  and  every  people !  So  that  God's  name  be  magnified,  what  mattera 
it  how  or  where?  We  know  no  politics  but  this,  ^*  Let  God  be  magni- 
fied.** All  nationalities  sink  before  our  relation  toourGod*  Christians 
are  cosmopolitan;  we  are  burgesses -(tftiie New  Jerusalem — there  is  our 


550  METBOFOUTAN  TABEBNACLB  FULPIT. 

citizenship;  we  are  freemen  of  the  entire  new  creation.  What  is  til 
else  to  God's  glory  ?  Bo  long  as  the  Lord  is  glorified,  let  the  empires 
CO  and  the  emperors  with  them ;  let  nations  rise  or  fall,  so  long  as 
he  comes  whose  right  it  is  to  reign ;  let  ancient  dynasties  pass  awaj,  if 
?^s  throne  is  bat  exalted.  We  would  never  dictate  to  the  God  of 
history ;  let  him  write  ont  as  he  pleases  the  stanzas  of  his  own  angost 
poem,  but  let  this  always  be  the  close  of  every  verse,  **  The  Lora  be 
magnified !  The  Lord  be  magnified !  The  Lord  be  magnified!  "  This 
is  the  continual  saying  of  all  them  that  love  his  salvation. 

IIL  We  had  much  to  say  under  our  second  head,  but  time  will  not 
tarry  for  us ;  therefore  we  must  proceed  to  the  last,  which  is  THE 
WISH.  Holy  David,  and  David's  perfect  Lord  both  wish  that  we  may 
say,  "  Let  God  be  magnified."  This  wish  is  promoted  by  an  anxiety 
for  God's  glory ;  it  is  a  most  holy  wish,  and  it  ought  to  be  fulfilled.  1 
shall  ask  your  attention  only  for  a  minute  or  two  to  the  reasons  of  the 
wish.    Why  should  it  be  wished  ? 

First,  because  it  always  ought  to  he  said,  **Let  God  be  magnified.'' 
It  is  only  right,  and  according  to  the  fitness  of  things,  that  God  should 
be  magnified  in  the  world  which  he  himself  created.  Such  a  handi- 
work deserves  admiration  from  all  who  behold  it.  But  when  he  new- 
made  the  world,  and  especially  when  he  laid  the  foundation  of  his 
new  palace  in  the  fair  colours  of  Jesus'  blood,  and  adorned  it  with  the 
sapphires  of  grace  and  truth  ;  he  had  a  double  claim  upon  our  praise. 
He  gave  his  Son  to  redeem  us,  and  for  this  let  bis  praise  be  great 
and  endless.  Things  are  out  of  joint  if  God  the  Hcdeemer  be  not 
glorified.  Sarely  the  wheels  of  nature  revolve  amiss,  if  God  the  loving 
and  gracious  be  not  greatly  magnified.  As  every  rigUt-hearted  man 
desires  to  see  right  and  justice  done,  therefore  does  he  wish  that  those 
who  love  God's  salvation  may  say  continually,  "  Let  God  be  magnified." 

But,  we  wish  it  next,  because  it  always  needs  saying.  The  world  is 
dull  and  sleepy,  and  utterly  indifferent  to  the  glory  of  God  in  the  work 
of  redemption.  We  neea  to  tell  it  over  and  over  and  over  again, 
that  God  IS  great  in  the  salvation  of  his  people.  There  are  many,  who 
will  rise  up  and  deny  God's  glory ;  rcvilers  of  all  sorts  abound  in  rajje ; 
but  over  and  above  their  clamour,  let  the  voice  of  truth  be  heard,  "  Let 
God  be  magnified."  They  cry,  "  the  Bible  is  worn  out."  They  doubt 
its  inspiration,  they  question  the  deity  of  Christ,  they  set  up  new  gods 
that  have  lately  come  up,  that  our  fathers  knew  not  Let  us  confront 
them  with  the  truth,  let  us  oppose  them  with  the  gospel,  let  us  over- 
come them  through  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  using  this  one  only  war-cry, 
'*  Let  God  be  magnified."  Everywhere  in  answer  to  all  blasphemy,  m 
direct  confiict  with  profanity,  let  us  lift  up  this  voice  with  neart  and 
soul.    '^  Let  God  be  magnified." 

And,  again,  we  desire  this,  because  tJie  saying  of  this  continually  doss 

good  to  the  sayers.    He  who  blesses  God  blesses  himself.    We  c»nnot 

I  serve  God  with  the  heart  without  serving  ourselves  most  practically. 

Nothing,  brethren,  is  more  for  your  benefit  than  to  spend  and  be  spent 

for  the  promotion  of  the  divine  honour. 

Then,  again,  \hi%  promotes  the  welfare  of  Oods  creatures.  We  ought 
to  desire  to  spread  the  knowledge  of  God,  because  the  dark  places  of 
the  earth  will  never  cease  to  be  the  habitation  of  cruelty  till  thqr  become 


OUR  WATCHWORD.  551 

the  temple  of  the  Lord  of  hosts.  Myriads  are  djing,  while  we 
are  sitting  complacently  here  souls  are  passing  into  eternity  unforgiven. 
The  wrath  of  God  is  abiding  still  npon  the  sons  of  men,  for  they  know 
not  Christ.  What  stronger  motive  could  there  be  for  desiring 
that  God's  name  should  continually  be  magnified.  I  have  been 
told,  and  I  believe  it  is  the  general  impression,  that  at  this 
particular  time  there  is  a  great  cessation  of  the  zealous  spirit  which 
once  ruled  among  Christians.  We  have  passed  over  the  heroic  age,  the 
golden  period  of  missions,  and  we  have  come  to  the  time  in  which  the 
church  rests  upon  her  oars,  takes  matters  quietly,  what  if  I  say  regards 
them  hopelessly  ?  Very  few  young  men  are  now  coming  forward,  at 
least  in  our  denomination,  to  offer  themselves  for  missionaries;  the 
funds  are  barely  sustained  and  nothing  more.  I  fear  there  is  among 
those  who  conduct  the  affairs  of  missions  too  little  of  faith,  and  too 
much  of  bastard  prudence,  which  last  had  better  be  banished  to  the 
bottomless  pit  at  once,  for  it  has  long  been  the  clog  upon  the  chariot 
wheels  of  the  gospel.  Faith  is  too  much  cast  into  the  background,  and 
the  work  is  viewed  in  a  mercantile  light,  as  though  it  were  a  rule  of 
three  sum — so  much  money  and  so  many  men,  and  then  so  many  con- 
versions, whereas  it  is  not  so.  God  worketh  not  according  to  arith- 
metical rules  and  calculations.  There  is,  I  fear,  on  the  whole,  a  general 
backsliding  from  the  right  state ;  and  what  a  sad  thing  it  is  that  it 
should  be  so,  since  at  our  best  we  were  never  too  zealous.  Few  caii 
bring  the  charge  of  fanaticism  against  the  English  Baptists :  we  have  been 
toQ  solid,  if  not  stolid,  for  that.  I  almost  wish  it  were  possible  for  us 
to  err  in  that  direction,  for  if  an  evil  it  would  at  any  rate  be  a  novelty, 
if  not  an  improvement. 

Why  is  this,  and  whence  comes  it?  Years  ago  our  fathers  compassed 
this  Jericho,  they  passed  round  it  according  to  the  Master's  bidding, 
and  are  we  about,  after  having  done  the  same  these  many  years,  to 
relinquish  the  task,  and  lose  the  result?  Do  we  fear  that  the  walls  will 
never  fall  to  the  ground  ?  Brethren,  I  believe  it  is  the  duty  of  the 
Christian  church  to  go  on  working  quite  as  earnestly  and  zealously 
and  believingly,  if  there  be  no  conversions,  as  if  half  the  world  were 
transformed  in  a  twelvemonth.  Our  business  is  not  to  create  a  harvest 
but  to  BOW  the  seed  ;  if  the  wheat  does  not  come  up,  if  we  have  sown  it 
aright,  our  Master  does  not  hold  us  responsible.  If  missions  had  been 
an  utter  failure  it  would  be  no  sort  of  reason  why  we  should  give  them 
up.  There  was  a  great  failure  when  the  hosts  of  Israel,  on  the  first 
occasion,  went  round  Jericho  ;  a  dreadful  failure  when  they  marched 
round  the  city  twice,  and  the  walls  shook  not ;  it  was  an  aggravated 
fSuInre  when  they  had  compassed  it  four  times;  it  was  a  most  dis- 
couraging defeat  when  they  had  tramped  round  it  five  times  ;  and,  on  the 
whole,  a  breakdown,  almost  enough  to  drive  them  to  despair,  when  they 
had  performed  the  circuit  six  times  and  not  a  single  brick  had  stirred  in 
the  wall.  Yes ;  but  then  the  seventh  day  made  amends,  when  the  people 
shouted  and  all  the  walls  fell  flat  to  the  ground.  Brethren,  iiiJMa|m^^ 
yet  time  to  shout,  but  we  must  continue  marching  and  say,  **  ^4^F^^^ 
be  magnified."  The  longer  the  walls  stand,  and  the  longer  wil^F 
the  louder  will  be  our  shout  when  they  lie  prostrate  before  us, 
^all ;  for,  "  Yerily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you  there  shall  not  be  one 


>^^^^ 


652  METROPOLITAN  TABEBNACLE  PULPIT. 

left  upon  another  that  shall  not  be  cast  down."  Remember  the  Gieds 
when  they  attacked  old  Troy :  ye  have  the  record  in  ancient  sfcoiy. 
They  waited  many  years  till  their  ships  had  well  nigh  rotted  on  tne 
seas,  but  the  prowess  of  Hector  and  the  armed  men  of  Troy  kept  back 
the  '*  King  of  men/*  and  all  the  hosts  of  the  avengers.  Suppose  that 
after  nine  years  had  dragged  along  their  weary  length,  the  chiefs  of  tbe 
Greeks  had  said,  *'  It  is  of  no  avail,  the  city  is  impr^nable  1  0 
Pelasgi,  back  to  your  fair  lands  washed  by  the  blue  iBgean,  you  wiD 
never  subdue  the  valour  of  Ilium,''  No ;  but  they  persevered  in  the 
weary  siege,  with  feats  of  strength  and  schemes  of  art,  till  at  last  tbej 
aaw  the  city  burned  and  heard  the  dire  lament :  ''  Troy  was,  but  is  no 
more.** 

Let  us  still  continue  to  attack  the  adversair.  "We  are  few,  bnt 
strength  lies  not  in  numbers.  The  Eternal  One  has  used  the  few  where 
he  has  put  aside  the  many.  In  our  weakness  lies  part  of  our  adaptation 
to  the  divine  work ;  only  let  ns  gather  up  fresh  faith,  and  renew  our 
courage  and  industry,  and  we  shall  see  greater  things  than  these. 
**  Pshaw/'  says  one,  "  Protestant  Christianity  is  in  a  miserable  minority, 
it  is  ridiculous  to  suppose  it  will  ever  be  the  dominant  religion  of  tbe 
world."  We  reply,  that  it  is  ridiculous,  nay  blasphemous,  to  doubt  when 
God  has  sworn  with  an  oath  that  '*  all  flesh  shall  see  the  salvation  of 
God."  God's  oath  is  better  evidence  than  appearances;  for,  in  a 
moment,  if  he  wills  it,  he  can  give  such  an  impetus  to  the  Christian 
church,  that  she  shall  in  her  enthusiasm  spread  the  gospel,  and  at  the 
same  time  he  can  give  such  a  turn  to  the  human  mind,  that  it  shall  be  as 
ready  to  accept  the  gospel  as  the  church  is  to  spread  it.  Observe  how 
the  church  grew  during  the  first  few  centuries.  After  the  aposUes  had 
died  you  do  not  find  in  the  next  century  the  name  of  any  very  remark- 
able man,  bnt  all  Christians  then  were  earnest,  and  tne  good  caDse 
advanced.  They  were  mostly  poor,  they  were  generally  illiterate,  but 
they  were  all  missionaries,  they  were  all  seeking  to  glorify  God,  and, 
consequently,  before  long,  down  went  Jupiter,  Saturn  loat  his  throne, 
even  Venus  was  abjured,  and  the  cross,  at  least  nominallv,  became 
supreme  throughout  all  Europe.  It  shall  be  done  again.  In  the  name  of 
the  Eternal,  let  us  set  up  our  banners.  Ho,  ye  that  love  the  Lord  and  his 
salvation,  vow  it  in  your  souls,  determine  it  in  yonr  hearts,  and,  God  the 
HolySpiritbeing  withyou,if  you  have  but  faith  in  him,itwilIbenoeinpty 
boast,  no  vain  vaunting.  God  shall  speak  and  it  shall  be  done.  The 
Lord  of  hosts  is  with  us,  the  God  of  Jacob  is  onr  refuge ;  and  sndi 
being  the  case,  nothing  is  impossible  to  ns. 

May  the  Lord  stir  us  up  with  these  thoughts,  and  fling  ns  like 
firebrands  into  the  midst  of  his  church  and  the  world,  to  set  both  on  a 
blaze  with  love  through  the  love  that  bums  in  our  hearts.  **  Let  God 
be  magnified."    Amen  and  Amen. 


POETION  OP   SCRIPTUEE  READ  BEPOEB  SbEMON — PBalm  iL 


Pl^tr^plitan  ilat^rnmik  §dpit. 


"NUNC   DIMITTIS." 


Deliverbd  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  Octobbe  8th,  1871,  by 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT     THS    METROPOLITAN     TABERNACLE,     NEWINGTOK. 


"  Lord,  now  lettcst  thou  thy  servant  depart  in  peace,  according  to  thy  word  :  for 
mine  eyes  have  seen  thy  salvation." — Luke  iL  29,  80. 

BLE8SED  wert  thou,  0  Simeon,  for  flesh  and  blood  had  not  revealed  this 
unto  thee  ;  neither  had  it  enabled  thee  so  cheerfully  to  bid  the  world 
farewell.  The  flesh  clings  to  the  earth — it  is  dust,  and  owns  affinity  to 
the  ground  out  of  which  it  was  taken ;  it  loathes  to  part  from  mother 
earth.  E?en  old  age,  with  its  infirmities,  does  not  make  men  really 
willing  to  depart  out  of  this  world.  By  nature  we  hold  to  life  with  a 
terrible  tenacity ;  and  even  when  we  sigh  over  the  evils  of  life,  and  re- 
pine concerning  its  ills,  and  fancy  that  we  wish  ourselves  away,  it  is 
probable  that  our  readiness  to  depart  lies  only  upon  the  surface,  but 
down  deep  in  our  hearts  we  have  no  will  to  go.  Flesh  and  blood  had 
not  revealed  unto  Simeon  that  he  saw  God's  salvation  in  that  babe  which 
he  took  oat  of  the  arms  of  Mary,  and  embraced  with  eager  joy.  God's 
grace  had  taught  him  that  this  was  the  Saviour,  and  God's  grace  at  the 
same  time  loosened  the  cords  which  bound  him  to  earth,  and  made  him 
feel  the  attractions  of  the  better  land.  Blessed  is  that  man  who 
has  received  by  grace  a  meetness  for  heaven,  and  a  willingness 
to  depart  to  that  better  land:  let  him  magnify  the  Lord  who 
has  wrought  so  great  a  work  in  him.  As  Paul  says,  *'  Thanks  be  unto 
the  Father  who  hath  made  us  meet  to  be  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of 
the  saints  in  light."  Certainly  none  of  us  were  meet  by  nature — not 
even  Simeon  ;  the  fitness  of  the  venerable  man  was  all  the  handiwork  of 
God,  and  so,  also,  was  his  anxiety  to  obtain  the  inheritance  for  which 
God  had  prepared  him.  I  trust,  brethren,  while  we  consider  this 
morning  the  preparedness  of  the  saints  for  heaven,  and  turn  over  in  our 
mind  those  reflections  which  will  make  us  ready  to  depart,  God*s  Holy 
Spirit,  sent  forth  from  the  Father,  may  make  us  also  willing  to  leave 
these  mortal  shores,  and  launch  upon  the  eternal  sea  at  the  bidding  of 
car  Father,  God. 

Vie  shall  note,  this  morning,  first,  that  every  believer  may  he  as- 
9ured  of  deparUng  in  peace ;  but  that,  secondly,  some  believers  feel  a  special 
No.  1,014. 


554  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

readiness  to  depart  now :  "Now  lettest  thou  thy  servant  deport  in 
peace ;"  and,  thirdly,  that  there  are  words  of  encouragement  to  produce 
in  lis  the  like  readiness :  **  according  to  thy  word."  There  are  words  of 
Holy  Writ  which  afford  richest  consolation  in  prospect  of  departure. 

I.  First,  then,  let  ns  start  with  the  great  general  principle,  which 
is  full  of  comfort ;  namely,  this,  that  every  believer  may  be  as- 
sured OF  ULTIMATELY  DEPARTING  IN  PEACE.  This  is  no  privilege 
peculiar  to  Simeon,  it  is  common  to  all  the  saints,  since  the  grounds  upon 
which  this  privilege  rests  are  not  monopolised  by  Simeon,  but  belong  to 
us  all. 

Observe,  first,  that  all  the  saints  have  seen  Qod^s  salvation^  therefore, 
should  they  all  depart  in  peace.  It  is  true,  we  cannot  take  up  the  in- 
fant Christ  into  our  arms,  but  he  is  "formed  in  us,  the  hope  of  glory." 
It  is  true,  we  cannot  look  upon  him  with  these  mortal  eyes,  out  we  hare 
seen  him  with  those  eyes  immortal  which  death  cannot  dim — ^the  eyes 
of  our  own  spirit  which  have  been  opened  by  God*8  Holy  Spirit.  A 
sight  of  Christ  with  the  natural  eye  is  not  savings  for  thousands  saw 
him  and  then  cried,  "  Crucify  him,  crucify  him."  After  all,  it  was  in 
Simeon's  case  the  spiritual  eye  that  saw,  tlie  eye  of  faith  that  truly  be- 
held the  Christ  of  God  ;  for  there  were  others  in  the  temple  who  sav 
the  babe ;  there  was  the  priest  who  performed  the  act  of  circumcision,  and 
the  other  officials  who  gathered  round  the  group ;  but  I  do  not  know 
that  any  of  them  saw  God's  salvation.  They  saw  the  little  innocent 
child  that  was  brought  there  by  its  parents,  but  they  saw  nothing  re- 
markable in  him ;  perhaps,  Simeon  and  Anna,  alone  of  all  those  who 
were  in  the  temple,  saw  with  the  inward  eye  the  real  Anointed  of  God 
revealed  as  a  feeble  infant.  So,  though  you  and  I  miss  the  outward 
sight  of  Christ,  we  need  not  regret  it,  it  is  but  secondary  as  a  privilege; 
if  with  the  inner  sight  we  have  seen  the  Incarnate  tiod,  and  accepted 
him  as  our  salvation,  we  are  blessed  with  holy  Simeon.  Abraham  saw 
Christ's  day  before  it  dawneJ,  and  even  thus,  after  it  has  passed,  we  see 
it,  and  with  faithful  Abraham  we  are  glad.  "We  have  looKed  unto  him, 
and  we  are  lightened.  We  have  beheld  the  Lamb  of  God  which  taketh 
away  the  sins  of  the  world.  In  the  "despised  and  rejected  of  men" 
we  have  seen  the  anointed  Saviour ;  in  the  crucified  and  buried  One, 
who  afterwards  rose  again,  and  ascended  into  glory,  we  have  seen  sal- 
vation, full,  free,  finished.  Why,  therefore,  should  we  think  ourselves 
less  favoured  than  Simeon  ?  From  like  causes  like  results  shall  spring : 
we  shall  depart  in  peace,  for  we  have  seen  God's  salvation. 

Moreover,  believers  already  enjoy  peace  as  much  as  ever  Simeon  did. 
No  man  can  depart  in  peace  who  has  not  lived  in  peace ;  but  he  who 
has  attained  peace  in  life  shall  possess  peace  in  death,  and  an  etemitv  of 
peace  after  death.  **  Being  justified  by  faith  we  have  peace  with  6od 
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.'*  Jesus  has  bequeathea  us  peace,  say* 
ing,  "  Peace  I  leave  with  you,  my  peace  I  give  unto  you."  •'  For  he  is 
our  peace,"  and  "  tlie  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  peace."  We  are  reconciled  unto 
God  by  the  death  of  his  Son.  Whatever  peace  flowed  in  the  heart  of 
Simeon,  I  am  sure  it  was  not  of  a  diviner  nature  than  that  which  dwells 
in  the  bosom  of  every  true  believer.  If  sin  be  pardoned,  the  quarrel  is 
ended ;  if  the  atonement  is  made,  then  is  peace  established,  a  peace 
covenanted  to  endure  for  ever.    We  are  now  led  in  the  paths  of  peace ; 


''KUNO  ddchtis.*'  555 

we  walk  the  Kind's  highway,  of  which  it  is  written,  "no  lion  shall  be 
tJiere ;  "  we  are  led  beside  the  still  waters,  and  made  to  lie  down  in 
green  pastures.  We  feel  no  slavish  fear  of  God,  though  he  be  "  a  con- 
suming fire"  even  to  us;  we  tremble  no  longer  to  approach  into 
his  presence,  who  deigns  to  be  our  Father.  The  precious  blood 
upon  the  mercy-seat  has  made  it  a  safe  place  for  us  to  resort  at  all 
times ;  boldness  has  taken  the  place  of  trembling.  The  throne  of  Qod 
is  oar  rejoicing,  though  once  it  was  our  terror. 

**  Once  *twas  a  seat  of  dreadful  wrath. 
And  shot  devouring  flame ; 
Our  God  appeared  *  consuming  fire,* 
And  vengeance  was  his  name.*' 

Therefore,  Brethren,  having  peace  with  God,  we  may  be  sure  tbat  we 
diidi  "  depart  in  peace."  We  need  not  fear  that  the  God  of  all  con- 
solation, who  has  already  enriched,  us  in  communion  with  himself,  and 
peace  in  Christ  Jesus,  will  desert  us  at  the  last  He  will  help  us  to 
sing  a  sweet  swan-song,  and  our  tabernacle  shall  be  gently  taken  down, 
to  be  rebuilt  more  enduringly  in  the  fair  country  beyond  Jordan. 

Furthermore,  we  may  i^est  assured  of  the  same  peace  as  that  which 
Simeon  possessed,  since  we  are,  if  true  belieyers,  equally  God's  servants. 
The  text  says,  '*  Lord,  now  lettest  thou  thy  servant  ae^^xl  in  peace."  Put, 
in  this  case,  one  servant  cannot  claim  a  privilege  above  the  rest  of  the 
household.  The  same  position  towards  God,  the  same  reward  from 
God.  Simeon,  a  servant;  you  also,  my  brother,  a  servant;  he  who 
saith  to  Simeon,  **  depart  in  peace,"  will  say  also  the  same  to  you.  The 
Lord  is  always  very  considerate  towards  his  old  serrants,  and  takes  care 
of  them  when  their  strength  faileth.  The  Amalekite  of  old  had  a 
servant  who  was  an  Egyptian,  and  when  he  fell  sick  he  left  him,  and 
he  would  have  perished  if  David  had  not  h^d  compassion  on  him ;  but 
our  God  is  no  Amalekite  slave-owner,  neither  doth  he  cast  off  his  wom- 
ont  servants.  '^Even  to  your  old  age  I  am  he;  and  even  to  hoar 
hairs  will  I  carry  yon  :  I  have  made,  and  I  will  bear  ;  even  I  will  carry, 
and  will  deliver  you."  David  felt  this,  for  he  prayed  to  God,  and  said, 
^  Now,  also,  when  I  am  old  and  grey-headed,  0  God,  forsake  me  not." 
If  thou  hast  been  clothed  in  thy  Lord*s  livery  of  grace,  and  taught  to 
obey  his  will,  he  will  never  leave  thee,  nor  forsake  thee ;  he  will  not 
sell  thee  into  the  hands  of  thine  adversary,  nor  suffer  thy  soul  to 
perish.  A  true  master  counts  it  a  part  of  his  duty  to  protect  his  ser- 
vants, and  our  great  Lord  and  Prince  will  show  himself  strong  on  the 
behalf  of  the  very  least  of  all  his  followers,  and  will  bring  them  every 
one  into  the  rest  which  remaineth  for  his  people.  Do  you  really  serve 
God  ?  Remember,  "  his  servants  ye  are  to  whom  ye  obey."  Are  ye 
taught  of  the  Spirit  to  obey  the  commandments  of  love  ?  Do  you  strive 
to  walk  in  holiness  ?  If  so,  fear  not  death ;  it  shall  have  no  terrors  to 
yon.    All  the  servants  of  God  shall  depart  in  peace. 

There  is  also  another  reflection  which  strcDgthens  our  conviction 
that  all  believers  shall  depart  in  peace,  namely,  this:  that  up  till 
now  all  things  in  their  expsrience  have  been  according  to  Gods  word, 
Simeon's  basis  of  hope  for  a  peaceful  departure  was  '*  according  to  thy 
word;"  and,  surely,  no  Scripture  is  of  private  interpretation,  or  is 


556  METBOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

to  be  reserved  for  one  believer  to  the  exclnsion  of  the  rest?  The 
promises  of  God,  which  are  *'  Yea  and  amen  ia  Christ  Jesas,"  are  sure 
to  all  the  seed :  not  to  some  of  the  children  is  the  promise  msde^ 
bnt  all  the  grace-bom  are  heirs.  There  are  not  special  promises 
hedged  round  and  set  apart  for  Simeon  and  a  few  saints  of  old  time, 
bnt  with  all  who  are  in  Christ,  their  federal  head,  the  covenant  is 
made,  and  stands  '*  ordered  in  all  things  and  sure."  If,  then,  Simeon, 
as  a  believer  in  the  Lord,  had  a  promise  that  he  should  depart  in  peace, 
I  have  also  a  like  promise  if  I  am  in  Christ.  What  God  hath  said  in 
his  word  Simeon  lays  hold  of,  and  none  can  say  him  nay ;  but  if,  with 
the  same  grace-given  faith,  I  also  grasp  it  for  myself,  who  shall  chal- 
lenge my  right  ?  God  will  not  violate  nis  promise  to  one  of  his  peqile 
any  more  than  to  another,  and,  consequently,  when  our  tarn  shall  come 
to  gather  up  our  feet  in  the  bed  and  to  resign  our  spiriti  some  predoni 
passage  in  sacred  writ  shall  be  as  a  rod  and  a  staff  to  as  that  we  may 
fear  no  evil. 

These  four  considerations,  gathered  out  of  the  text  itself,  may  gm 
fourfold  certainty  to  the  assurance  that  every  believer,  at  the  hoar  of  hia 
departure,  shall  possess  peace. 

For  a  moment,  review  attentively  the  words  of  the  aged  saint :  they 
have  much  instruction  in  them.  Every  believer  shall  in  death  depart 
in  the  same  sense  as  Simeon  did.  The  word  here  used  is  snggestiveand 
encouraging  :  it  may  be  applied  either  to  escape  {h>m  confinement,  or 
to  deliverance  from  toil.  The  Christian  man  in  thepresent  state  is  like 
a  bird  in  a  cage :  his  body  imprisons  his  soul.  His  spirit,  it  is  true, 
ranges  heaven  and  earth,  and  laughs  at  the  limits  of  mister,  space,  and 
time  ;  but  for  all  that,  the  flesh  is  a  poor  scabbard  anwortfay  of  the 
glittering  soul,  a  mean  cottage  unfit  for  a  princely  spirit,  a  clog,  a 
burden,  and  a  fetter.  When  .we  would  watch  and  pray,  we  find  fall 
often  that  the  spirit  is  willing  but  the  flesh  is  weak.  "  We  that  are  ia 
this  body  do  groan."  The  fact  is,  we  are  caged  birds ;  bat  the  day 
Cometh  when  the  great  Master  shall  open  the  cage  door,  and  release  hn 
prisoners.  We  need  not  dread  the  act  of  unfastening  the  door,  for  it 
will  give  to  our  soul  the  liberty  for  which  it  inly  pines,  and  then,  with 
the  wings  of  a  dove,  covered  with  silver,  and  its  feathers  with  yellow 
gold,  though  aforetime  it  had  lien  among  the  pots,  it  will  soar  into  its 
native  air,  singing  all  the  way  with  a  raptnre  beyond  imagination. 
Simeon  looked  upon  dying  as  a  mode  of  being  let  loose— a  deliveraoce 
out  of  durance  vile,  an  escape  from  captivity,  a  release  from  bondage. 
The  like  redemption  shall  be  dealt  unto  us.  How  often  doe9  my  soul 
feel  like  an  unhatchcd  chick,  shut  up  within  a  narrow  shell,  in  darkness 
and  discomfort  I  The  life  within  labours  hard  to  chip  and  break  tktt 
shell,  to  know  a  little  more  of  the  great  universe  of  truth,  and  see  in 
clearer  light  the  infinite  of  divine  love.  Oh,  happy  day,  when  the  shell 
shall  be  broken,  and  the  soul,  complete  in  the  image  of  Christ,  shall 
enter  into  tlie  freedom  for  which  she  is  preparing  !  We  look  for  that, 
and  we  shall  have  it.  God,  who  gave  us  to  aspire  to  holiness  and 
spirituality  and  to  likeness  to  himself,  never  implanted  those  aspirations 
in  us  out  of  mockery.  He  meant  to  gratify  these  holy  longings,  or,  else, 
he  would  not  have  oKcited  them.  Ere  long  we,  like  Simeon,  shall  depart 
— that  is,  we  shall  be  set  free  to  go  in  peace. 


"NUNC  DIMITTIS."  557 

I  said  that  the  word  meant  also  a  release  from  toil.  It  is  as  thongh 
Simeon  had  been  standing  at  the  table  of  his  Master  like  a  servant 
waiting  on  his  Lord.  You  know  the  parable  in  which  Christ  says  that 
the  master  does  not  first  bid  his  servant  sit  down  and  eat  bread,  but 
commands  him  thus,  "  Gird  thyself  and  serve  me."  See,  then,  Simeon 
stands  yonder,  girt  and  serving  his  Master  ;  but  by-and-by,  when  the 
Master  sees  fit,  he  turns  round  and  says  to  Simeon,  **Now  thou  mayest 
depart,  and  take  thine  own  meat,  thy  work  is  done."  Or,  we  may  use 
another  simile,  and  picture  Simeon  sitting  at  the  Kinsj's  gate,  like 
Mordecai,  ready  for  any  errand  which  may  be  appointed  him,  bnt  at 
length  his  time  of  attendance  expire?*,  and  the  great  monarch  bids  him 
depart  in  peace.  Or,  yet  again,  we  may  view  him  as  a  reaper  toiling 
amid  the  harvest  beneath  a  burning  sun,  parched  with  thirst  and 
wearied  with  labour,  and  lo  I  the  great  Boaz  came  into  the  field,  and, 
having  saluted  his  servant,  says  to  him,  "Thou  hast  fulfilled  like  an 
hireling  thy  day  :  take  thou  thy  wage,  and  depart  in  peace."  The  like 
shall  happen  to  all  true  servants  of  Christ;  they  shall  .rest  from  their 
labours  where  no  weariness  shall  vex  them,  "neither  shall  the  sun  light  on 
them,  nor  any  heat."  They  shall  enter  into  the  joy  of  their  Lord,  and 
enjoy  the  rest  which  remaineth  for  them.  There  is  much  of  comfort- 
able thought  if  we  meditate  upon  this. 

Bnt,  note  the  words  again.  You  perceive  that  the  departure  of  the 
child  of  God  is  appointed  of  the  Lord.  **  Now  leifesl  thou  thy  servant 
depart."  The  servant  must  not  depart  from  his  labour  without  his 
Master's  permission,  else  would  he  be  a  runaway,  dishonest  to  his  posi- 
tion. The  good  servant  dares  not  stir  till  his  Master  says,  **  Depart  in 
peace."  Simeon  was  content  to  wait  till  he  received  permission  to 
depart,  and  it  becomes  us  all  to  acquiesce  cheerfully  in  the  Lord's 
appointment,  whether  he  lengthens  or  shortens  our  lire.  It  is  certain 
tnat  without  the  Lord's  will  no  power  can  remove  us.  No  wind  from 
the  wilderness  shall  drive  our  souls  into  the  land  of  darkness,  no  fiends 
with  horrid  clamour  can  drag  ns  down  to  the  abyss  beneath,  no  destruc- 
tion that  wasting  at  noonday,  or  pestilence  walkmg  in  darkness  can  cut 
short  our  mortal  career.  We  shall  not  die  till  God  shall  say  to  us,  "  My 
child,  depart  from  the  field  of  service,  and  the  straitness  of  this  thy 
tabernacle,  and  enter  into  rest."  Till  God  commands  us  we  cannot  die, 
and  when  he  bids  us  go  it  shall  be  sweet  for  ns  to  leave  this  world. 

Note,  further,  that  the  words  before  ns  clearly  show  that  the 
believer's  departure  is  attended  with  a  renetval  of  the  divine  benediction, 
'*  Depart  in  peace,"  saith  God.  It  is  a  farewell,  such  as  we  give  to  a 
friend :  it  is  a  benediction,  such  as  Aaron,  the  priest  of  God,  might 
pronounce  over  a  suppliant  whose  sacrifice  was  accepted.  Eli  paid  unto 
Hannah,  '*  Go  in  peace,  and  the  God  of  Israel  grant  thee  thy  petition 
that  thou  hast  asked  of  him."  Around  the  sinner*8  death-bed  the 
tempest  thickens,  and  he  hears  the  rumblings  of  the  eternal  storm  :  his 
soul  is  driven  away,  either  amid  the  thunderings  of  curses  loud  and 
deep,  or  else  in  the  dread  calm  which  evermore  forebodes  the  hurricane. 
"  Depart,  ye  cursed,"  is  the  horrible  sound  which  is  in  his  ears.  But, 
not  so  the  righteous.  He  feels  the  Father's  hand  of  benediction  on  his 
head,  and  underneath  him  are  the  everlasting  arms.  The  best  wine 
with  him  is  kept  to  the  last.    At  eventide  it  is  light ;  and,  as  his  sun  is 


558  KETROPOLTTAN  TABEENACLB  PULPIT. 

going  down,  it  grows  more  glorious,  and  lights  up  all  the  sanoimd- 
iugs  with  a  celestial  glow,  whereat  bystanders  wonder,  and  exclaim 
''  Let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous,  and  let  mj  last  end  be 
like  his."  That  pilgrim  sets  out  upon  a  happy  journey  to  whom 
Jehovah  saith,  "  Depart  in  peace."  This  is  a  sofc  finger  laid  upon  the 
closing  eyelid  by  a  tender  father,  and  it  ensures  a  happj  waking,  wheie 
eves  are  never  wet  with  tears. 

I  cannot  detain  you  longer  over  these  words :  suffice  ib  to  add,  that 
whatever  belonged  to  Simeon  in  this  benediction  must  not  be  regarded 
as  peculiar  to  him  alone,  but  as,  in  their  measure,  the  possession  (^  all 
believers.  '*  This  is  the  heritage  of  the  servants  of  the  Lord,  and  their 
righteousness  is  of  me,  saith  the  Lor^." 

II.  But  now,  secondly,  we  remind  yon,  that  some  beueyebs  arb 

CONSCIOUS  OF  A  SPECIAL  READINESS  TO  DEPART  IN  PEACE. 

When  do  they  feel  this  ?  Answer :  first,  when  their  grace*  ar$ 
vigorous.  All  the  graces  are  in  all  Christians,  but  they  are  not  all  there 
in  the  same  proportion,  nor  are  they  at  all  times  in  the  same  degree  of 
strength.  In  certain  believers /aiVA  is  strong  and  active.  Now,  when 
faith  becomes  *'  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen,"  and  "  the  substance  of 
things  hoped  for,"  then  the  soul  is  sure  to  say,  '^  Lord,  now  lettest  thoa 
thy  servant  depart  in  peace."  Faith  brings  the  clusters  of  Eschol  into 
the  desert,  ana  makes  the  tribes  long  for  the  land  that  floweth  with 
milk  and  honey.  When  the  old  Gauls  had  drunk  of  the  wines  of  Italy, 
the^  said,  *'  Let  us  cross  the  Alps,  and  take  possession  of  the  yineyards, 
which  yield  such  generous  draughts."  So,  Mhen  faith  makes  us  realize 
the  joys  of  heaven,  then  it  is  that  our  soul  stands  waiting  on  the  wing, 
watching  for  the  signal  from  the  glory-land. 

The  same  is  true  of  the  grace  of  hoj}e,  for  hope  peers  into  the 
things  invisible.  She  brings  near  to  us  the  golden  gates  of  the 
Eternal  City.  Like  Moses,  oui*  hope  climbs  to  the  top  of  Pisgah,  and 
beholds  the  Canaan  of  the  true  Israel.  Moses  had  a  delightful  vision 
of  the  promised  land  when  he  gazed  from  Nebo*s  brow,  and  saw  it  all 
from  Dan  to  Beersheba :  so  also  hope  drinks  in  the  charming  prospect 
of  the  goodly  land  and  Lebanon,  and  then  she  exclaims  exnltingly, 
'*  Lord,  now  lettest  thou  thy  servant  dcpait  in  peace."  Heaven  realisedand 
anticipated  by  hope  rendera  the  thought  of  departure  most  precious  to 
the  heart. 

And  the  like,  also,  it  the  effect  of  the  grace  of  love  upon  ns.  Love 
puts  the  heart,  like  a  sacrifice,  on  the  altar,  and  then  she  fetches 
heavenly  fire,  and  kindles  it ;  and,  as  soon  as  ever  the  heart  begins  to 
bum  and  glow  like  a  sacrifice,  what  is  the  consequence  ?  Why,  it 
ascends  like  pillars  of  smoke  up  to  the  tlirone  of  God.  It  is  the  veir 
instinct  of  love  to  draw  us  nearer  to  the  person  whom  we  lovo ;  and, 
when  loye  towards  Ood  pervades  the  soul,  then  the  spirit  cries,  "  Make 
haste,  my  beloved,  be  thou  like  a  roe  or  a  young  hart  upon  the 
mountains  of  separation."  Perfect  love,  casting  out  all  fear,  cries,  '*  Up, 
and  away." 

^  Let  me  be  with  thee,  where  thou  art^ 
My  Saviour,  my  eternal  rest  t 
Then  only  will  this  longing  heart 
Be  fully  and  for  ever  blest." 


"NUNC  DIMITTIS."  559 

I  might  thus  mention  all  the  graces,  but  suffer  one  of  thcin  to  suffice, 
one  which  is  often  OYerlooked,  but  is  priceless  as  the  gold  of  Ophir — it 
is  the  grace  of  humility .  Is  it  strange  that  the  lower  a  man  sinks  in 
his  own  esteem  the  higher  does  he  rise  before  his  God  ?  Is  it  not 
written,  ^*  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit,  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  ? "  Simeon  had  no  conceit  of  his  own  importance  in  the  world, 
else  he  would  have  said,  ^'  Lord,  let  me  stay,  and  be  an  apostle.  Surely 
I  shall  be  needed  at  this  juncture  to  lend  my  aid  in  the  auspicious 
era  which  has  just  commenced?"  But  no,  he  felt  himself  so  little, 
so  inconsiderable,  that  now  that  he  had  attained  his  heart's  wish  and 
seen  God's  salvation,  he  was  willing  to  depart  in  peace.  Humility 
by  making  ns  lie  low  helps  us  to  think  highly  of  God,  and,  consequently, 
to  desire  much  to  be  with  God.  0  to  have  our  graces  always  flourishing, 
for  then  shall  we  always  be  ready  to  depart,  and  willing  to  be  oil'ered 
up.  Lack  of  grace  entangles  us,  but  to  abound  in  grace  is  to  live  in  the 
suburbs  of  the  New  Jerusalem. 

Another  time,  when  believers  are  thus  ready  to  go,  is  when  their 
assurance  is  clear.  It  is  not  always  so  with  even  the  most  mature 
Christians,  and  some  true  saints  have  not  yet  attained  to  assurance ; 
they  are  truly  saved,  and  possess  a  genuine  faith,  but  as  assurance  is 
the  cream  of  faith,  tiie  milk  has  not  stood  long  enough  to  produce  the 
cream ;  they  have  not  yet  come  to  the  flower  of  assurance,  for  their 
faith  is  but  a  tender  plant.  Give  a  man  assurance  of  heaven  and  he 
will  be  eager  to  enjojr  it.  While  he  doubts  his  own  security,  he  wants 
to  linger  here.  He  is  like  the  Psalmist  when  he  asked  that  God  would 
permit  him  to  recover  his  strength  before  he  went  hence,  and  was  no 
more.  Some  things  were  not  yet  in  order  with  David,  and  he  would 
stay  awhile  till  they  were.  But,  when  the  ship  is  all  loaded,  the  crew 
on  board,  and  the  anchor  heaved,  the  favouring  breeze  is  desired  that 
the  barque  may  speed  on  its  voyage.  When  a  man  is  prepared  for  his 
jonmey,  ready  to  depart,  he  does  not  care  to  linger  long  in  these  misty 
valleys,  but  pants  for  the  sunny  summits  of  the  mount  of  God,  whereon 
standeth  the  palace  of  the  Great  King.  Let  a  man  know  that  he  is 
resting  upon  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  let  him  by  diligent  self- 
examination  perceive  in  himself  the  marks  of  regeneration,  and  by  the 
witness  of  his  own  spirit,  and  by  the  infallible  witness  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  bearing  witness  with  his  own  spirit,  let  him  be  certified  that  he 
is.bom  of  God,  and  the  natural  consequence  will  be  that  he  will  say, 
*'  Now  let  me  loose  from  all  things  here  below  and  let  me  enter  into  the 
rest  which  is  assuredly  my  own."  0  you  that  have  lost  your  assurance 
by  n^ligent  living,  by  falling  into  sin,  or  by  some  other  form  of  back- 
aliding,  I  do  not  wonder  that  you  hug  the  world,  for  you  are  afraid  you 
have  no  other  portion ;  but  with  those  who  read  their  titles  clear  to 
mansions  in  the  skies  it  will  be  otherwise.  They  will  not  ask  to  linger 
in  this  place  of  banishment,  but  will  sing  in  their  hearts,  as  we  did  just 
now: 

**  Jerusalem  my  happy  borne. 
Name  ever  dear  to  me ; 
YHien  shall  my  labours  have  an  end. 
In  joy  and  peace  and  thee  ?  " 

Belored,  furthermore,  saints  feel  most  their  readiness  to  go  when 


5G0  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

iJieir  communion  wilh  Chris  I  is  near  and  sweet;  when  Christ  hides  hiip- 
self  wo  are  afraid  to  talk  of  dying,  or  of  heaven ;  but,  when  he  o&ly 
shows  himself  through  the  lattices,  and  we  can  see  those  eyes  which  are 
*'  ns  the  eyes  of  doves  by  the  rivers  of  water,  washed  with  milk  and  fitly 
sot;"  when  our  ov\n  soul  melteth  even  at  that  hazj  sight  of  him, » 
through  a  glass  darkly.  Oh  then  we  fain  would  be  at  home,  and  our  soul 
crieth  out  for  the  day  when  her  eyes  shall  see  the  King  in  his  beaatj, 
in  the  land  that  is  very  far  off.    Have  you  never  felt  the  heavenly  hom^ 
sickness?      Have  you  never  pined  for  the  home-bringing?     Sarelj, 
when  your  heart  has  been  full  of  the  Bridegroom's  beanty,  and  yonr 
soul  has  been  ravished  with  his  dear  and  ever  precions  love,  yon  hare 
said:  "Wiien  shall  the  day  break,  and  the  shadows  flee  away  ?    Why 
are  his  chariots  so  long  in  coining  ?'*     You  have  swooned,  as  it  were, 
with  lovc-sickuess  for  your  precious  Saviour,  thirsting  to  see  him  u 
he  is,  and  to  be  like  him.     The  world  is  black  when  Christ  is  feir;  it  is 
a  poor  heap  of  ashes  when  he  is  altogether  lovely  to  us.     When  a  pre- 
cious Christ  is  manifested  to  our  spirits,  we  feel  that  we  coald  see 
Jesus  and  die.    Put  out  these  eyes,  there  is  nothing  more  for  them  to  see 
when  Ihey  have  seen  him,      "  Black  sun,"  said  Rutherford,  "  black 
moon,  black  stars,  but  inconceivably  bright  and  glorious  Lord  Jesaa." 
How  often  did  that  devout  man  write  words  of  this  sort :  "  Oh  if  I  hid 
to  swim  through  seven  hells  to  reach  him,  if  he  would  but  say  to  me, 
like  Peter,  *  Come  unto  me,'  I  would  go  unto  him  not  only  on  the  sea,  but 
on  the  boiling  floods  of  hell,  if  I  might  but  reach  him,  and  come  to 
him.''    I  will  pause  here  and  give  you  his  own  words  :  *^I  profess  to 
you  I  have  no  rest,  I  have  no  ease,  till  I  be  over  head  and  ears  inlore'a 
ocean.     If  Christ's  love  (that  fountain  of  delight)  were  laid  as  open  to 
me  as  I  would  wish.  Oh,  how  I  would  drink,  and  drink  abandantly ! 
I  half  call  his  absence  cruel ;  and  the  mask  and  veil  on  Christ's  fiuie 
a  cruel  covering,  that  hideth  such  a  fair,  fair  face  from  a  sick  souL     I 
dare  not  upbraid  him,  but  his  absence  is  a  mountain  of  iron  upon  my 
heavy  heart.    Oh,  when  shall  we  meet  ?     Oh,  how  long  is  it  to  the 
dawning  of  the  marriage  day?     0  sweet  Lord  Jesus,  take  wide  steps; 
0  my  Lord,  come  over  the  mountains  at  one  stride !    O  my  Beloved,  be 
like  a  roe,  or  a  young  hart,  on  the  mountains  of  separation.     Oh,  if  he 
would  fold  the  heavens  together  like  an  old  cloak,  and  shoTel  time  and 
days  out  of  the  way,  and  make  ready  in  haste  the  Lamb's  wife  for 
her  Husband!     Since  he  looked  upon  me  my  heart  is  not  mine; 'be 
hath  run  away  to  heaven  with  it."     When  these  strong  throes,  these 
ardent  pane's  of  insatiable  desire  come  upon  a  soul  that  is  fully  satn- 
rated  with  Christ*s  love,  through  having  been  made  to  lean  its  head  upon 
his  bosom,  and  to  receive  the  kisses  of  his  mouth,  then  is  the  time  wnen 
the  soul  saith,  *'  Lord,  now  lettest  thou  thy  servant  depart  in  peace." 

So  again,  beloved,  saints  have  drawn  their  anchor  up  and  spread 
their  sails,  when  they  have  been  niade  to  hold  loose  by  all  ther§  is  in  this 
world ;  and  that  is  generally  when  they  hold  fastest  by  the  world  to 
come.  To  many  this  world  is  very  sweet,  very  fair,  but  God  puts 
bitters  into  the  cup  of  his  children ;  when  their  nest  is  soft,  he  fills  it 
w  ith  thorns  to  make  them  long  to  fly.  Alas,  that  it  should  be  so,  bat 
some  of  God's  servants  seem  ns  if  they  had  made  up  their  minds  to  find 
u  rest  beneath  the  moon.     They  are  moon-struck  who  hope  to'  do  so. 


"MUKO  DIMITTIB."  561 

All  the  houses  in  this  plague-stricken  land  are  worm-eaten  and  let  in 
the  rain  and  wind :  my  soul  longeth  to  find  a  rest  among  the  ivory 
palaces  of  thy  land,  O  Imroanuel. 

Brethren,  it  often  happens  that  the  loss  of  dear  friendR,  or  the 
treachery  of  those  we  trusted,  or  bodily  sickness,  or  depression  of  spirit, 
may  help  to  unloose  the  holdfasts  which  enchain  us  to  this  life;  and 
then  we  are  enabled  to  say  with  David  in  one  of  the  most  precious  little 
Psalms  in  the  whole  Book,  the  ISlst,  *'  I  have  behaved  and  quieted 
myself  as  a  child  that  is  weaned  of  his  mother,  my  soul  is  even  as  a 
weaned  child.'*  I  have  often  thought  that  if  David  had  said,  *'  my 
soul  is  even  as  a  weantir?;^  child,"  it  would  have  been  far  more  like 
most  of  God's  people.  But  to  be  weaned,  quite  weaned  from  the 
world,  to  turn  away  from  her  consolations  altogether,  this  it  is  which 
makes  us  cry,  "  Lord,  now  lettest  thou  thy  servant  depart  in  peace." 
Eyen  as  the  psalmist  when  he  said,  *'  And  now,  Lord,  what  wait  I  for  ? 
my  hope  is  in  thee." 

Again,  saints  are  willing  to  depart  when  fJieir  work  fs  almost  done. 
This  will  not  be  the  case  with  many  here  present,  perhaps,  but  it  was 
80  with  Simeon.  Good  old  man !  He  had  been  very  constant  in  his 
deyotions,  but  on  this  occasion  he  came  into  the  temple,  and  there,  it 
is  said,  he  took  the  child  in  his  arms,  and  blessed  God.  Once  more  he 
delivered  his  soul  of  its  adoration — once  more  he  blended  his  praise 
wiih  the  songs  of  angels.  When  he  had  done  that,  he  openly  confessed 
his  faith :  another  important  work  of  every  believer — for  he  said, 
''  Mine  eyes  have  seen  thy  salyation."  He  bore  public  testimony  to  the 
child  Jesus,  and  declared  that  he  should  be  '*  a  light  to  lighten  the 
Gentiles."  Haying  done  that,  he  bestowed  his  fatherly  benediction 
upon  the  child's  parents,  Joseph  and  his  mother  ;  he  blessed  them,  and 
said  unto  Mary,  '^  Behold,  this  child  is  set  for  the  fall  and  rising  again 
of  many  in  Israel."  Now,  we  read  that  David,  after  he  had  served  his 
generation,  fell  on  sleep ;  it  is  time  for  man  to  sleep  when  his  life's 
work  is  finished.  Simeon  felt  he  had  done  all :  he  had  blessed  God; 
he  had  declared  his  faith  ;  he  had  borne  testimony  to  Christ ;  he  had 
bestowed  his  benediction  upon  godly  people ;  ana  so  he  said,  '*  Now, 
Lord,  lettest  thou  thy  servant  depart  in  peace."  Ah,  Christian  people, 
yon  will  never  be  willing  to  go  if  you  are  idle.  You  lazy  lie-a-beds, 
who  do  little  or  nothing  for  Christ,  you  sluggish  servants,  whose 
garden  is  oyergrown  with  weeds,  no  wonder  that  you  do  not  want  to 
see  your  master!  Your  sluggishness  accuses  you,  and  makes  you 
cowards.  Only  he  who  has  put  out  his  talents  to  good  interest  will 
be  willing  to  render  an  account  of  his  stewardship.  But  when  a  man 
feels,  without  claiming  any  merit,  that  he  has  fought  a  good  fight, 
finished  his  course,  and  kept  the  faith,  then  will  he  rejoice  in  the  crown 
which  is  laid  up  for  him  in  heaven,  and  he  will  long  to  wear  it.  Throw 
your  strength  into  the  Lord's  work,  dear  brethren — all  your  strength ; 
spare  none  of  your  powers:  let  body,  soul,  and  spirit  be  entirely  conse- 
crated to  God,  and  used  at  their  utmost  stretch.  Get  through  your  day's 
work,  for  the  sooner  you  complete  it,  and  have  fulfilled  like  an  hireling 

irour  day,  the  more  near  and  sweet  shall  be  the  time  when  the  shadows 
engthen,  and  God  shall  say  to  you,  as  a  faithful  servant,  *'  Depart  iu 
peace  1" 


562  MBTROPOLITAH  TABEBITAGLE  PULPIT. 

One  other  matter,  I  think,  helps  to  make  saints  williag  to  go,  and 
that  is  wlien  tfiey  see  or  foresee  the  prosperity  of  ihs    church  of  OoL 
Good  old  Simeon  saw  that  Christ  was  to  be  a  light  to  lighten  the 
Gentiles,  and  to  be  the  glory  of  his  people  Israel ;  and,  therefore,  he 
said,  "  Lord,  lettest  now  thv  servant  depart  in  peace."     I  have  knovB 
many  a  godly  deacon  who  has  seen  a  church  wither  and  decay,  its 
ministry  become  unprofitable,  and  its  membership  become  divided; 
the  dear  old  man  has  poured  out  his  soul  in  agony  before  Ood^  and 
when  at  last  the  Lord  has  sent  a  man  to  seek  the  good  of  Israel,  and 
the  church  has  been  built  up,  he  has  been  overjoyed,  and  he  has  said, 
'*  now  lettest  thou  thy  servant  depart  in  peace."     It  mnst  have  r^ 
conciled  John  Knox  to  die  when  he  had  seen  the  reformation  saMj 
planted  throughout  all  Scotland.     It   made  dear  old  Latimer,  as  he 
stood  on  the  fagot,  feel  happy  when  he  could  say,  *'  Coarage,  brother, 
we  shall   this  day  light  such  a  candle  in  England  as    shall  msm 
be  blown  out."    "  Pray  for  the  peace  of  Jerusalem,"  Ay,  that  we  do, 
and  we  vehemently  desire  her  prosperity,  and  if  we  can  see  Christ  ^ori- 
Hed,  error  defeated,  truth  established,  sinners  saved,  and  saints  sancti- 
fied, our  spirit  feels  she  has  all  she  wishes.    Like  dyin^  David,  whoiwe 
have  said,  ''  Let  the  whole  earth  be  filled  with  his  gk>ry/'  we  can  M 
back  upon  the  pillows  and  die,  for  our  praters  like  those  of  David  the 
son  of  Jesse  are  ended.    Let  us  pray  for  this  peace  and  this  prosperity, 
and  when  we  see  it  come,  it  shall  bring  calm  and  rest  to  onr  spintSy  so 
that  we  shall  be  willing  to  depart  in  peace. 

III.  I  shall  call  your  attention  now,  for  a  little  while,  to  the  third 
point,  that  there  aee  wouds  to  bnoouraob  us  to  thx  uks 
READINESS  TO  DEPART.  ^^ According  to  thy  wordJ*  Now  let  us  go  to 
the  Bible,  and  take  from  it  seven  choice  words  all  calculated  to  cheer 
onr  hearts  in  the  prospect  of  departure,  and  the  first  is  Psalm  ixiii  4 : 
"  Yea,  though  I  walk  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  I  will 
fear  no  evil :  for  thou  art  with  me  ;  thy  rod  and  thy  staff  thqr  comfort 
me."  '*  We  walk  " — the  Christian  does  not  quicken  his  pace  when  he 
dies ;  he  walked  before,  and  he  is  not  afraid  of  death,  so  he  calmly  walks 
on.  It  is  a  walk  through  a  "  shadow.**  There  is  no  sabstance  in 
death,  it  is  only  a  shade.  Who  needs  fear  a  shadow  ?  It  is  not  i 
lonely  walk — "  Thou  art  with  me."  Neither  is  it  a  walk  that  need 
cause  us  terror ;  "  I  i^ill  fear  no  evil : "  not  only  is  there  no  evil,  but  no 
fear  shall  cloud  my  dying  hours.  It  shall  be  a  departure  full  of  com- 
fort :  "  Thy  rod  and  thy  staff*' — a  duplicate  means  shall  give  ns  a  ful- 
ness of  consolation.    **  Thy  rod  and  thy  staff  they  comfort  me." 

Take  another  text,  and  so  follow  the  direction,  "  According  to  thy 
word."  Psalm  xxxvii.  37 :  "  Mark  the  perfect  man,  and  behold  the 
upright :  for  the  end  of  that  man  is  peace.**  If  we  are  perfect,  that  is 
sincere ;  if  wc  arc  upright,  that  is  honest  in  heart ;  our  end  shall 
assuredly  be  peace. 

Take  another  word,  Psalm  cxvi.  15 :  **  Precious  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord  is  the  death  of  his  saints.*'  It  is  no  ordinary  thing  for  a  saint  to 
die  ;  it  is  a  spectacle  which  the  eyes  of  God  arc  delighted  with.  As  king*8 
deli(>;ht  in  their  pearls  and  diamonds,  and  count  them  precioos,  so  the 
death-beds  of  the  saints  are  God's  precious  things. 

Take  another,  Isaiah  Ivii.  2 :  *<He  shall  enter  into  peace :  they  shall 


"nunc  DDCiTris.**  563 

rest  in  their  beds,  each  one  walking  in  his  uprightness."  Here  is  an 
entrance  into  peace  for  the  saint,  rest  on  his  dying  bed,  rest  for  his  body 
in  the  grave,  rest  for  his  spirit  in  the  bosom  of  his  Lord,  and  a  walking 
in  his  nprightness  in  the  immortality  above.  ''  According  to  thy  word." 
Oh,  what  force  there  is  in  these  few  svllables  !  When  yon  can  plead  the 
word  of  God  you  must  prevail.  Nothing  has  such  marrow  and  fatness 
in  it  as  a  text  of  Scripture.  It  has  a  force  of  comfort  all  its  own. 
Consider  also  1  Cor.  iii.  22  : "  For  all  things  are  yonr's :  whether  Paul,  or 
Apollos,  or  Cephas,  or  the  world,  or  life,  or  death,  or  things  present,  or 
things  to  come  5  all  are  your*8."  Now,  if  death  is  yours,  there  can  be 
no  sort  of  reason  why  you  should  be  afraid  of  that  which  is  made  over 
to  you  as  a  part  of  your  inheritance. 

Take  the  fifteenth  chapter  and  fifty-fourth  verse  of  the  same  epistle  : 
'^  So  when  this  corruptible  shall  have  put  on  incorruption,  and  this 
mortal  shall  have  ^ut  on  immortality,  then  shall  be  brought  to  pass  the 
saying  that  is  written.  Death  is  swallowed  up  in  victory.  0  death, 
where  is  thy  sting  ?  0  grave,  where  is  thy  victory  ?  The  sting  of 
death  is  sin  ;  and  the  strength  of  sin  is  the  law.  But  thanks  be  to 
God,  which  giveth  us  the  victory  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Clirist." 
With  such  a  text  we  need  not  fear  to  depart. 

And  so  that  other  word,  the  seventh  we  shall  quote,  and  in  that 
number  seven  dwelleth  perfection  of  testimony.  Rev.  xiv.  13  :  "  And  I 
heard  a  voice  from  heaven  saying  unto  me,  Write,  Blessed  are  the  dead 
which  die  in  the  Lord  from  henceforth :  yea,  saith  the  Spirit,  tliat  they 
may  rest  from  their  labours  ;  and  their  works  do  follow  them." 

Now,  I  dare  say,  many  of  you  have  said,  "  I  wish  I  had  a  word  from 
God,  just  like  Simeon  had,  to  cheer  me  in  my  dying  moments."  You 
have  it  before  you ;  here  are  seven  that  I  have  read  to  you,  most  sure 
words  of  testimony,  unto  which  you  do  well  to  take  heed,  as  unto  a  light 
shining  in  a  dark  place.  These  promises  belong  to  all  believers  in  our 
precious  Lord  and  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ.  Fear  not,  then,  be  not  afraid, 
but  rather  say,  "  Now  lettest  thou  thy  servant  depart  in  peace." 

I  have  done  the  sermon,  but  we  mast  put  a  rider  to  it.  Just  a  word 
or  two  to  those  of  you  who  cannot  die  in  peace  because  you  are  not 
believers  in  Christ:  you  have  never  seen  God's  Balvation,  neither  are 
you  God*s  servants.  I  must  deal  with  you  as  I  have  dealt  with  the 
saints.  I  have  given  them  texts  of  Scripture,  for  the  text  saith, 
**  according  to  thy  word  ;"  and  I  will  give  you  also  two  passages  of 
Scripture,  which  will  show  you  those  who  may  not  hope  to  depart  in 
peace. 

The  first  one  is  negative :  it  shows  who  cannot  enter  heaven,  and, 
consequently,  who  cannot  depart  in  peace.  1  Corinthians  vi.  9 :  **  Know 
ye  not  that  the  unrighteous  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God  ?"  the 
unjust,  the  oppressive,  cheats,  rogues,  *'  the  unrighteous  shall  not  inherit 
the  kingdom  of  God."  I  will  read  these  words,  I  need  not  explain 
them,  but  let  every  one  here  who  comes  under  their  lash  suomit 
to  God's  word.  **Be  not  deceived:  neither  fornicators," — plenty 
of  them  in  London — **nor  idolaters," — and  ve  need  not  worship  a 
God  of  wood  and  stone  to  be  idolaters,  worship  anything  but  God, 
jon  are  an  idolater — *'  nor  adulterers,  nor  effeminate,  nor  abusei*s  of 
themselves  with  mankind,  nor  thieves,  nor  covetous,  nor  drunkards," — 


564  METKOPHLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

alas,  some  of  these  come  to  this  house  regularly, — *'  nor  revilere,"  AxA 
is,  backbiters,  cavillers,  tale-bearers,  swearers,  and  such  like,  "nor ex- 
tortioners,"— you  fine  twenty  per  cent,  gentlemen !  You  who  grind  poor 
borrowers  with  usurious  interest.  None  of  yon  shall  inherit  the  king- 
dom of  God,  not  one  of  you.  If  you  come  within  this  list,  except  God 
renew  your  hearts  and  change  you,  the  holy  gates  of  heayeu  are  shut  in 
your  face. 

Now,  take  another  text,  of  a  positive  character,  from  the  Book  of 
Revelation  xxi.  7  :  "He  that  overcometh  shall  inherit  all  things ;  and 
I  will  be  his  God,  and  he  shall  be  my  son.  But  the  fearful," — that  means 
the  cowardly,  those  that  are  ashamed  of  Christ,  those  that  dare  not 
suffer  for  Christ's  sake,  those  who  believe  ererything  and  nothing,  and  so 
deny  the  truth,  because  they  cannot  endure  to  be  persecuted;  "  the  fearidl 
and  unbelieving," — that  is,  those  who  do  not  trust  a  Saviour — **  and  the 
abominable," — and  they  arc  not  scarce,  some  among  the  poor  are 
abominable,  and  there  are  Right  Hononrables  who  ought  to  be  called 
Right  Abominables ;  ay,  and  greater  than  that,  too,  whose  vices  make 
them  abominable  to  the  nation  :  and  "  murderers," — "  he  that  hateth  his 
brother  is  a  murderer  ;"  and  *'  whoremongers  and  sorcerers  ;"  those  who 
have  or  pretend  to  have  dealings  with  devils  and  spirits,  your  spirit- 
rappers,  the  whole  batch  of  them  ;  *'  and  idolaters,  and  all  liars,"  and 
these  swarm  everywhere,  they  lie  in  print,  and  they  lie  with  the  voice; 
**  all  liars  shall  have  their  part  in  the  lake  which  burneth  with  fire  and 
brimstone,  which  is  the  second  death." 

Now,  these  are  no  words  of  mine,  but  the  words  of  God ;  and  if  they 
condemn  you,  you  are  condemned;  but,  if  you  be  condemned,  fly  to 
Jesns.  Repent  and  be  converted,  as  saith  the  gospel,  and  forgiveness 
shall  be  yours,  through  Jesus  Christ.     Amen. 


Portions  of  Sc'Riptuuk  head  nEFORE    Sermon — Luke  i.  -46 — 55; 

i.  G7 — 75;  ii.  25 — 3b. 


Our  usual  Penny  Almnnnck  is  now  ready,  nnd  we  hope  it  will  be  as  nmch 
np])roved  of  as  its  predecessors  have  been.  We  have  also,  with  no  small  labour, 
written  an  Almanack  for  the  walls,  which  is  called  John  Floughman^s  Sheet 
Almanack.  Our  friends  tells  ns  that  it  will  have  an  unprecedented  sale,  and  wc 
only  hope  it  may,  but  not  to  the  detriment  of  the  older  one.  They  are  quite 
distinct  things,  and  very  diflerent  in  all  respects,  except  that  they  are  by  the 
same  author,  cost  the  same  price — one  penny,  and  can  be  had  of  the  ssaie 
publishers,  Messrs.  Passmore  and  Alabaster. — CJ.  H.  S. 


IW^tr^pIitan  iiakmnrle  f  ttljjit. 


THE  ONE  THING  NEEDFUL. 


%  ^txwmx 


Delivbred  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  October  15th,  1S71,  by 

C.  a  SPURGEON, 

AT     THE     METROPOUTAN     TABEBlfACLB,     NEWINGTON. 


" But  one  thing  is  needful." — Luke  x.  42. 

We  have  no  difficulty  whatever  in  deciding  what  that  one  thing  is. 
We  are  not  allowed  to  say  that  it  is  the  Saviour,  for  he  is  not  a  thing; 
and  we  are  not  permitted  to  say  thac  it  is  attention  to  our  own  salva- 
tion, for,  although  that  would  be  true,  it  is  not  mentioned  in  the  con- 
text. The  one  thing  needful  evidently  is  that  which  Mnry  chose — that 
good  part  which  should  not  be  taken  away  from  her.  Very  clearly  this 
was  to  sit  at  Jesus'  feet,  and  hear  his  word.  If  anything  be  plain  at 
all  in  Holy  Scripture,  it  is  most  clear  that  this  is  the  one  thing  needful, 
to  sit  at  Jesus'  feet  aud  hear  his  word.  This  and  nothing  less,  this  and 
nothing  more. 

The  mere  posture  of  sitting  down  and  listening  to  the  Saviour's 
word  was  nothing  in  itself:  it  was  that  which  it  indicated.  It  indicated, 
in  Mary's  case,  a  readiness  to  believe  what  the  Saviour  taught,  to 
accept  and  to  obey — nay,  to  delight  in,  the  precepts  which  fell  from  his 
lips.  Aud  this  is  the  one  thing  needful.  He  that  hath  it  hath  the 
spirit  of  grace  and  life.  To  sit  at  Jesus'  feet  implies  submission.  Such 
an  one  is  no  longer  i  esisting  his  power  ;  he  has  cast  down  the  weapons 
of  his  rebellion,  and  has  come  humbly  to  acknowledge  the  Eedeemer  as 
Lord  and  King  in  his  soul.  This  is  needful — absolutely  needful ;  for 
no  rebel  can  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven  with  the  weapons  of  rebel- 
lion in  his  hands.  We  cannot  know  Christ  while  we  resist  Christ :  we 
must  be  reconciled  to  his  gentle  sway,  and  confess  that  he  is  Lord,  to 
the  glory  of  God  the  Father. 

To  sit  at  Jesns'  feet  implies  faith  as  well  as  submission.  Mary  be- 
heved  in  what  Jesus  said,  and,  therefore,  sat  there  to  be  taught  by  him. 
It  is  absolutely  necessaiy  that  we  have  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
in  his  power  as  God  and  man,  in  his  death  as  being  expiatory,  in  his 
crucifixion  as  being  a  sacrifice  for  our  sins.  We  must  trust  him  for 
time  and  for  eternity,  in  all  his  relationships  as  Prophet,  Pnest,  and 
King.  We  must  rely  upon  him  ;  he  must  be  our  hope,  our  salvation, 
our  all  in  all.  This  one  thing  is  an  absolute  necessary :  without  it,  we 
Nos.  1,015-16. 


566  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

are  undone.    A  believing  gnbrnission,  and  a  snbmis8i?e  faith  in  JesoB 
we  mnst  have,  or  perish. 

But  sitting  at.  Jesus'  feet  implies,  also,  that  having  submitted  and 
believed,  we  now  desire  to  be  his  disciples.  Discipleship  is  too  often 
forgotten;  it  is  as  needful  as  faith.  We  are  to  go  into  all  the  world 
and  disciple  all  nations,  baptising  them  into  the  name  of  the  Father, 
and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holj  Ghost.  A  man  cannot  be  saved  unlea 
he  becomes  a  learner  in  the  school  of  Christ,  and  a  learner,  too,  in  a 
practical  sense,  being  willing  to  practise  what  he  learns.  Only  he  who 
does  the  Master's  will  knows  his  doctrine.  We  are,  if  we  have  choaen 
the  good  part,  sittera  at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  just  as  Saul  of  Tarsus  sac 
at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel ;  Christ  is  to  us  our  great  Instructor,  and  we 
take  the  law  from  his  lips.  The  believer's  position  is  that  of  a  pupil,  and 
the  Lord  Jesus  is  his  teacher.  Except  wc  be  converted  and  become  as 
little  children,  we  can  in  no  wise  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
Sitting  at  the  feet  of  Jesus  indicates  the  child-like  spirit  of  true  dis- 
cipleship ;  and  this  is  the  one  thing  needful :  there  is  no  salvation 
apart  from  it. 

It  meant,  also,  service,  for  though  Mary  was  not  apparently  engaged 
in  waiting  upon  Christ  as  Martha 'was,  yet  she  was,  in  very  truth, 
ministering  unto  him  in  a  dee|>er  and  truer  sense.  No  one  gives-greater 
joy  to  a  public  spcfiker  than  an  attentive  listener;  no  one  serves  a 
teacher  better  than  he  who  is  an  apt  and  attentive  scholar.  The  first 
duty,  indeed,  of  the  student  to  the  tutor  is  that  he  be  cheerfol  in 
accepting,  and  diligent  in  retaining,  what  is  taught :  in  this  sense, 
Mary  was  really  waiting  upon  Christ  in  one  of  his  loftiest  capacities, 
namely — that  of  a  teacher  and  prophet  in  the  midst  of  IsraeL  In  that 
same  spirit,  had  the  Master  only  intimated  it,  she  would  have  risen  to 
wash  his  feet,  or  anoint  his  head,  or  wait  at  table,  as  Martha  did;  but 
she  would,  while  she  was  performing  these  active  duties,  have  continued 
spiritually  in  her  first  posture  ;  she  could  not,  of  course,  have  continued 
literally  sitting  at  the  feet  of  the  Saviour,  but  her  heart  would  have 
remained  in  the  condition  which  that  posture  indicates.  She  was  in  the 
fittest  position  for  service,  for  she  waited  to  hear  what  her  Lord  would 
have  her  to  do.  We  must  all  be  servants,  too ;  as  we  have  been  servants 
of  unrighteousness,  we  must  by  grace  submit  ourselves  unto  the  rules 
of  Jesus,  and  become  servants  of  righteousness,  or,  else,  we  miss  the  one 
thing  that  is  indispensable  for  entrance  into  heaven. 

Sitting  at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  also,  signifies  love.  She  would  not  have 
been  sitting  there  at  ease  and  happy  in  mind,  if  she  had  not  loved  him. 
There  was  a  charm  in  the  very  tone  of  his  words  to  her.  She  knew  how 
he  had  loved  her,  and,  therefore,  each  syllable  was  music  to  her  soul. 
She  looked  up  again  and  again,  I  doubt  not,  into  that  dear  face,  and 
often  caught  the  meaning  of  the  words  more  readily  as  she  read  his 
countenance,  marked  his  eyes  ofttimes  suttused  with  tears,  and  ever 
bright  with  holy  sympathy.  Her  love  to  his  person  made  her  a  willing 
lemner,  and  we  must  be  the  same.  AVe  must  not  learn  of  Chnst  lilw 
unwilling  truant  boys,  who  go  to  school  and  must  needs  have  learning 
flogged  into  them;  we  must  he  eager  to  learn;  we  must  open  cor 
mouth  wide  that  he  may  fill  it,  like  the  thirsty  earth  when  it  needs 
the  shower,  our  soul  must  break  for  the  longing  it  hath  towards  hit 


THB  ONB  THING  NEEDFUL.  567 

cx)mTnandment8  at  all  times.  We  must  rejoice  ia  his  statntes  more 
than  gold,  yea,  than  much  fine  gold.  When  we  are  moved  by  this 
spirit,  we  have  found  the  one  thing  needful. 

Having  laid  before  you  the  meaning  of  the  text,  that  to  sit  at 
Jesus*  feet  is  the  one  necessary,  for  a  literal  translation  of  the  text 
would  be—**  of  one  thing  there  is  a  necessity ; "  let  us  take  the  text 
as  it  stands,  and  notice  in  it  four  things.  The  first  is  a  word  of 
consideration :  the  disjunctive  conjunction,  **  but."  The  Saviour  bida 
us  to  make  a  pause.  He  says,  *'but  one  thing  is  needful."  Then  there 
comes  a  word  of  necessity  :  " one  thing  is  needful"  Thirdly,  a  word 
of  concentration :  "  one  tiling  is  needful ;"  and  then  a  word  of  imme- 
diateness :  **  one  thing  is  needfur* — needful  now,  at  once. 

I. — To  begin,  then,  here  is  a  word  of  consideration,  which,  as  I 
have  already  said,  is  interjected  into  the  middle  of  our  Lord's  brief 
word  to  Martha.  Martha  is  very  busy ;  she  is  rather  quick  tempered 
also,  and  she  speaks  to  the  Saviour  somewhat  shortly ;  and  the  Master 
says,  **  Martha,  Martha," — very  tenderly,  kindly,  gently,  with  only  the 
slightest  tinge  of  rebuke  in  his  tone — **  Martha,  Martha,  thou  art  care- 
ful and  troubled  about  many  things — but,  but,  but,  but,  but,  wait  a  while, 
and  hear."  That  wise  and  warning  hut  may  be  very  useful  to  many 
here.  You  are  engaged  to-day  in  business;  very  diligent  you  are  in  it. 
You  throw  your  whole  energy  into  your  trading,  as^you  must,  if  you  would 
succeed,  xou  rise  up  early,  and  you  sit  up  late.  Shall  I  say  a  word 
that  should  discoun^^e  your  industry  ?  I  will  not ;  hut^  hit  is  there 
nothing  else? — is  this  life  all?  Is  making  money  everything?  Is 
wealth  worth  gaining  merely  for  the  sake  of  having  it  said,  **  He  died 
worth  fifty  thousand  pounds  ?V    Is  it  so  ? 

Perhaps,  you  are  a  very  hard-working  man.  You  have  very  little  rest 
during  the  week,  aud  in  order  to  bring  up  your  family  comfortably,  yon 
strain  every  nerve ;  you  live  as  you  should,  economically,  and  you  work 
diligently ;  from  morning  to  night  the  thought  with  you  is,  "  How 
shall  I  fill  these  many  little  mouths?  How  shall  I  bring  them 
up  properly?  How  shall  I,  as  a  working  man,  pay  my  way?" 
Very  right;  I  wish  all  working  men  would  be  equally  thought- 
ful and  economical,  and  that  there  were  fewer  of  those  foolish 
spendthrifts  who  waste  their  substance  when  they  have  it,  and  who,  the 
moment  there  is  a  frost,  or  they  are  out  of  employ,  become  paupers, 
loafing  upon  the  charity  of  others.  I  commend  your  industry,  hut^  but, 
but  J  at  the  same  time,  is  that  all  ?  Were  you  made  only  to  be  a  machine 
for  digging  holes,  laying  bricks,  or  cutting  out  pieces  of  wood  ?  Were 
you  created  only  to  stand  at  a  counter  and  measure  or  weigh  out  goods? 
do  you  think  your  God  made  you  for  that  and  that  only  ?  Is  this  the 
chief  end  of  man — to  earn  so  many  shillings  a  week,  and  try  to  make 
ends  meet  therewith  ?  is  that  all  immortal  men  were  made  for  ?  As  a 
man  with  a  soul,  capable  of  thought  and  jud<:;ment,  and  not  a  mere 
animal  like  a  dog,  nor  a  machine  like  a  steam  engine,  can  you  stand  up  and 
look  at  yourself,  and  say,  **I  believe  I  am  perfectly  fulfilling  my  destiny"? 
I  b^  tnis  morning  to  interject  that  quiet  **  but,''  right  into  the  middle 
of  your  busy  life,  and  ask  from  you  space  for  consideration,  a  pause  for 
Hie  voice  of  wisdom,  that  a  hearing  may  be  granted  her.  Business  ? 
Litour  ?  Yes,  but  there  is  a  higher  bread  to  be  earned,  and  there  is  a 


568  METROPOLITAN  TABEBNAGLE  PULPIT. 

higher  life  to  be  considered.  Hence  the  Lord  puts  it,  *'  Laboar  not  for 
the  meat  that  perisheth/'  that  is  to  say,  not  for  that  first  and  foremoBt ; 
"  bnt  for  that  which  endureth  nnto  life  eternal."  Gud  hath  made  man 
that  he  may  glorify  liim  ;  and  whatever  else  man  accomplishes,  if  be 
attains  not  to  this  end,  his  life  is  a  disastrous  failnre.  Bat  a  man  wiQ 
fail  to  reach  that  end,  and  make  eternal  shipwreck,  unless  he  comes  to  sit 
at  Jesus'  feet ;  there  and  there  only  can  he  learn  how  to  sanctifj  his 
business  and  to  consecrate  his  labour,  and  so  bring  forth  onto  God, 
through  his  grace,  that  which  is  due  to  him. 

Now,  I  have  spoken  thus  to  the  busy,  bnt  I  might  speak,  and  I 
should  have  certainly  as  good  a  claim  to  do  so,  to  those  who  are  loven 
of  pleasure.  They  are  not  cumbered  with  much  serving  ;  rather^  thejr 
laugh  at  those  who  cumber  themselves  about  anything.  They  arc 
merry  as  the  birds,  their  life  is  as  the  flight  of  a  butterfly,  which  lightly 
floats  from  flower  to  flower,  according  to  its  own  sweet  will;  with 
neither  comb  to  make,  nor  hive  to  guard.  Now,  thou  gay  young  man, 
what  doth  Solomon  say  to  thee  ?  **  Rejoice,  0  young  man,  in  thy 
youth  ;  and  let  thy  heart  cheer  thee  in  the  days  of  thy  youth  ;  huT— 
there  comes  in  a  pause,  and  the  cool  hand  of  wisdom  is  laid  npon  the 
hot  brow  of  follv,  and  the  vouth  is  asked  to  think  awhile — ^**  but  know 
thou,  that  for  all  these  things,  God  will  bring  thee  into  judgment."  It 
cannot  be  that  an  immortal  spirit  was  made  for  frivolities  ;  a  soul  im- 
mortal  spending  all  her  fires  on  the  playthings  of  the  world,  "  resembles 
ocean  into  tempest  toss'd,  to  waft  a  feather,  or  to  drown  a  fly."  So 
great  a  thing  as  an  immortal  soul  could  not  have  been  made  by  God, 
with  no  higher  object  than  to  spend  itself  upon  trifles  light  as  air. 
Oh,  pause  a  while,  thou  careless,  godless  one,  and  hear  the  voice  that 
saith  unto  thee,  "  but."  There  is  something  more  than  the  fool's 
laugh,  all  thin^rs  are  not  a  comedy;  death  is  serious,  and  heaven  and 
hell ;  and  should  not  life  be  ?  The  charms  of  music^  the  merriment  of 
the  gay  assembly,  the  beauties  of  art,  and  the  delights  of  banqueting — 
there  must  be  something  more  for  thee  than  these;  and  something 
more  must  be  required  of  thee  than  that  thou  shouldst  waste  from  mom 
to  night  thy  precious  time  upon  nothing  but  to  please  thyself.  Stop, 
stop,  and  let  this  admonitory  *'  but  '*  sound  in  thine  ears. 

1  take  liberty,  moreover,  to  address  the  same  word  to  religions  people, 
who,  perhaps,  need  it  as  much  as  others.  They  will,  of  course,  agree 
with  anything  I  can  say  about  the  mere  worldling  or  the  profligate  ; 
but,  will  they  listen  to  me  when  I  say  to  them,  "You  are  very  diligent 
in  your  religion,  you  are  attentive  to  all  its  outward  rites  and  cere- 
monies, you  believe  the  articles  of  your  church,  you  practise  the  cere- 
monies ordained  by  its  rulers;  but,  but,  do  you  know  that  all  this  is 
nothing,  unless  you  sit  at  Jesus'  fee  ?"  We  may  do  what  the  church 
tells  us,  and  never  do  what  Christ  tells  us,  for  these  may  be  different 
things ;  and  the  church  is  not  our  Saviour,  but  Christ.  Yfe  may  believe 
what  a  certain  creed  tells  us,  but  not  believe  what  Jesos  teaches  ;  for 
our  creed  and  Christ  may  be  two  very  diff'erent  things.  Ay,  and  we 
may  believe  even  what  the  Bible  itself  teaches  to  us,  or  think  we  believe 
it;  but,  if  our  heart  has  never  made  submission  to  the  Teacher  himself, 
so  as  to  sit  at  his  feet,  and  receive  the  truth  obediently  from  him«  our 
religion  is  altogether  vain.     Traditional  religion  is  not  sabmisskm  to 


THE  ONE  THING  NEEDFUL.  569 

Christ,  but  to  custom.  Obedience  to  a  denomination  is  not  obedience 
to  JesQS  himself.  How  I  wish  that  all  professing  Christians  would 
bring  themselves  to  an  examination,  and  enquii*e,  "  Do  I  really  believe 
in  the  person  of  my  Lord,  and  accept  him  as  my  Teacher  ?  Do  I  study 
the  Word  of  God  to  learn  the  truth  from  him,  and  not  accept  it  blindly 
and  at  second  hand  from  my  minister,  or  my  parents,  or  the  church  of 
the  nation,  or  the  creed  of  ray  family  ?"  We  go  to  Jesus  for  teaching, 
desiring  with  our  hearts  to  be  taught  by  his  book  and  his  Spirit,  cheer- 
fully agreeing  in  all  things  to  shape  our  faith  to  his  declaration,  and 
our  life  to  his  rule.  For  us,  there  must  be  no  spiritual  law-giver,  and 
no  infallible  Rabbi,  but  the  Blessed  One,  wliom  Magdalene  called 
**  Rabboiii/*  and  whom  Thomas  saluted  as,  *'  My  Lord  and  my  God." 

Yes,  and  let  me  say,  even  to  those  of  you  who  can  honestly  declare 
tliat  Clirist  is  your  sole  confidence,  it  is  possible  for  you  to  forget  the 
necessity  of  sitting  at  his  feet.  You,  dear  brethren,  are  looking  to  his 
precious  blood  alone  f«r  your  salvation,  and  his  name  is  sweet  to  you, 
and  you  desire  in  all  things  to  be  conformed  to  his  will.  So  far  it  is  well 
with  yon,  for  in  this  you  have  a  measure  of  sitting  at  his  feet;  bui 
BO  had  Martha ;  she  loyed  her  Lord,  and  she  knew  his  word,  and  she 
was  a  saved  soul,  for  **  Jesus  loved  Mary,  and  Martha^  and  Lazarus  ;'* 
but-  you  have  not  perhaps  so  much  of  this  needful  thing  as  Mary 
had,  and  as  you  ought  to  have.  You  have  been  very  busy  this  week,  and 
have  been  drifted  from  your  moorings ;  you  have  not  lived  with  your 
Lord  in  conscious  fellowship;  you  have  been  full  of  care  and  empty 
of  prayer;  you  have  not  committed  your  sorrows  to  your  loving 
friend  ;  you  have  blundered  on  in  duty  without  asking  his  guidance  or 
assistance;  you  have  not  maintained,  in  your  Christian  service,  the  com- 
munion of  your  spirit  with  the  Well-Beloved,  and,  if  such  has  been  the 
case,  let  me  say  '^  but"  to  you,  and  ask  you,  as  you  sit  here  this 
morning,  to  make  a  little  stop  in  your  Sunday-school  teaching  or  your 
street  preaching,  or  whatever  else  it  is  that  you  are  so  laudably  engaged 
in,  and  say  to  yourself :  **  To  me,  as  a  worker,  the  one  thing  needful  is 
to  keep  near  my  Lord,  and  I  must  not  so  suffer  the  watering  of  ochers 
to  occupy  me,  as  to  neglect  my  own  heart,  lest  I  should  have  to  say 
*  woe  is  me,  they  made  me  keeper  in  the  vineyards,  but  my  own  vine- 
yard have  I  not  kept.' "  To  the  saints,  as  well  as  to  others,  the  one 
thing  needful  is  to  sit  at  Jesus'  feet.  We  are  to  be  always  learners  and 
lovers  of  Jesus.  Departure  from  him,  and  independence  of  him,  let 
them  not  once  be  named  among  you.  It  is  weakness,  sickness,  sin,  and 
sorrow  for  a  believer  to  leave  his  Lord  and  become  either  his  own  leader 
or  reliance.  We  are  only  safe  while  we  remain  humbly  and  gladly 
subservient  to  him.  You  see,  then,  thai  this  word  ^^bul**  suggests  a 
very  useful  and  salutary  pause  to  us  all.  May  God  help  us  to  benefit 
thereby. 

IL  Secondly,  our  text  speaks  of  necessity — one  thing  is  a  necessity. 
If  this  be  proven,  it  overrides  all  other  considerations.  We  are  nearly 
right  when  we  say  proverbially,  **  Necessity  has  no  law."  If  a  man 
steal,  and  it  be  found  that  he  was  dying  of  hunger,  he  is  always  half 
forgiven,  and  charity  has  been  known  to  excuse  him  altogether.  Neces- 
sity has  been  frequently  accepted  as  a  good  excuse  for  what  else  might 
not  have  been  tolerated;  and  when  a  thing  is  right,  and  necessity  backs 


570  MKTllOPOLITAN  TABKRKACLE  PULPrT. 

it,  then  indeed  the  right  becomes  imperative,  and  pushes  to  the  front 
to  force  its  way.  Necessity,  like  hunj^er,  breaks  through  stone  walla. 
The  text  claims  for  sitting  at  Jesus'  feet  that  it  is  the  first  and  0DI7 
necessity.  Now,  I  see  all  around  me  a  crowd  of  things  alluring  and  fas- 
cinating. Pleasure  calls  to  me ;  I  hear  her  syren  song — but  I  reply,  "  I 
cannot  regard  thee,  for  necessity  presses  upon  me  to  hearken  to  another 
voice.'*  Philosophy  and  learning  charm  me :  fain  would  I  yield  my  heart 
to  them ;  but,  while  I  am  yet  unsaved,  the  one  thing  needful  demands  idt 
first  care,  and  wisdom  bids  me  give  it.  Not  that  we  love  human  learn- 
ing less,  but  eternal  wisdom  more.  Pearls  ?  Yes.  Emeralds  ?  Yes; 
but  bread,  in  God's  name — bread  at  once,  when  I  am  starving  in  the 
desert !  What  is  the  use  of  ingots  of  jrold,  or  bars  of  silver,  or  caskets 
of  jewels,  when  food  is  wanting  ?  If  one  thing  be  needftil,  it  devours, 
like  Aaron's  rod,  all  the  matters  which  are  merely  pleasurable.  All  the 
fascinating  things  on  earth  may  go,  but  needful  things  we  must  hafe. 
If  you  are  wise,  you  will  evermore  prefer  the  necessary  to  the  dazzlio<). 

About  us  arc  a  thousand  things  cnfariglin/j.  This  world  is  very  much 
like  the  pools  we  have  heard  of  in  India,  in  which  grows  a  long  grass  of 
BO  clinging  a  character  that,  if  a  man  once  falls  into  the  water,  it  is  almost 
certain  to  be  his  death,  for  only  with  the  utmost  difliculty  could  he  be 
rescued  from  the  meshes  of  the  deadly,  weedy  net,  which  immediately 
wraps  itself  around  him.  This  world  is  even  thus  entangling.  All  the 
efforts  of  grace  are  needed  to  preserve  men  from  being  ensnared  with  the 
deccitfulness  of  riches  and  the  cares  of  this  life.  The  ledger  demands  yon, 
the  day-book  wants  you,  the  shop  reauircs  you,  the  warehouse  bell  rings 
for  you;  the  theatre  invites,  the  ball-room  calls:  you  must  live,  you 
say,  and  you  must  have  a  little  enjoyment,  and,  consequently,  you  give 
your  heart  to  the  world.  These  things,  I  sav,  are  very  entangling;  hot 
we  must  be  disentangled  from  them,  for  we  cannot  afford  to  lose  our 
souls.  **  What  shall  it  profit  a  man  if  he  gain  the  whole  world  and 
lose  his  own  soul  ?  "  If  a  ship  is  going  down,  and  a  passenger  has  his  gold 
in  a  bug  about  him,  and  he  has  upon  him  a  costly  cloak,  see  how  heactJB. 
Off  goes  the  garment  when  he  knows  that  he  cannot  i)ossibly  swim  with  it 
upon  him.  No  matter  though  it  be  lined  with  miniver  and  be  made  of  cost- 
liest stuff,  olf  he  throws  it ;  and,  as  for  his  bags  of  treasure,  with  many  a 
regi-et  he  flings  them  down  upon  the  deck,  for  his  life  is  dearer  than  they. 
If  he  may  but  save  his  life,  he  is  willing  to  lose  all  besides.  Oil,  sirsi 
for  the  one  thing  needful,  all  entangling  things  must  be  given  up.  You 
must  lay  aside  every  weight,  and  the  sin  that  doth  so  easily  beset  you, 
if  by  any  means  the  one  thing  needful  may  be  yours. 

Ihere  are  many  things  very  ptizzU?ig,  and  some  people  have  a 
strange  delight  in  being  bewildered.  It  is  astonishing  the  many  letters 
I  receive  and  interviews  I  am  asked  to  give,  in  order  to  adjust  iu  people's 
minds  the  doctrine  of  predestination  and  the  fact  of  free  agency ;  and 
equally  remarkable  is  the  way  in  which  young  people,  and  old  people 
too,  will  pick  out  extremely  difficult  texts,  perhaps  relating  to  the 
Second  Advent,  or  to  the  battle  of  Armageddon,  and  they  must  needs 
have  these  opened  up  to  them  before  they  will  believe  the  gospel  I 
think  it  utterly  useless  to  begin  upon  such  things  with  those  who  aw 
unsaved.  One  thing  is  needful,  sir,  and  that  is  by  no  means  a  pusslin^ 
matter ;  it  is  plainly  this,  that  thou  submic  thyself  to  Jesos  OhriBt  and 


J 


THl  ONE  THING  NEEDFUL.  571 

sit  at  his  feet.  That  is  needful :  as  for  the  doctrines  of  election  and  the 
second  advent,  they  are  important,  but  they  are  neither  the  most 
essential  nor  the  most  pressing.  The  one  thinp:  needful  for  a  seeking 
soul  is  that  it  receive  Jesus  and  become  submissive  to  him,  setting 
as  a  disciple  at  his  feet  and  as  a  servant  doinp:  his  will.  It  is  true 
there  is  the  ninth  chapter  of  Romans  in  the  Bible,  and  a  precious 
chapter  it  is :  but  the  seeking  sinner  should  take  care  to  read  first  the 
third  chapter  of  John,  and  till  he  has  mastered  that,  he  had  better  let 
the  Romans  alone.  Go  firat  to  the  business  which  concerns  your  sal- 
vation ;  attend  to  that,  and  when  all  is  right  with  you,  then,  at 
Jesus'  feet,  you  will  be  in  the  best  possible  position  to  learn  all  that 
can  be  learned  of  the  higher  mysteries  and  the  deeper  truths. 

Moreover,  there  is  much  that  is  desirahls,  very  desirable — desirable 
in  the  highest  spiritual  seuse  ;  but  it  must  bo  second  to  that  which 
is  needful.  If  I  read  the  experience  of  men  who  have  known  their 
own  hearts  and  mourned  before  the  Lord,  I  wish  that  I  had  as  deep 
a  sense  of  sin  as  they  had  ;  or,  I  read  the  story  of  saints  who  have  lived 
the  angelic  life,  and  even  here  on  earth  have  dwelt  with  Christ  and 
walked  the  golden  streets  in  fellowship  with  him,  I  wish  I  could  rise  to 
all  their  heights ;  but  for  all  that,  if  my  soul  is  still  polluted  with  sin, 
for  me  the  one  thing  needful  is  cleansing  by  the  Redeemer's  blood;  I 
must  at  once  believingly  yield  to  Jesus,  for  this  is  of  necessity, 
and  the  desirable  things  will  come  to  me  afterwards,  if  I  sit  down  at 
Jesus'  feet  So  near  the  source  of  all  good  things,  it  will  be  easy  to 
be  enriched  with  all  knowledge  and  grace,  but  our  first  business  is  to 
get  there,  and  by  the  Holy  Spirit's  blessing  we  may  come  there  without 
either  the  deep  experience  or  the  elevated  feelings  we  have  described ;  we 
may  come  just  as  we  are,  all  guilty  and  lost,  and  submit  ourselves  to  the 
Saviour.  Having  done  that,  we  are  in  the  best  position  for  spiritual  at- 
tainments— ^yea,  they  shall  surely  be  ours.  Let  the  heart  yield  itself  to 
Jesus,  and  all  is  well.  When  he  becomes  our  leader  and  commander, 
our  sole  reliance  and  sure  confidence,  it  is  well  with  us  :  we  have  all  that 
is  needful,  and  the  pledge  of  ail  that  is  desirable. 

Tell  us  it  is  a  necessity,  and  everything  else  must  give  way :  necessity 
overrules  all  else.  Now,  why  is  it  that  sitting  at  Jesus'  feet  is  a  necessity? 
It  is  80,  because  it  is  needful  for  us  to  have  our  sins  forgiven  ;  but  Jesus 
will  never  forgive  the  unhumbled  rebel.  If  he  will  not  take  Jesus  to  be 
a  Master,  the  sinner  cannot  have  him  to  be  a  Saviour.  As  long  as  we 
rebel  against  him,  we  cannot  be  saved  by  him.  Submission,  by  rc'^«entance 
and  faith,  we  must  have,  or  our  transgressions  will  remain  upon  us  to  our 
everlasting  ruin.  It  is  necessary,  because  we  must  have  our  inbred  sins 
overcome ;  but  none  can  stay  corruption  in  a  man  but  Christ,  who  has 
come  to  destroy  the  work  of  the  devil,  and  to  save  his  people  from  their 
sins.  Jesus,  the  seed  of  the  woman,  is  the  only  power  that  can  crush  the 
serpent's  head.  Only  at  the  feet  of  Jesus  can  the  divine  power  be 
gained  which  woriks  in  us  holiness  and  sanctifies  us  practically ;  there- 
fore, as  you  must  be  purified  or  you  cannot  enter  heaven,  you  must  come 
to  Jesus'  feet.  Moreover,  it  is  at  the  feet  of  Jgsus  that  the  soul's 
ignorance  is  removed ;  and  since  ignorance  concerning  ourselves  and 
our  God  must  be  taken  from  us,  we  must  be  taught  of  him.  God 
is  << our  light  and  our  salvation;"  our  light  first,  and  our  salvation 


572  METROPOLITAN  TABEBNACLE  PULPIT. 

in  consequence.  We  must  have  the  light.  The  spiritually  blind  nun 
cannot  enter  heaven,  he  must  have  his  eyes  opened,  bat  Jesus  Am 
can  work  that  miracle  of  grace.  Neither  can  we  receive  true  light  ex* 
cept  ft-om  him,  for  he  is  *'  the  true  light,  that  lighteth  every  mmtbt 
Cometh  into  the  world ;"  none  are  ever  enlightened,  except  by  iuia. 
'*  In  him  is  light — all  light ;  and  the  light  is  the  light  of  men."  Ai 
God  is  the  mind  of  the  world,  he  who  has  not  Ood  is  demented;  ind 
as  Chridt  is  the  light  of  the  world,  he  that  believes  not  in  him  abidekh 
in  darkness  even  until  now.  We  must  come,  then,  and  yield  ornielm 
unreservedly  to  Jesus,  worshipping  him,  trusting  him,  and  obeying  him 
— in  a  word,  we  must  sit  at  his  feet,  and  hear  his  word ;  otherwise^  ve 
shall  abide  in  darkness  and  in  death. 

In  order  to  enter  heaven,  it  is  necessary  that  oar  natore  should 
become  like  the  nature  of  Christ.  This  earth  is  for  those  who  bear  tlie 
image  of  the  first  Adam ;  but  the  new  heaven  and  the  new  earth  are  for 
those  who  bear  the  image  of  the  second  Adam.  We  mast^  by  some 
means,  acquire  the  nature  of  the  second  and  heavenly  Adam,  and  thii 
must  be  wrought  in  us  by  regeneration,  and  developed  by  acqaaiotan(Se 
with  him.  By  sitting  at  Jiis  feet,  and  beholding  him,  we  become 
changed  into  the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory  even  as  by  the  Spirit 
of  the  Lord.  If  we  reject  the  Lord  Jesus  as  our  trust,  teacher,  and 
examplur,  we  have  no  new  life,  we  arc  not  new  creatures  in  Christ,  and 
we  can  never  be  admitted  within  the  holy  gates  where  those  alone  dwell 
who  are  fashioned  after  his  likeness.  We  must,  then«  sit  at  his  feet;  it 
is  absolutely  necessary,  and,  without  it,  our  whole  life  will  be  a  com- 
plete failure ;  we  may  make  money,  but  we  shall  lose  oar  floals;  we 
may  gain  honour,  but  shall  have  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God; 
we  may  enjoy  pleasure,  but  we  shall  forfeit  the  pleasares  which  are 
at  God's  right  hand  for  evermore;  we  may  have  done  oar  ooantij 
some  service,  but  to  our  God,  and  the  higher  country,  we  shall  hafe 
ren«iered  no  service,  for  we  cannot  serve  God  if  we  will  not  obey 
Christ.  '*  He  that  honoureth  not  the  Son,  hononreth  not  the  Father 
which  hath  sent  him/'  This  life  is  a  blank,  a  long  rcbellioo,  to  tiie 
man  who  submits  not  to  Jesus,  and  the  life  for  ever  hereafter  will 
be  darkness  and  confusion ;  as  darkness  itself,  a  land  of  sorrow,  and  of 
weeping,  and  of  wailing,  and  of  gnashing  of  teeth,  a  land  of  despair, 
upon  which  no  star  shall  ever  shine,  or  sun  shall  ever  rise.  Woe,  woe, 
woe,  woe  to  the  Godless,  Christless  spirit  that  passeth  across  the  rirer 
of  death  without  a  hope.  Woe,  woe,  woe,  woe  eternally  to  the  loal  that 
will  not  sit  at  the  feet  of  Jesus !  he  shall  be  trodden  beneath  his 
feet  in  his  anger,  and  crushed  in  his  hot  displeasure.  God  grant  that 
may  never  be  our  portion.  To  sit  at  Jesus*  feet  is  the  one  thinf 
needful  then. 

And,  brethren,  let  me  just  say,  and  leave  this  point,  it  is  needfhito 
every  on?  of  you.  It  is  not  some  of  us  who  must  be  there,  bat  all.  The 
wisest  must  become  fools  to  learn  of  him,  or  fools  they  are;  the  most 
educated  and  cultured  mind  must  submit  to  this  farther  caltare,  orelie 
it  is  nothing  but  a  barren  waste  in  his  sight.  One  thing  is  a  neoessi^r 
to  you  all,  high  or  low,  rich  or  poor,  queen  or  beggar — yoa  matt  lit  st 
Jesus*  feet ;  and  all  alike  must  accept  his  teaching,  or  yoa  know  notIuv( 
that  can  save  you. 


J 


TfiB  O^E  THING  NEBBFtTIi.  573 

S6me  things  in  this  world  are  necessary,  after  a  measure,  bnt  this  is 
necessarj  without  measure;  infinitely  needful  is  it  that  you  sit  at  Jesus' 
feet,  needful  now,  needful  in  life ;  needful  in  life  for  peace,  in  death  for 
rest,  and  in  eternity  for  bliss.  This  is  needful  always.  Many  things 
have  their  nses  for  youth,  others  come  not  into  value  till  old  age  ;  but 
one  thing,  the  one  thing,  is  needful  for  childhood,  and  needful  for  palsied 
age  ;  it  is  needful  for  the  ruddy  cheek,  and  the  active  limb,  andneedfiil 
upon  the  sick  bed  ;  needful  in  the  world,  and  in  the  church,  needful 
everywhere,  and  always.  In  the  highest  and  most  emphatic  sense, 
*^  one  thing  is  needful." 

III.  Thus  much  about  the  necessity,  the  next  word  is  coNCENTRATioir : 
'*  On$  thing  is  needful."  I  am  glaid  it  says  *'  one  thing,"  because  a 
division  of  ends  and  objects  is  always  weakening.  A  man  cannot 
follow  two  things  welL  Our  life-flood  suffices  not  to  fill  two  streams  or 
three;  there  is  only  enough  water,  as  it  were,  in  our  life's  brooklet,  to 
torn  one  wheel.  It  is  a  great  pity  when  a  man  fritters  away  his 
energies  by  being  "everything  by  turns,  and  nothing  long;"  trying  all 
things,  and  mastering  nothing.  Oh,  soul,  it  is  well  for  thee  that  there 
18  only  one  thing  in  this  world  that  is  absolutely  necessary,  give  thy 
whole  soul  to  that.  If  other  things  are  necessary  in  a  secondary 
place,  "Seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his  righteousness,  and  all 
these  shall  be  added  nnto  you." 

One  thing  is  needful,  and  this  is  well  arranged,  for  we  cannot  follow 
two  things.  If  Christ  be  one  of  them,  we  cannot  follow  another. 
Is  it  not  written,  "  No  man  can  serve  two  masters,  either  he  will  bate 
the  one  and  love  the  other,  or  cleave  to  the  one  and  despise  the  other. 
Te  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon."  Not  only  would  it  be  very 
weakening  to  yon  to  attempt  to  serve  both,  but  it  is  absolutely  im- 
possible that  you  should  do  so.  Jesus  Christ  is  a  monopoliser  of  human 
nearts,  he  will  never  accept  a  portion  of  our  manhood.  He  bought  us 
altogether,  and  he  will  have  the  whole  of  our  personality.  Christ  must  be 
everything,  or  he  will  be  nothing.  He  does  not  love  Christ  who  loves 
anything  as  well  as  Christ,  neither  does  he  trust  him  who  trusts  in  any- 
thing besides.  Christ  must  reign  alone.  **  Jesus  only,"  must  be  the 
motto  of  our  spirits.  It  is  well  for  us,  therefore,  that  only  one  thing  is 
necessary,  for  only  one  thing  is  possible. 

It  is  an  unspeakable  mercy  that  the  one  thing  needful  is  a  very 
simple  one.  Little  child,  thou  couldst  not  climb  the  mountain,  but 
Ihon  canst  sit  down  ac  Jesus'  feet;  thou  canst  not  understand  hard 
doctrine,  bnt  thou  canst  love  him  who  said,  "Suffer  the  little  children 
to  come  unto  me,  and  forbid  them  not,  for  of  such  is  the  kingdom  of 
heaven."  Unlearned  man,  thou  who  haat  no  time  to  acquire  earthly 
lore,  if  the  one  thing  needful  were  something  that  belonged  only  to  the 
learned,  alas  for  thee ;  but  if  thou  canst  not  teach,  it  is  not  needful  that 
thon  shouldst,  it  is  only  needful  that  thou  shouldst  learn.  Take  the 
Incarnate  Wisdom  to  be  thy  Master,  and  sit  as  a  little  child  at  his  feet 
to  learn  with  all  thine  heart  That  is  all  he  asks  of  thee.  Men  will 
have  it  that  they  must  do  something  to  be  saved,  they  must  fret  and 
worry  like  Martha,  but  after  all,  the  right  way  is  to  end  your  doing 
and  fretting  by  sitting  down  content  with  JeKus'  doing,  satisfied  with 
his  righteousness  and  with  the  merit  of  his  precious  blood.    The  one 


574  METBOPOUTAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

thing  needfal  is  yery  easy,  excepfc  to  prond  hearts,  which  caimot  farook  to 
accept  everything  gratis,  and  to  be  beholden  to  sovereign  mercy.  To 
the  poor  in  spirit  it  is  not  only  simple  but  sweet  to  sit  at  Jesns'  fe^ 
I  would  be  nothing  but  what  he  makes  me,  I  would  have  nothing  bat 
what  he  gives  me,  I  would  ask  nothing  but  what  he  promises  me,  I 
would  trust  in  nothing  but  what  he  has  done  for  mc,  and  I  would  denrs 
nothing  but  what  he  has  prepared  for  me.  To  sit  at  Jesna'  feet  in 
humble  submission  and  quiet  rest,  he  the  master  and  I  the  little  child, 
I  the  vessel  waiting  to  be  filled,  and  he  my  fulness,  I  the  mown  grass, 
and  he  the  falling  dew,  I  the  rain  drop,  and  he  the  sun  that  makes  me 
glisten  in  life  with  diamond  brilliance,  and  then  exhales  me  in  death  to 
be  absorbed  in  him ;  this  is  all  in  all  to  me. 

Let  us  remark  tliat.,  though  this  is  only  one  thing,  and  so  ooncen- 
trated,  yet  it  is  also  comprehensive  and  contains  many  things.  Imagine 
not  that  to  sit  at  Jesus'  feet  is  a  very  small,  unmeaning  thing.  It  means 
peace,  for  they  who  submit  to  Jesus  find  peace  through  his  piecioDS 
olood.  It  means  holiness,  for  those  who  learn  of  Jesus  learn  no  m,  bat 
are  instmcted  in  things  lovely  and  of  good  repute.  It  means  skength, 
for  they  that  sit  with  Jesus,  and  feed  upon  him,  are  girded  with  hi% 
strength ;  the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  their  strength.  It  means  wisdooi, 
for  they  that  learn  of  the  Son  of  God  understand  more  than  the  ancients, 
because  they  keep  his  statutes.  It  means  zeal,  for  the  love  of  Christ 
fires  hearts  that  live  upon  it,  and  they  that  are  much  with  Jesus  become 
like  Jesus,  so  that  the  zeal  of  the  Lord's  house  eats  them  up.  If  we 
say  that  in  an  army  the  one  thing  needful  is  loyalty  to  the  sovereign, 
we  know  what  that  means;  for  the  loyal  soldier  will  be  sore  to  be  obe- 
dient to  his  oihccis,  and  if  attached  to  his  queen,  he  will  be  brave  in  the 
day  of  battle,  and  do  his  duty  well.  If  we  said  that  the  one  thing  need- 
ful in  a  family  was  love,  we  should  not  have  required  a  small  thing  ; 
for  love  will  place  husband  and  wife  in  their  true  position ;  love  will 
produce  obedience  in  children,  and  diligence  in  servants.  Let  love 
permeate  everything,  and  other  virtues  will  grow  out  of  it,  as  flowers 
spring  from  the  soil.  So  when  we  say  that  sitting  at  Jesus'  feet  is 
the  one  thing  needful,  we  have  not  uttered  a  mere  truism  :  it  compre- 
hends a  world  of  blessings. 

And,  hero  would  I  address  a  word  to  the  church  of  God  in  this 
country  at  this  present  time.  She,  too,  is  as  Martha,  cumbered  with 
much  serving.  It  were  her  wisdom,  and  her  strength,  if  she  would  be- 
come more  like  Mary,  and  sit  at  Jesus'  feet.  Just  now  we  need  revival. 
Oh  that  God  would  send  it !  Oh  for  a  mighty  flood  of  spiritual  in- 
fluences, that  would  bear  the  stranded  churches  right  out  into  a  sea  of 
usefulness.  But  how  can  we  get  revival?  AVe  shall  have  it,  brethren, 
when  wo  commune  with  Christ.  When  the  saints  habitually  sit  at 
Jesus*  feet  they  will  be  revived,  and  of  necessity  the  revival  will  spread 
from  them,  and  the  hearts  of  sinners  will  be  touched. 

There  is  great  talk  now-a-days  of  union ;  the  walls  of  the  various  churches 
are  to  l»e  broken  down,  and  the  denominations  are  to  be  blended.  Think 
not  of  it  in  such  a  fashion  ;  the  only  union  possible,  or  dei^irable^is  that  we 
all  unite  to  sit  at  Jesus'  feet.  It  is  not  allowable  that  we  concede  one 
truth  and  you  another ;  that  is  not  natural  charity,  but  common 
treason  to  Christ.    We  have  no  right  to  yield  an  atom  of  the  truth  of 


THE  ONE  THING  NEEDFUL.  576 

God,  under  the  pretence  of  charity.  Truth  is  no  property  of  ours;  we 
are  only  God*s  stewards,  and  it  behoves  us  to  be  faithful  to  our  trust. 
Neither  one  church  nor  another  has  any  right  to  bate  its  testimony  one 
jot,  if  it  be  true.  To  alter  the  statute-book  of  Christ  is  blasphemy. 
True  union  will  come  when  all  the  churches  learn  of  Christ,  for  Christ 
does  not  teach  two  things  opposed  to  each  other.  There  are  not  two 
baptisms  in  the  Bible ;  we  shall  not  find  two  sets  of  dogmas  diametri- 
cally opposite  to  each  other.  If  we  give  up  the  yarious  things  that  are 
of  man,  and  hold  fast  each  of  us  only  that  which  is  of  God,  we  shall 
be  united  in  principle  and  in  doctrine;  and  **  One  Lord,  one  faith, 
one  baptism"  will  once  again  be  emblazoned  upon  the  banners  of  the 
church  of  God.  Sit  at  Jesus'  feet,  0  thou  church  of  Christ,  and  true 
unity  will  come  to  thee. 

We  hear  a  great  deal  about  the  necessity  of  controversy.  "We  ought 
to  be  ready  to  answer  all  that  infidels  object,  so  wise  men  say.  Every 
absurdity  of  every  fool  we  are  to  sit  down  and  reply  to,  and  when  this 
labour  of  Hercules  is  accomplished,  we  are  to  begin  again,  for  by  tliat 
time  new  whimsies  will  be  in  men's  brains,  and  new  lies  will  have  been 
begotten.  Is  this  so  ?  Am  I  to  do  nothing  in  winning  souls  and 
glorifying  God,  but  to  spend  all  ray  time  in  finding  wind  for  the 
nostrils  of  the  wild  asses  of  the  desert?  Well,  let  those  do  it  who 
please,  we  believe  that  the  settlement  of  all  controversy  in  the  church  and 
lor  the  church  would  come  from  the  Lord  himself,  if  we  believed  more 
fully  in  him,  and  waited  more  upon  him  for  guidance,  and  if  we  preached 
the  gospel  more  in  his  own  strength,  and  in  his  own  Spirit. 

And,  as  for  missions :  we  appoint  our  committees,  we  amend  our 
plans,  and  suggest  schemes.  All  very  well  and  good;  but  missions 
will  never  flourish  till  the  church,  with  regard  to  missions,  sits 
at  Jesus'  feet  She  will  never  convert  the  heathen  in  her  own  way : 
God  will  give  success  only  when  we  work  in  his  way.  It  may  be  very 
useful  to  make  translations,  and  exceedingly  beneficial  to  keep  schools  ; 
but  if  I  read  my  Bible  right,  it  is  not  Christ's  way.  "  Go  ye  into  all 
the  world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature,"  is  the  law  of  Jesus 
Christ ;  and  when  the  church  everywhere,  at  home  and  abroad,  takes 
more  earnestly  to  preaching,  when  the  testimony  of  the  truth  is  per- 
petual and  incessant,  in  simple  language,  and  popular  speech,  then 
Christ  the  Lord  will  look  upon  the  church  that,  like  Mary,  sits  at  his 
feet,  and  say,  '*  Thou  hast  done  thy  part,"  and  the  blessing  shall  follow. 
"  Thy  work  is  done,  and  I  will  give  thee  thy  reward." 

For  us  all,  beloved,  saints  and  sinners,  one  thing  is  needful :  that 
we  always  sit,  like  Mary,  at  the  Master's  feet. 

lY.  The  last  word  is  immediateness,  and  there  is  no  need  that 
we  say  much  upon  it.  One  thing  is  a  necessity,  a  necessity  not  of 
the  ftiture  only,  but  of  to-day.  It  is  not  written,  "itsAa/Z^dneeoful,"  on 
certain  coming  days,  to  sit  at  Jesus'  feet ;  but  it  is  so  now.  Young 
man,  one  thing  is  necessary  to  you  while  yet  young ;  do  not  postpone  it 
till  advanced  years.  Christian,  it  is  needAil  for  thee  to-day  to  have 
communion  with  Christ ;  do  not  think  of  it  as  indispensable  to-morrow 
or  to-night  at  the  communion  table ;  it  is  needful  now.  There  are 
dangers  thou  canst  not  see,  which  can  only  be  warded  off  by  present 
and  immediate  fellowship  with  Christ. 


676  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

"One  thing  is  needful.*'  It  is  not  that  it  was  needfal  in  the  past, 
indeed  it  was  so ;  but  it  is  needful  now.  It  was  needfal  for  me  in  the 
days  of  mj  sinfulness  to  submit  to  Christ,  it  is  equally  needful  for  me 
now.  However  much  you  advance,  0  believer,  you  never  advance 
beyond  this ;  whatever  your  experience,  or  your  information,  or  your 
rii^eness  for  glory,  it  is  needful  still  to  sit  at  Jesus'  feet.  Yon  shall  never 
(ret  into  a  higher  class  in  the  school  of  wisdom  than  is  the  class  \7hich 
Christ  teaches;  his  is  the  infant  class  in  the  school,  but  it  is  the  hi^lie^it 
class  also.  It  is  always  needful,  every  momeut  needful,  that  we  eit  at 
Jesus'  feet. 

It  is  needful,  I  have  already  said,  to  the  sinner.  Life,  and  health, 
and  peace  will  come  to  him  when  he  becomes  a  disciple  of  the  Crncified. 
Would  God  that  he  might  be  made  so  this  very  morning:.  There  is  life 
in  a  look  at  the  Crucified  One.  To  depend  entirely  upon  the  sinner's 
Saviour  is  the  sinner^s  salvation.  God  brinfj  vou  to  his  feet,  dear 
hearers. 

But,  it  is  equally  needful  for  the  saint.  Covered  with  the  fruiU  of 
righteousness,  his  root  must  still  cling  to  the  riven  rock.  You  most 
never  imagine,  whatever  you  have  done  or  wliPctever  you  have  attainel, 
that  you  are  to  leave  Mary's  seat ;  still  mnst  you  abide  there. 

It  is  the  one  thing  needful  for  the  backslider.  If  you  have  fallen  never 
BO  much,  you  will  rise  again  if  you  come  to  the  Master  submissively  and 
abide  with  him.  It  was  the  mark  of  the  man  who  had  the  devil  cast 
out  of  him,  that  he  was  clothed  and  in  his  right  mind,  sitting  at  the 
feet  of  Jesus ;  it  shall  show  that  you,  too,  are  restored  when  you  learn 
of  your  Lord.  A  seat  at  Jesns*  feet  is  the  place  for  all  Christians  to 
die  in,  they  shall  sleep  sweetly  with  their  heads  in  Jesus*  bosom:  it 
is  the  place  for  them  to  live  in,  for  joy  and  bliss  are  there. 

Beloved,  I  desire  for  myself  never  again  to  be  worried  with  the 
cares  of  this  church,  but  to  take  them  all  to  my  Master,  and  wait  at 
his  feet.  I  desire  not  to  be  troubled  about  my  preaching,  nor  to  be 
cumbered  about  anything  beneath  the  sun,  but  to  leave  all  these,  as 
he  would  have  me  leave  them,  in  his  hands.  You  who  are  working  in 
the  classes,  in  the  school,  or  anywhere  else,  I  pray  you  look  well  toyonr 
fellowship  with  Jesus.  You  cannot  slay  the  enemy  by  throwing  away 
your  sword,  and  nearness  to  Christ  is  your  battle-axe  and  weapons  of  war; 
you  have  lost  your  power  when  you  have  left  your  Lord.  One  thing 
is  needful — let  the  rest  go.  What  if  we  have  not  learning  ? — what  if 
we  have  not  eloquence?  If  we  live  near  to  Christ,  we  have  something 
better  than  all  these;  if  we  abide  in  him,  and  he  abides  in  us,  we  shall 
ask  what  we  will,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  us.  If  his  word  abides  in 
US,  we  shall  go  and  bring  forth  fruit,  and  our  fruit  shall  remain;  if  he 
abides  in  us,  we  shall  enjoy  heaven  on  earth,  and  be  daily  preparing  for 
that  eternal  heaven  which  is  to  be  our  portion.  "  One  thing  is  needful." 
God  grant  it  to  every  one  of  us ! — Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripturk  read  before  Sermon — Luke  x. 


Jll^tt[D|0lttan  iUHknmd^  f  ttl^tt* 


BEAUTY    FOR    ASHES. 


DELIVERED  BY 

C.  H.    SPURGEON, 


AT  THE  METROPOTilTAN  TABEUNACTiK,  NBWINGTON. 


"  To  appoint  unto  them  that  mourn  in  Zion,  to  give  unto  them  beauty  for  ashes, 
the  oil  of  joy  for  mourning,  the  garment  of  praise  for  the  ipirit  of  heaviness ;  that 
they  might  be  called  trees  of  righteousness,  the  planting  of  the  Lord,  that  he  might 
be  glorified." — Isaiah  Ixi.  3. 

When  soldiers  are  on  the  march,  or  advancing  to  the  battle,  military 
men  think  it  wise  to  let  the  trumpet  sound,  that  the  warriors  may  be 
stimulated  by  the  thrilling  music.  Many  a  weary  soldier  has  tramped 
on  with  new  vigour  when  the  band  has  struck  up  a  lively  march,  or 
a  soul-moving  tune.  In  the  midst  of  our  present  Christian  service, 
my  brethren,  when  I  trast  all  of  you  have  resolved  to  come  to  the  help 
of  the  Lord — to  the  help  of  the  Lord  against  the  mighty — we  would 
bid  the  silver  trumpets  of  gospel  promise  sound  aloud,  that  the  hosts 
of  God  as  they  march  on  in  battle  array  may  feel  their  pulses  quickened 
and  their  souls  cheered.  May  times  of  revival  be  also  seasons  of  re- 
freshing. In  times  of  great  toil  and  eminent  service  much  extra 
refreshment  may  with  wisdom  be  dealt  out.  Harvest  men  require 
substantial  meals  amid  their  exhausting  toil ;  and,  as  I  feel  that  the  Lord 
of  the  harvest  would  not  have  his  labourers  treated  niggardly,  I  have  to 
regale  each  of  you  with  a  portion  of  bread,  a  good  piece  of  flesh,  and  a 
flagon  of  wine.  Melchisedek  met  Abraham  with  bread  and  wine — 
not  on  some  fine  holiday  when  he  had  been  musing  in  the  plains 
of  Marare,  but  when  he  returned  from  the  slaughter  of  the  kings. 
After  hard  fighting  comes  sweet  refreshment,  and  any  here  who 
have  striven  diligently  to  serve  the  Master,  and  have  been  pursuing 
their  sncred  calling  even  unto  faintness,  will  be  entitled  to  come  and 
sit  down,  and  partake  of  the  nourishing  bread  and  wine,  which  such 
a  text  as  this  prepares  for  all  the  sons  of  the  Father  of  the  faithful. 
Elijah  ate  of  bread  brought  by  angelic  hands,  for  a  forty  days'  journey 
was  before  him  ;  such  a  trial  of  strength  may  be  ordained  for  brethren 
to  whom  this  word  shall  come.  Precious  promises  are  for  poverty- 
stricken  saints.  The  strong  drink  of  divine  consolation  is  for  the 
heavy  of  heart,  as  saith  Solomon — "  Let  him  drink  and  forget  his 
poverty,  and  remember  his  misery  no  more."    May  he  who  uttered  the 


57S  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

words  which  arc  now  open  before  us  speak  them  with  power  to  the 
heart  of  each  one  here  present.  They  came  from  the  lips  of  Jesai ; 
may  they  drop  again  into  onr  hearts  fresh  from  his  mouth  (that  well  of 
comfort  nndefiled),  and  fall  with  all  their  ancient  life-giving  power. 

We  will  read  our  text  again,  and  then  meditate  thereon.  "To 
appoint  unto  them  that  mourn  in  Zion,  to  give  unto  them  beanty  for 
ashes,  the  oil  of  joy  for  mourning,  the  garment  of  praise  for  the  spirit 
of  heaviness;  that  they  might  be  called  trees  of  righteousness,  the 
planting  of  the  Lord,  that  be  might  be  glorified." 

Our  first  consideration  will  be,  who  glides  this  word  f  Secondly,  h 
whom  doth  he  give  it?  Thirdly,  w/iat  saith  he  in  U?  And,  fourthly, 
wliat  will  come  of  it  f 

I.  First  then,  who  arvES  this  word  ?  It  is  a  word  to  mourners  in 
Zion,  meant  for  their  consolation.  But  who  gives  it  ?  The  answer  is  not 
far  to  seek.  It  comes  from  him  who  said,  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  God 
is  upon  me ;"  "  he  hath  sent  me  to  bind  up  the  broken-hearted."  Now, 
in  a  very  inferior  and  subordinate  sense,  Christian  ministers  have  the 
Spirit  of  God  resting  upon  them,  and  they  are  sent  to  bind  op  the 
broken-hearted ;  but  they  can  only  do  so  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  and  in 
strength  given  from  him.  This  word  is  not  spoken  by  them,  nor  by 
prophets  or  apostles  either,  but  by  the  great  Lord  and  Master  of  apostles 
and  prophets,  and  ministers,  even  by  Jesus  Christ  himself.  If  he 
declares  that  he  will  comfort  us,  then  we  inav  rest  assured  we  shall  be 
comforted  I  The  stars  in  his  right  hand  may  fail  to  penetrate  the  dark- 
ness, but  the  rising  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  effectually  scatters  the 
gloom.  If  the  consolation  of  Israel  himself  comes  forth  for  the  uplift- 
mg  of  his  downcast  people,  then  their  doubts  and  fears  may  well  fij 
apace,  since  his  presence  is  light  and  peace. 

But,  who  is  this  anointed  one  who  comes  to  comfort  mourners  ?  He 
is  described  in  the  preface  to  the  text  as  a  preacher.  "The  Spirit  of 
the  Lord  God  is  upon  me  ;  because  the  Lord  hath  appointed  me  to 
preach  good  tidings  unto  the  meek."  Remember  what  kind  of  preacher 
Jesus  was.  **  Never  man  spake  like  this  man.*'  He  was  a  son  of  con- 
solation indeed.  It  was  said  of  him,  "  A  bruised  reed  shall  he  not  break, 
and  the  smoking  flax  shall  he  not  quench."  He  was  gentleness  itself: 
his  speech  did  not  fall  like  a  hail  shower,  it  dropped  like  the  rain, 
and  distilled  as  the  dew,  as  the  small  rain  upon  the  tender  herb.  He 
came  down  like  the  soft  vernal  shower  upon  the  new  mown-gras8, 
scattering  refreshment  and  revival  wherever  his  words  were  heard.  The 
widow  at  the  gates  of  Nain  dried  her  eyes  when  he  spake,  and  Jaims 
no  longer  mourned  for  his  child.  Magdalene  gave  over  weeping,  and 
Thomas  ceased  from  doubting,  when  Jesus  showed  himself.  Hearj 
hearts  leaped  for  joy,  and  dim  eyes  sparkled  with  delight  at  his  bidding. 
Now,  if  such  be  the  person  who  declares  he  will  comfort  the  broken- 
hearted, if  he  be  such  a  preacher,  we  may  rest  assured  he  will  accom- 
plish his  work. 

In  addition  to  his  being  a  preacher,  he  is  described  as  a  physician, 
"  He  hath  sent  me  to  bind  up  the  broken-hearted."  Some  hearts  want 
more  than  words.  The  choicest  consolations  that  can  be  conveyed  in 
human  speech  will  not  reach  their  case  ;  the  wounds  of  their  hearts  are 
deep,  they  are  not  flesh  cuts,  but  horrible  gashes  which  lay  bare  the 


BEAUTY  FOR  ASHES.  579 

bone,  and  threaten  ere  long  to  kill  unless  they  be  skilfallj  closed.  It 
is,  therefore,  a  great  joy  to  know  that  the  generous  friend  who,  in  the 
text,  promises  to  deal  with  the  sorrowing,  is  fully  competent  to  meet  the 
most  frightful  cases.  Jehovah  Rophi  is  the  name  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth  ; 
he  is  in  his  own  person  the  Lord  that  healeth  us.  He  is  the 
beloved  physician  of  men's  souls.  "By  his  stripes  we  are  healed." 
Himself  took  our  infirmities,  and  bare  our  sicknesses,  and  he  is  able 
now  with  a  word  to  heal  all  our  diseases,  whatever  they  may  be.  Joy 
to  you,  ye  Fons  of  mourning;  congratulation  to  you,  ye  daughters  of 
despondency :  he  who  comes  to  comfort  you  can  not  only  preach  with 
his  tongue,  but  he  can  bind  up  with  his  hand.  "  He  healeth  the 
broken  in  heart,  and  bindeth  up  their  wounds.  He  telleth  the  number 
of  the  stars ;  he  calleth  them  all  by  their  names.*' 

As  if  this  were  not  enough,  our  gracious  helper  is  next  described  as  a 
liberator.  **  He  hath  sent  me  to  proclaim  libeity  to  the  captives,  and  the 
opening  of  the  prison  to  them  that  are  bound."  There  were  many  downcast 
persons  in  Israel  in  the  olden  times— persons  who  had  become  bankrupt, 
and,  therefore,  had  lost  their  estates,  and  had  even  sunk  yet  further  into 
debt,  titt  they  were  obliged  to  sell  their  children  into  slavery,  and  to  become 
themselves  bondsmen.  Their  yoke  was  very  heavy,  and  their  trouble  was 
very  sore.  But  the  fiftieth  year  came  -round,  and  never  was  there  heard 
music  so  sweet  in  all  Judaea's  land,  as  when  the  silver  trumpet  was  taken 
down  on  the  jubilee  morn,  and  a  loud  shrill  blast  was  blown  in  every 
city,  and  hamlet,  and  village,  in  all  Israel,  from  Dan  even  to  Beer-sheba. 
What  meant  that  clarion  sound  ?  It  meant  this:  *'  Israelite,  thou  art  free. 
If  thou  hast  sold  thyself,  go  forth  without  money,  for  the  year  of  jubilee 
has  come."  Go  back,  go  back,  ye  who  have  lost  your  lands;  seek 
out  the  old  homestead,  and  the  acres  from  whence  ye  have  been  driven  : 
they  are  yours  again.  Go  back,  and  plough,  and  sow,  and  reap  once 
more,  ana  sit  each  man  under  his  vine  and  his  fig-tree,  for  all  your 
heritages  are  restored.  This  made  great  joy  among  all  the  tribes,  but 
Jesus  has  come  with  a  similar  messaL^e.  He,  too,  publishes  a  jubilee 
for  bankrupt  and  enslaved  sinners.  He  breaks  the  fetters  of  sin,  and 
gives  believers  the  freedom  of  the  truth.  None  can  hold  in  captivity 
the  souls  whom  Jesus  declares  to  be  the  Lord's  free  men. 

Surely,  if  the  Saviour  has  power,  as  the  text  declares,  to  proclaim 
liberty  to  the  captive,  and  if  he  can  break  open  prison  doors,  and  set 
free  those  convicted  and  condemned,  he  is  just  the  one  who  can  comfort 
your  soul  and  mine,  though  we  be  mourning  in  Zion.  Let  us  rejoice  at 
his  coming,  and  cry  Hosanna,  blessed  is  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of 
the  Lord.  Happy  are  we  that  we  live  in  an  age  when  Jesus  breaks  the 
gates  of  brass  and  cuts  the  bars  of  iron  in  sunder. 

As  if  th  js  were  not  all  and  not  enough,  one  other  matter  is  mentioned 
concerning  our  Lord,  and  he  is  pictured  as  being  sent  as  the  herald  of 
good  iidvujs  of  all  sorts  to  us  the  sons  of  men.  Read  the  second  verse : 
*'  To  proclaim  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord.''  God  has  taken  upon 
himself  human  flesh.  The  infinite  Jehovah  came  down  from  heaven 
and  became  an  infant ;  lived  among  us,  and  then  died  for  us.  Behold 
in  the  person  of  the  incarnate  God  the  sure  pledge  of  divine  benevo- 
lence. "  He  that  spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  freely  delivered  him  up 
for  us  all,  how  shall  he  not  with  him  also  freely  give  us  all  things?  " 


680  METROPOLITAN  TABERNAOLB  PULPIT. 

Beloved,  the  yery  fact  that  a  Saviour  came  to  the  world  should  be  ft 
source  of  hope  to  us,  and  when  we  think  what  a  Saviour  he  was,  hoi 
he  suffered,  how  he  finished  the  work  that  was  given  him  to  do,  and  what 
a  salvation  it  is  which  he  has  wrought  out  for  us,  we  may  well  fed  tliat 
the  comfort  of  mourners  is  work  for  which  he  is  well  anited,  and  whidi 
he  can  execute  most  effectually.  How  beautiful  upon  Olivet  lad 
Calvary  are  the  feet  of  him  that  bringeth,  in  his  person  and  his  work, 
''good  tidings,  that  publisheth  peace,  that  bringeth  good* tidings  of 
good,  that  publisheth  salvation/'  But  I  must  not  linger.  I  have  gpokea 
to  you  enough  to  lead  your  thoughts  to  the  blessed  person  who  here 
declares  that  he  will  comfort  the  mourner.  May  the  Holy  Ghotk 
reveal  him  nnto  you  in  all  the  power  of  his  arm,  the  love  of  his  heart, 
the  virtue  of  his  blood,  the  prevalence  of  his  plea,  the  majesty  of  hii 
exaltation,  and  the  glory  of  his  character. 

II.  Secondly,  TO  whom  is  this  word  spoken?  It  is  spoken  to 
those  who  mourn  in  Zion.  They  are  in  Zion.  They  are  the  Lord's 
people,  but  they  mourn.  To  mourn  is  not  always  a  mark  of  grace. 
Nature  mourns.  Fallen  human  nature  will  have  to  mourn  for  eve*, 
except  grace  shall  chan^^e  it.  But  the  mourning  here  meant  is  a 
mourning  in  Zion — a  mourning  of  gracious  souls.  Let  me  try  and 
describe  what  kind  of  mourning  it  is.  It  assumes  various  shapes.  K 
begins  in  most  hearts  with  hmentniion  overpast  sin,  I  have  broken  God's 
just  commandments,  I  have  done  evil  against  my  God,  I  have  destroyed 
my  soul ;  my  heart  feels  this,  and  bitterly  mourns.  It  is  one  thing 
to  say  formally,  "  I  am  a  miserable  sinner  ;  "  it  is  a  very  different  thing 
to  be  one.  To  say  it  may  be  gross  hypocrisy,  to  feel  it  is  a  mark  of 
grace.  Oh  that  every  one  of  us,  if  we  have  never  felt  mourning  for  wn, 
may  feel  it  at  this  hour.  May  we  mourn  to  think  that  we  have  pierced 
the  Saviour,  that  we  have  transgressed  against  a  God  so  good,  and  a 
Redeemer  so  generous.  Those  who  mourn  for  the  guilt  of  past  sin, 
before  long,  reach  a  higher  point.  Mourners  are  not  suffered  long  to 
tarry ;  grace  takes  their  load  of  guilt  away.  Their  transgressions  are 
covered.  Do  they  leave  off  mourning  then  ?  Oh,  no,  they  mourn  in 
another  way.  There  is  a  sweet  mourning  concerning  mv  past  sin  which 
I  would  never  wish  to  lose.  It  is  forgiven,  every  sin  of  mine  is  blotted 
out,  and  my  soul,  therefore,  with  a  sweet  bitterness,  would  mourn  over 
it  moFO  and  more. 

**  My  sins,  my  sins,  my  Saviour ! 
How  sad  on  thee  they  fall, 
Seen  through  thy  gentle  patien 
I  tenfold  feel  them  all. 

I  know  they  are  forgiven ; 

But  still  their  pain  to  me 
Is  all  the  fprief  and  anguish 

They  laid,  my  Lord,  on  thee." 

This  is  a  kind  of  mourning  which  may  accompany  us  even  to 
heaven's  gates,  and  we  might  almost  regret  to  have  to  part  with  saoh 
a  friend  even  there. 

"  Lord,  let  me  weep,  for  nought  hut  sin, 
And  after  none  but  thee ; 
And  then  I  would- — oh  that  I  might— 
A  constant  weeper  he." 


BEAUTY  FOB  ASHES.  581 

Trne  hearts,  however,  mourn  not  only  for  their  past  tmnsgressions, 
but  they  also  sorrow  over  iheir  present  imperfections.  If  you  are  what 
yea  should  be,  dear  friend,  I  am  quite  cert.ain  you  see  a  great  deal  in 
yourself  to  grieve  over.  You  cannot  live  as  you  would  live.  Whenever 
I  meet  with  a  person  who  feels  that  he  is  perfect,  I  conceive  at  once 
that  he  has  not  yet  attained  even  a  remote  conception  of  what  true 
perfection  must  be.  The  savage  of  Australia  is  satisfied  with  his 
weapons  of  war  so  long  as  he  has  never  seen  n  rifle  or  heard  of  a  cannon : 
to  him  his  hovel  is  a  model  of  architecture,  for  he  has  never  heard  of  a 
cathedral  or  a  palace.  I  have  no  doubt  that  a  barn-door  fowl  would  be 
quite  surprised  at  the  complaint  which  an  eagle  might  make  about  its 
inability  to  mount  as  high  as  it  desires  to  do.  The  fowl  is  perfect — perfect 
up  to  the  condition  of  its  barn-door,  barley-scratching  life,  it  knows 
nothing  higher  than  its  roosting  place,  and  so  it  concludes  itself  abso- 
lutely perfect  and  fit  for  all  that  is  desirable  in  flight.  But  oh,  could 
it  know  where  the  thunders  dwell,  and  sail  above  the  clouds  where 
the  callow  lightnings  wait  the  bidding  of  the  Lord,  then  would  the 
creature  feel  something  of  the  aspirations  and  the  griefs  which  tor- 
ment the  heart  of  the  royal  bird.  Men  know  not  what  God  is,  nor 
the  infinity  of  his  perfections,  nor  the  majesty  of  his  parity,  else, 
when  highest  would  they  cry,  "  Higher,  higher,  higher,"  and  mourn 
because  they  have  not  yet  attained,  and  need  still  to  mount  as  on  eagle's 
wings.  Brethren,  I  speak  for  you  all  when  I  say,  there  is  not  a  day 
in  which  our  service  satisfies  us,  not  a  deed  we  have  ever  performed 
that  contents  us.  We  see  our  spots,  and  would  fain  wash  them  out  with 
tears  if  we  could,  though  we  bless  God  they  are  removed  by  the  precious 
blood  of  Jesus.  Those  are  among  the  blessed  who  mourn  because  they 
cannot  live  a  perfect  life  as  they  desire.  To  mourn  after  more  holiness 
is  a  sign  of  holiness ;  to  moum  after  greater  conformity  to  the  image 
of  Christ  proves  that  we  are  already  in  a  measure  conformed  thereunto  ; 
to  sigh  atler  more  complete  subordination  of  our  entire  life  to  the 
will  of  God  is  a  mourning  for  which  Jesus  Christ  will  bring  rich 
comfort. 

The  Christian  mourner  laments^  ahOj  because  he  cannot  be  more 
continually  in  communion  with  Qod,  He  knows  the  sweetness  of 
fellowship  with  the  Father  and  with  the  Son.  He  cannot  bear  to 
have  it  broken.  If  but  the  thinnest  cloud  pass  between  him  and 
the  sun  of  God*s  love,  he  is  distressed  directly,  for  he  is  sensitive  lest  he 
should  lose  the  delights  of  communion.  A  native  of  sunny  Italy  deplores 
the  absence  of  heaven's  bright  blue,  when  made  to  dwell  in  this  land 
of  the  fleecy  clouds;  and  he  who  has  dwelt  in  unclouded  fellowship  with 
the  Lord  bemoans  his  hard  lot,  if  even  for  awhile  he  beholds  not  that 
face  which  is  as  the  sun  shining  in  its  strength.  Love  cannot  endure 
absence,  much  less,  coldness.  True  grace  finds  its  life  in  fellowship,  and 
pines  if  it  be  denied  it. 

The  real  Christian  mourns,  again,  because  he  cannot  be  more  useful. 
He  wishes  he  were  like  a  pillar  of  fire  and  light,  so  that  he  might 
evermore  by  day  and  by  night  enlighten  the  ignorant,  and  inspire  the 
dull  and  laggard.  He  wishes  not  so  much  for  more  talent  as  for  more 
grace  to  make  use  of  the  talent  which  he  has.  He  would  fain  bring  in 
a  great  rental  to  the  owner  of  the  vineyard  who  has  placed  him  as  a 


582  BIETKOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

husbandman  amono;  the  vines.  He  longs  to  brinp^  up  priceless  pearb 
from  the  deep  seas  of  sin,  wherewith  to  adorn  the  diadem  of  his  Lord 
and  King,  He  sighs  because  thorns  and  thistles  will  spring  up  where 
he  looked  for  a  hundred-fold  harvest:  this  makes  him  groBXi  out, 
**  Who  hath  believed  our  report,  and  to  whom  is  the  arm  of  the  Lord 
revealed  ?  " 

Moreover,  like  his  Lord,  he  mourns  for  otiiers.  He  mourns  in  Zion 
because  of  the  deadiicssof  the  Christian  church,  its  divisions,  its  errors, 
its  carelessness  towards  the  souls  of  sinners.  He  cries  with  Jeremiah, 
"  How  is  the  gold  become  dim  !  How  is  the  much  fine  gold  changed  I" 
But,  he  mourns  most  of  all  for  the  unconverted.  He  sees  their  state  of 
alienation  from  God,  and  knowing  the  danger  of  it,  his  heart  shrinks 
within  him,  as  with  prophetic  glance  he  sees  what  their  end  will  be: 
when  "  there  shall  be  wailing  and  gnashing  of  teeth."  His  heart  breaks 
for  the  sins  and  sorrows  of  others,  and,  like  his  Saviour,  he  conld  weep 
over  the  cities  that  reject  divine  love  ;  he  could  say  like  Moses  that  he 
was  almost  willing  to  have  his  name  blotted  out  of  the  Book  of  Life  if 
others  might  be  saved  :  he  feels  snch  sorrow  and  heaviness  of  heart  for 
his  kinsmen  according  to  the  flesh  who  are  strangers  to  Christ,  that  be 
has  no  rest  in  his  flesh  concerning  them.  Dear  brethren,  he  that  is 
quickened  by  the  new  life  obtains  an  enlar^^ed  heritage  of  mourning; 
but,  let  it  not  be  forgotten,  he  wins  tenfold  more  joy  as  well ;  and,  mean- 
while, such  weeping  is  in  itselt  sweet— tears  not  too  briny,  and  griefr 
not  too  bitter ;  such  griefs  we  would  wish  to  feel  as  long  as  we  live, 
especially  if  the  Lord  Jesus  alternates  them  with  the  fulfilling  of  that 
most  excellent  promise,  to  which  I  now  direct  you. 

III.  What  is  tliat,  then,  in  the  third  place,  vmica  is  spoken  in  the 
text  to  those  that  mourn  ?     I  would  draw  particular  attention  to  the 
words  here,  "  To  appoint  unto  them  that  mourn  in  Zion,  to  give  unto 
them  beauty  for  ashes."    Come,  mourning  souls,  who  mourn  in  the  way 
described,  come  ye  gladly  hitlier :  there  is  comfort  appoinled  for  you.  and 
there  is  also  comfort  f/iveti  to  yon.     It  is  the  prerogative  of  King  Jesos 
both  to  appoint  and  to  give,      llow  cheering  is  the  thought  that  as  our 
grief's  arc  apj)ointed,  so  also  are  our  consolations.     God  has  allotted  a 
portion  to  every  one  of  his  mourners,  even  as  Joseph  allotted  a  mess  to 
each  of  his  brethren  at  the  least.    You  shall  have  your  due  share  at  the 
table  of  grace,  and  if  you  are  a  little  one,  and  have  double  sorrows,  yoa 
shall   have  a  double  portion  of  comfort.     "  To  appoint  unto  them," 
This  is  a  word  full  of  strong  consolation ;  for  if  God  appoints  me  a  por- 
tion, who  can  deprive  me  of  it  ?     If  he  appoints  my  comfort,  who  dare 
stand  in  the  way  ?     If  he  appoints  it,  it  is  mine  by  right     Bat  then,  to 
make  the  appointment  ^ecure,  he  adds  the  word  "  To  giv$.^^     The  Holf 
One  of  Israel  in  the  midst  of  Zion  gives  as  well  as  appoints.     The  rich 
comforts  of  the  gospel  are  conferred  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  at  the  command 
of  Jesus  Christ,  upon  every  true  mourner  in  the  time  when  he  needs 
them ;  they  are  given  to  each  spiritual  mourner  in  the  time  when  he 
would  faint  for  lack  of  them.     Ho  can  eflectnally  give  the  comfort 
appointed  for  each  particular  case.     All  I  can  do  is  to  speak  q{  the 
comfort  for  God's  mourners  ;  I  can  neither  allot  it,  nor  yet  distribute  it; 
but  our  Lord  can  do  both.    My  prayer  is  that  he  may  do  so  at  this 
moment;  that  every  holy  mourner  may  have  a  time  of  sweet  rejoicing 


BEAUTY  FOR  ASHES.  588 

while  sittinf^  at  the  Master's  feet  in  a  waiting  posture.  Did  you  never 
feel,  while  cast  down,  on  a  sudden  lifted  up,  when  some  precious  promise 
has  come  home  to  your  soul  ?  This  is  the  happy  experience  of  all  the 
saints. 

"  Sometimes  a  light  surprises 

The  Christian  while  he  sings : 
It  is  the  Lord  who  rises 

With  healing  In  his  wings. 
When  comforts  are  declining, 

He  grants  the  soul  again, 
A  season  of  clear  shining, 

To  cheer  it,  after  rain." 

Our  eyer  gracious  and  almighty  Lord  knows  how  to  comfort  hig 
children,  and  be  assured  he  will  not  leave  them  comfortless.  He  who 
bids  his  ministers  again  and  again  attend  to  this  duty,  and  sajs, 
**  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye  my  people,"  will  not  himself  neglect  to  give 
them  consolation.  If  you  are  very  heavy,  there  is  the  more  room  for 
the  display  of  his  grace  in  you,  by  making  yon  very  joyful  in  his  ways. 
Do  not  despair ;  do  not  say,  "  I  have  fallen  too  low,  my  harp  has  been  so 
long  upon  the  willows  that  it  has  forgotten  Zion's  joyful  tunes."  Oh,  no, 
yon  shall  lay  your  fingers  amongst  the  old  accustomed  strings,  and  the 
art  of  making  melody  shall  come  back  to  you,  and  your  heart  shall  once 
more  be  glad.  He  appoints  and  he  gives — the  two  words  put  together 
afford  double  hope  to  us — he  appoints  and  he  gives  comfort  to  his 
mourners. 

Observe,  in  the  text,  the  change  Christ  promises  to  work  for  his 
mourners.  First,  here  is  leauty  givoxxfor  ashes.  In  the  Hebrew  there 
is  a  ring  in  the  words  which  cannot  be  conveyed  in  the  English.  The 
ashes  that  men  put  upon  their  head  in  the  East  in  the  time  of  sorrow 
made  a  grim  tiara  for  the  brow  of  the  mourner  ;  the  Lord  promises  to 
put  all  these  ashes  away,  and  to  substitute  for  them  a  glorious  head  dress 
— a  diadem  of  beauty.  Or,  if  we  run  away  from  the  words,  and  take  the 
inner  sense,  we  may  look  at  it  thus  : — mourning  makes  the  face  wan  and 
emaciated,  and  so  takes  away  the  beauty;  but  Jesus  promises  that  he  will 
so  come  and  reveal  joy  to  the  sorrowing  soul,  that  tlie  face  shall  fill  up 
again:  the  eyes  that  were  dull  and  cloudy  shall  sparkle  again,  and  the 
countenance,  yea,  and  the  whole  person  shall  be  once  more  radiant  with 
the  beauty  which  sorrow  had  so  grievously  marred.  I  thank  God  I  have 
sometimes  seen  this  change  take  place  in  precious  saints  who  have  been 
cast  down  in  soul.  There  has  even  seemed  to  be  a  visible  beauty  put 
upon  them  when  they  have  found  peace  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  this  beauty 
is  far  more  lovely  and  striking,  because  it  is  evidently  a  beauty  of  the 
mind,  a  spiritual  lustre,  far  superior  to  the  surface  comeliness  of  the 
flesh.  When  the  Lord  shines  full  upon  his  servants'  faces,  he  makes 
them  fair  as  the  moon,  when  at  her  full  she  reflects  the  light  of  the 
sun.  A  gracious  and  unchanging  God  sheds  on  his  people  a  gracious 
and  unfading  loveliness.  0  mourning  soul,  thou  hast  made  thine  eyes 
red  with  weeping,  and  thy  cheeks  are  marred  with  furrows,  down  which 
the  scalding  tears  have  burned  their  way ;  but  the  Lord  that  healeth 
thee,  the  Lord  Almighty  who  wipeth  all  tears  from  human  eyes,  shall 
yisit  thee  yet;  and,  if  thou  now  believest  in  Jesus,  he  shall  visit  thee 


584  METROPOLITAN  TABEBNACLE  PULPIT. 

now,  and  chase  these  clondj  griefs  away,  and  thy  face  shall  be  brighi 
and  clear  again,  fair  as  the  morning,  and  sparkling  as  the  dew.  Thoa 
shalt  rejoice  in  the  God  of  thy  salvation,  even  in  God,  thy  exceeding 
joy.     Is  not  this  a  dainty  promise  for  monrning  soals  ? 

Then,  it  is  added,  "  He  will  give  the  oil  of  joy  for  mourning  J*  Here 
we  have  first  beauty,  and  then  unction.  The  Orientals  used  rich 
perfumed  oils  on  their  persons — used  them  largely  and  lavishly  in  timet 
of  great  joy.  Now,  the  Holy  Spirit  comes  upon  those  who  belie?e  in 
Jesus,  and  gives  them  an  anointing  of  perfume,  most  precious,  more 
sweet  and  costly  than  the  nard  of  Araby.  An  unction,  such  as  royaltj 
has  never  received,  sheds  its  costly  moisture  over  all  the  redeemed  when 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  rests  upon  them.  "  We  have  an  unction  from  the 
Holy  One,*'  saith  the  apostle.  "  Thou  anointest  my  head  with  oil,  my 
cup  runneth  over."  Oh,  how  favoured  are  those  who  have  the  Spirit  of 
Ood  upon  them !  You  remember  that  the  oil  which  was  poured  oa 
Aaron's  head  went  down  to  the  skirts  of  his  garment,  so  that  the  same 
oil  was  on  his  skirts  that  had  been  on  his  head.  It  is  the  game  ^irit 
that  rests  on  the  believer  as  that  which  rests  on  Jesus  Christ,  and  be 
that  is  joined  unto  Christ  is  one  Spirit.  What  favour  is  here !  Instead 
of  mourning,  the  Christian  shall  receive  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Comforter, 
who  shall  take  of  the  things  of  Christ,  and  reveal  them  unto  him,  and 
make  him  not  merely  glad,  but  honoured  and  esteemed. 

Then,  it  is  added,  to  give  still  greater  fulness  to  the  cheering  promise, 
that  the  Lord  will  give  "  the  garment  of  praise  for'the  apirit  of  heavi- 
ness.'* The  man  is  first  made  beautiful,  next  he  has  the  anointing, 
then  afterwards  he  is  arrayed  in  robes  of  splendour.  What  garments 
these  are  I  Surely  Solomon  in  all  his  glory  wore  not  such  right  rov»l 
apparel.  "  The  garment  of  praise,"  what  a  dress  is  this !  Speak  of 
wrought  gold,  or  fine  linen,  or  needlework  of  divers  colours,  or  tafFeta, 
or  damasks,  or  gorgeous  silks  most  rich  and  rare  which  come  from  far 
off  lands — where  is  anything  compared  with  "  the  garment  of  praise?" 
When  a  man  wraps  himself  about,  as  it  were,  with  psalmody,  and  lives 
for  ever  a  chorister,  singing  not  with  equal  voice,  but  with  the  same 
earnest  heart  as  they  do  who  day  and  night  keep  up  the  never  ending 
hymn  before  the  throne  of  the  infinite  I  AM,  what  a  life  is  hfs,  what  a 
roan  is  he  !  0 mourner,  this  is  to  be  your  portion  ;  take  it  now;  Jesus 
Christ  will  cover  you,  even  at  tliis  hour,  with  the  garment  of  praise;  so 
grateful  shall  you  be  for  sins  forgiven,  for  infirmity  overcome,  for  watch- 
fulness bestowed,  for  the  church  revived,  for  sinners  saved,  that  you 
shall  undergo  the  greatest  conceivable  change,  and  the  sordid  garments 
of  your  woe  shall  be  put  aside  for  the  brilliant  array  of  delight.  It 
shall  not  be  the  spirit  of  praise  for  the  spirit  of  heaviness,  though  that 
were  a  fair  exchange,  but  as  your  heaviness  you  tried  to  keep  to  yourself, 
so  your  praise  you  shall  not  keep  to  yourself,  it  shall  be  a  garment  to 
you,  external  and  visible,  as  well  as  inward  and  profound.    Wherever 

iron  are  it  shall  be  displayed  to  others,  and  they  shall  see  and  take  know- 
edge  of  you  that  God  has  done  great  things  for  you  whereof  you  are 
glad.    I  wish  I  had  power  to  speak  fitly  on  such  a  theme  as  this  ;  bnt^ 
surely,  it  needs  him  upon  whom  the  Spirit  rested  without  measure  to 
proclaim  this  joyful  promise  to  the  mourners  in  Zion. 
We  must  close,  by  noticing  what  will  be  the  result  of  this  appoint- 


BKAUIT  FOR  ASHES.  585 

lent,  and  the  text  concludes,  by  saying,  "  That  ihetf  might  he  called 
'•ess  of  righfeatisnesSy  the  planting  of  the  Lord,  that  he  might  be 
lorified'*  We  learn,  here,  that  those  mourninjo:  souls  who  are  cast 
own,  and  have  put  ashes  on  their  heads,  shall,  when  Jesus  Christ 
a  infinite  mercy  comes  to  them,  be  made  like  trees — like  "oaks;  "  the 
•riginal  is,  like  '*  oaks  of  righteousness,''  that  is,  they  shall  become 
trong,  firmly  rooted,  covered  with  verdure ;  they  shall  be  like  a  well- 
ratered  tree  for  pleasantness  and  delight.  Thou  sayest,  *'  I  am  a  dry 
ree,  a  sere  branch,  I  am  a  cast  ofi',  fruitless  bough  ;  Oh  that  I  were 
isited  of  God  and  saved!  I  mourn  because  I  cannot  be  what  I  would.** 
(ourner,  thou  shalt  be  all  thou  wouldst  be,  and  much  more  if  Jesus 
isits  thee.  Breathe  the  prayer  to  him  now;  look  to  him,  trust 
im.  He  can  change  thee  from  a  withered  tree  that  seems,  twice  dead 
ito  a  tree  standing  by  the  rivers  of  water,  whose  leaf  is  unwithering, 
nd  whose  fruit  ripens  in  its  season.  Only  have  confidence  in  an  anointed 
aviour,  rely  upon  him  who  came  not  here  to  destroy  but  to  bless,  and 
iiou  shalt  yet  through  faith  become  a  tree  of  righteousness,  the  planting 
f  the  Lord,  that  he  may  be  glorified. 

But,  the  very  pith  of  the  text  lies  in  a  little  word  to  which  you  must 
)ok.  "Ye  shall  be  called  trees  of  rij^hteousness."  Now,  there  are 
lany  mourning  saints  who  are  trees  of  righteousness,  but  nobody  calls 
fiem  so,  they  are  so  desponding  that  they  give  a  doubtful  idea  to  others. 
Observers  ask,  "  Is  this  a  Christian  ?  "  And  those  who  watch  and 
bserve  them  are  not  at  all  struck  with  their  Christian  character, 
ndeed,  I  may  be  speakinjj  to  some  here  who  are  true  believers  in  Jesus, 
ut  they  arc  all  their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage ;  they  hardly  know 
lemsclves  whether  they  are  saved,  and,  therefore,  they  cannot  expect 
lat  others  should  be  very  much  impressed  by  their  godly  character 
nd  fruitful  conversation.  But,  0  mourners  !  if  Jesus  visits  .vou,  and 
ives  you  the  oil  of  joy,  men  shall  call  you  "  trees  of  righteousness," 
ley  shall  see  grace  in  you,  they  shall  not  be  able  to  help  owning  it,  it 
lal]  be  so  distinct  in  the  happiness  of  your  life,  that  they  shall  becom- 
elled  to  see  it.  I  know  some  Christian  people  who,  wherever  they  go, 
re  attractive  advertisements  of  the  gospel.  Nobody  could  be  with  them 
)r  a  half-an-hour  without  saying,  "Whence  do  they  pain  this  calm, 
lis  peace,  this  tranquility,  this  holy  delight  and  joy  ?"  Many  have  been 
itracted  to  the  cross  of  Christ  by  the  holy  pleasantness  and  cheerful 
mversation  of  those  whom  Christ  has  visited  with  the  abundance  of 
is  love.  I  wish  we  were  all  such.  I  would  not  discourage  a  mourner; 
0,  but  encourage  him  to  seek  after  the  garments  of  praise;  never- 
leless,  I  must  say  that  it  is  a  very  wretched  thing  for  so  many  pre- 
ssors to  go  about  the  world  grumbling  at  what  they  have  and  at  what 
ley  have  not,  murmuring  at  the  dispensations  of  providence,  and  at  the 
hours  of  tiieir  brethren.  They  arc  more  like  wild  crab-trees  than  the 
ord's  fruit-trees.  Well  may  people  say,  "  If  these  are  Christians, 
od  save  us  from  such  Christianity."  But,  when  a  man  is  contented 
-more  than  that,  when  he  is  happy  under  all  circumstances,  when  "  his 
»irit  doth  rejoice  in  God  his  Saviour  "  in  deep  distress,  when  he  can  sing 

the  fires  of  afilictiou,  when  he  can  rejoice  on  the  bed  of  sickness,  when 
8  ahout  of  triumph  grows  louder  as  his  conflict  waxes  more  and  more 
Terei  and  when  he  can  utter  the  sweetest  song  of  victory  in  his 


586  METROPOLITAN  TABBRNAOLB  FULPIT. 

departinj^  moments,  then  all  who  Bee  such  people  call  fchem  treee  of 
rigliteousncss,  they  confess  that  they  are  the  people  of  God. 

Note,  fitill,  the  result  of  all  this  goes  further,  "  They  shall  be  called 
trees  of  righteousness,  ilie  planting  of  tlie  Lord,**  that  is  to  say,  when 
there  is  joy  imparted,  and  unction  given  from  the  Holy  Spirit,  instead  of 
despondency,  men  will  say,  **  It  is  God*s  work,  it  is  a  tree  thatOod  has 
planted,  it  could  not  grow  like  that  if  anybody  else  had  planted  it ;  tlus 
man  is  a  man  of  God's  making,  his  joy  is  a  joy  of  God's  giving."  I  feei 
sure  that  in  the  case  of  some  of  us  we  were  under  such  sadness  of  heart 
before  conversion,  through  a  sense  of  sin,  that  when  we  did  find  peace, 
everybody  noticed  the  change  there  was  in  us,  and  they  said  one  to 
another,  "  Who  has  made  this  man  so  happy,  for  he  was  just  now  most 
heavy  and  depressed  ?  "  And,  when  we  told  them  where  we  lost  our 
burden,  they  said,  **  Ah,  there  is  something  in  religion  after  alL" 
"  Then  said  they  among  the  heathen  the  Lord  hath  done  great  thingi 
for  them,'*  Remember  poor  Christian  in  Pilgrim's  Progress.  Marie 
what  heavy  sighs  lie  heaved,  what  tears  fell  from  his  eyes,  what  a 
wretched  man  he  was  when  he  wrung  his  hands,  and  saici,  "  The  city 
wherein  I  dwell  is  to  be  burned  up  with  fire  from  heaven,  and  I  shall  be 
consumed  in  it,  and,  besides,  I  am  myself  undone  by  reason  of  a  burden 
that  lieth  hard  upon  me.  Oh  that  I  could  get  rid  of  it ! "  Do  you  re- 
member John  Bunyan's  description  of  how  he  got  rid  of  the  burden? 
He  stood  at  the  foot  of  the  cross,  and  there  was  a  sepulchre  hard  by, 
and  as  he  stoc^d  and  looked,  and  saw  one  hanging  on  the  tree,  suddenly 
the  bands  that  bound  his  burden  cracked,  and  the  load  rolled  right 
away  into  the  sepulchre,  and  when  he  looked  for  it,  it  could  not  be 
found.  And  what  did  he  do  ?  Why,  he  gave  three  great  leaps  for  joy, 
and  sang, 


"  Blcss'd  cross !  bless'd  sepulchre !  blcss'd  rather  be 
The  man  that  there  was  put  to  shame  for  me." 


If  those  who  knew  the  pilgi'im  in  his  wretchedness  had  met  him  on 
the  other  side  of  that  never-to-be-forgotten  sepulchre,  they  would  have 
said,  "  Are  you  the  same  man  ? "  If  Christiana  had  met  him  that  day, 
she  would  have  said,  "  My  husband,  are  you  the  same  ?  What  a  change 
has  come  over  you ;  "  and,  when  she  and  the  children  marked  the  father'a 
cheerful  conversation,  they  would  have  been  compelled  to  say,  '*It  is  the 
Lord's  doing,  and  it  is  wondrous  in  our  eyes."  Oh  live  such  a  happy  life 
that  you  may  compel  the  most  wicked  man  to  ask  where  yon  Wmed 
the  art  of  livin;::.  Let  the  stream  of  your  life  be  so  clear,  so  limpid,  so 
cool,  so  sparkling,  so  like  the  river  of  the  water  of  life  above,  that 
men  may  say,  "  AVhence  came  this  crystal  rivulet  ?  We  will  trace  it 
to  its  source,"  and  so  may  they  be  led  to  the  foot  of  that  dear  crosi 
wiicro  all  your  ho})es  began. 

Another  word  rcnuiins,  and  when  we  have  considered  it,  we  will  con- 
clu  le.  That  other  word  is  thiii,  *'  7'/ie  planling  of  tJio  Lord,  that  h$ 
mlffhl  ha  (/hri/if^d.'"  That  is  the  end  of  it  all,  that  is  the  great  result  we 
diive  at,  and  that  is  the  ol>joct  evcu  of  God  himself,  **thr.the  might  be 
gloriticd"  For  when  men  sue  the  cheerful  Christian,  and  perceive  that 
this  is  (jod's  work,  then  they  own  the  power  of  God;  not  always, 
perhaps,  with  their  hearts  as  they  should,  but  still  they  are  obliged  tQ 


u 


BEAUTY  FOR  ASHES.  587 

confess  "  this  is  the  finger  of  God."  Meanwhile,  the  saints,  comforted  by 
yonr  example,  praise  and  bless  God,  and  all  the  chnrch  lifts  up  a  song  to 
the  Most  High.  Come,  mv  brethren  and  sisters,  are  any  of  you  down; 
are  yon  almost  beneath  the  enemy's  foot  ?  Here  is  a  word  for  yon, 
"  Rejoice  not  over  me,  0  mine  enemy,  though  I  fall  yet  shall  I  rise 
again/'  Are  any  of  you  in  deep  trouble — very  deep  trouble  ?  Anot-her 
word  then  for  you ;  **  When  thou  passest  through  the  waters,  I  will  be 
with  thee  ;  and  through  the  rivers,  they  shall  not  overflow  thee  :  when 
thou  walkest  through  the  fire,  thou  shalt  not  be  burned ;  neither  shall 
the  flame  kindle  upon  thee/'  Are  you  pressed  with  labours  and  afflic- 
tions ?  **  As  thy  days  so  shall  thy  strength  be,"  "  All  things  work 
together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God,  to  them  that  are  the  called 
according  to  his  purpose."  Are  you  persecuted  ?  Here  is  a  note  of 
encouragement  for  you  :  "  Blessed  are  ye,  when  men  shall  revile  you, 
and  persecute  you,  and  shall  say  all  manner  of  evil  against  yon  falsely, 
for  my  sake.  Kejoice,  and  be  exceeding  glad ;  for  great  is  your  reward 
in  heaven :  for  so  persecuted  they  the  prophets  which  were  before  you." 
Whatever  your  circumstances  are,  "  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  always,  and 
again  I  say  rejoice."  Think  what  Jesus  has  given  you,  your  sins  are 
pardoned  for  his  name  sake,  your  heaven  is  made  secure  to  you,  and  all 
that  is  wanted  to  bring  you  there ;  you  have  grace  in  your  hearts,  and 
glory  awaits  you;  you  have  already  grace  within  you,  and  greater  grace 
shall  be  granted  you  ;  you  are  renewed  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ  in  your 
inner  man,  the  good  work  is  begun,  and  God  will  never  leave  it  till 
he  has  finished  it ;  your  names  are  in  his  book,  nay,  graven  on  the 
palms  of  his  hands;  his  love  never  changes,  his  power  never  diminishes, 
his  grace  never  fails,  his  truth  is  firm  as  the  hills,  and  his  faithfulness 
is  like  the  great  mountains.  Lean  on  the  love  of  his  heart,  on  the 
might  of  his  arm,  on  the  merit  of  his  blood,  on  the  power  of  his  plea, 
and  the  indwelling  of  his  Spirit.  Take  sueh  promises  as  these  for 
your  consolation,  "  Strengthen  ye  the  weak  hands,  and  confirm  the 
feeble  knees.  Say  to  them  that  are  of  a  fearful  heart,  be  strong,  fear 
not."  "  Fear  not,  thou  worm  Jacob,  and  ye  men  of  Israel ;  I  will  help 
thee,  saith  the  Lord,  and  thy  Redeemer,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel." 
"  For  a  small  moment  have  I  forsaken  thee ;  but  with  great  mercies 
will  I  gather  thee.  In  a  little  wrath  I  hid  my  face  from  thee 
for  a  moment;  but  with  everlasting  kindness  will  I  have  mercy 
on  thee,  saith  the  Lord  thy  Redeemer.  For  this  is  as  the  waters 
of  Noah  unto  me:  for  as  I  have  sworn  that  the  waters  of  Noah 
should  no  more  go  over  the  earth ;  so  have  I  sworn  that  I  would  nol 
bo  wroth  with  thee,  nor  rebuke  thee.  For  the  mountains  shall  depart^ 
and  the  hills  be  removed;  but  my  kindness  shall  not  depart  from  thee, 
neither  shall  the  covenant  of  my  peace  be  removed,  saith  the  Lord  that 
hath  mercy  on  thee."  "  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee,  for  my  strength 
is  made  perfect  in  weakness."  *'  He  giveth  power  to  the  faint ;  and  to 
them  that  have  no  might  he  increaseth  strength."  "  The  eternal  God 
is  thy  refuge,  and  underneath  are  the  everlasting  arms  :  and  he  shall 
thrust  out  the  enemy  from  before  thee ;  and  shall  say,  destroy  them." 
**  1  am  God,  I  fail  not,  therefore  ye  sons  of  Jacob  are  not  consumed." 
One  might  continue  for  ever  quoting  these  precious  passages,  but  may  the 
Lord  apply  one  or  other  of  them  to  every  mourner's  soul;  and,  especially 


588  HETBOPOUTAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

if  there  be  a  monming  sinner  here,  may  he  get  a  grip  of  that  choke 
word,  ''Him  that  cometh  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  ont; "  or,  that 
other  grand  sentence,  *'  All  manner  of  sin  and  blasphemy  shall  be 
forgiven  unto  men;*'  or,  that  other,  "The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  his 
Son,  cleanseth  ns  from  all  sin ; "  or,  that  equally  encouraging  word, 
**  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason  together;  though  your  sins  bi  as  scarlet 
they  shall  be  as  wool,  though  they  be  red  like  crimson  they  shall  be  a^ 
snow."  The  Lord  bring  us  all  into  comfort  and  joy  by  the  way  of  Uie 
cross. 

Peradventure,  I  speak  to  some  for  whom  the  promises  of  God  have 
no  charm  ;  let  me,  tnen,  remind  them  that  his  threatenings  are  as  sure 
as  his  promises,  ^e  can  bless,  bat  he  can  also  curse.  He  appoints 
mourning  for  those  who  laugh  now  with  sinful  merriment ;  he  will  gi?e 
to  his  enemies  vengeance  for  all  their  rebellions.  He  has  himself  said, 
"And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  instead  of  sweet  smell  there  shall  be  stink; 
and  inst-ead  of  a  girdle  a  rent;  and  instead  of  well  set  hair  baldness; 
and  instead  of  a  stomacher  a  girding  of  sackcloth  ;  and  burning  instead 
of  beauty."  Beware,  then,  ye  that  forget  God,  lest  he  overthrow  you  in 
his  hot  displeasure.  Seek  ye  the  Saviour  now,  lest  the  acceptable  year 
of  the  Lord  be  closed  with  a  long  winter  of  utter  despair. 

"  Ye  who  spurn  his  righteous  sway, 

Yet,  oh  yet,  he  spares  your  breath  ; 
Yet  his  hand,  averse  to  slay, 

Balances  the  bolt  of  death. 
Ere  thnt  dreadful  bolt  descends. 

Haste  before  his  feet  to  fall, 
Kiss  the  sceptre  he  extends, 

And  adore  him,  *  Lord  of  all.*  ** 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon— Isaiah  IxL 


Mr.  Spurgeon  begs  to  inform  his  friends  that  the  usual  Almanack  is  now 
ready  for  1872,  and  also  a  sheet  for  the  walls,  by  John  Ploughman.  Bothsre 
to  be  had  for  one  penny  each,  and  it  is  hoped  that  their  circulation  will  do  good 
both  spiritually  and  morally.  Friends  are  i-equested  to  circulate  them.  Ther 
are  both  published  by  Messrs.  Passmorc  and  Alabaster,  and  may  be  had  of  ail 
bookaellers. 


THE  TALKING  BOOK. 


Deliveeed  on  Lord'8-day  Morning,  October  22nd,  1871,  by 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT     THE     METROPOLITAN     TABERNACLE,     NEWINGTON. 


"  When  thou  awakest,  it  shall  talk  with  thee." — Proverbs  vi.  22. 

It  is  a  Tery  happy  circumstance  when  the  commandment  of  our  father 
and  the  law  of  our  mother  are  also  the  commandment  of  God  and  the 
law  of  the  Lord.  Happy  are  they  who  have  a  doable  force  to  draw 
them  to  the  right — the  bonds  of  nature,  and  the  cords  of  i;,Tace. 
They  sin  with  a  vengeance  who  sin  both  against  a  father  on  earth  and 
the  great  Father  in  heaven,  and  they  exhibit  a  virulence  and  a  violence  of 
sin  who  do  despite  to  the  tender  obligations  of  childhood,  as  well  as  to  the 
demands  of  conscience  and  God.  Solomon,  in  the  passage  before  us^ 
evidently  speaks  of  those  who  find  in  the  parents'  law  and  in  6od*s  law 
the  same  thing,  and  he  admonishes  such  to  bind  the  law  of  God  about 
their  heart,  and  to  tie  it  about  their  neck ;  by  which  he  intends  inward 
affection  and  open  avowal.  The  law  of  God  should  be  so  dear  to  us,  that 
it  should  be  bound  about  the  most  vital  organ  of  our  being,  braided 
about  our  heart.  That  which  a  man  carries  in  his  hand  he  may  forget 
and  lose,  that  which  he  wears  upon  his  person  may  be  torn  from  him,  but 
that  which  is  bound  about  his  heart  will  remain  there  as  long  as  life  re- 
mains. We  are  to  love  the  word  of  God  with  all  our  heart,  and  mind,  and 
sonl,  and  strength  ;  with  the  full  force  of  our  nature  we  are  to  embrace 
it ;  all  our  warmest  affections  are  to  be  bound  up  with  it.  When  the 
wise  man  tells  us,  also,  to  wear  it  about  our  necks,  he  means  that  we. 
are  never  to  be  ashamed  of  it.  No  blush  is  to  mantle  our  cheek  when 
we  are  called  Christians ;  we  are  never  to  speak  with  bated  breath  in 
any  company  concerning  the  things  of  God.  Manfully  must  we  take  up 
the  cross  of  Christ ;  cheerfully  must  we  avow  ourselves  to  belong  to 
those  who  have  respect  unto  the  divine  testimonies.  Let  us  count  true 
religion  to  be  our  highest  ornament;  and,  as  magistrates  put  upon 
them  their  gold  chains,  and  think  themselves  adorned  thereby,  so  let  us 
tie  about  our  neck  the  commands  and  the  gospel  of  the  Lord  our  God. 

In  order  that  we  may  be  persuaded  so  to  do,  Solomon  gives  us  three 
telling  reasons.     He  says  that  God*s  law,  by  which  I  understand  the 
whole  run  of  Scripture,  and,  especially  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  will 
No.  1,017. 


590  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT 

• 

be  a  guide  to  us  :— "  When  thou  j^oest,  it  bIiaII  lead  thee.*'  It  will  be 
a  guardian  to  us :  "  Wlien  thou  sleepest " — when  thou  art  defenccle« 
and  oif  thy  guard — "  it  shall  keep  thee."  And  it  shall^  also  be  a  dear 
companion  to  us :  "  When  chou  awakest,  it  shall  talk  with  thee."  Any- 
one of  these  three  arguments  might  surely  suffice  to  make  us  seek  a 
nearer  acquaintance  with  the  sacred  word.  We  all  need  a  ^id$^  for  "it 
is  not  in  man  that  walketh  to  direct  his  steps."  Left  to  our  own  w 
we  soon  excel  in  folly.  There  are  dilemmas  in  all  liyes  where  a  guide 
is  more  precious  than  a  wedge  of  gold.  The  word  of  God,  as  an  infal- 
lible director  for  human  life,  should  be  sought  unto  by  us,  and  it  will  lead 
us  in  the  highway  of  safety.  Equally  powerful  is  the  second  reason: 
the  word  of  God  will  become  the  guardian  of  our  days ;  whoso  heark- 
eneth  unto  it  shall  dwell  safely,  and  shall  be  quiet  from  fear  of  eiiL 
Unguarded  moments  there  may  be;  times,  ineyitable  to  our  imper- 
fection, there  will  be,  when,  unless  some  other  power  protect  ua,  we 
shall  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  foe.  Blessed  is  he  who  has  God's  law 
so  written  on  his  heart,  and  wears  it  so  about  his  neck  as  armour  of 
proof,  that  at  all  times  he  is  iuYulnerable,  kept  by  the  power  of  God 
through  faith  unto  salvation. 

But  I  prefer,  this  morning,  to  keep  to  the  third  reason  for  loring  God's 
word.  It  is  this,  that  it  becomes  our  sweei  companion .-  "  When  thoa 
awakest,  it  shall  talk  with  thee."  The  inspired  law  of  God,  whidi 
David  in  the  hundred  and  nineteenth  Psalm  calls  Gk>d's  testimonies,  pre- 
cepts, statutes,  and  the  like,  is  the  friend  of  the  righteous.  Its  essence 
and  marrow  is  the  gospel  of  Jesus,  the  law-fulfiller,  and  this  also  is  the 
special  solace  of  believers.  Of  the  whole  sacred  Tolume  it  may  be  said, 
"  When  thou  awakest,  it  shall  talk  with  thee."  I  gather  four  or  fire 
thoughts  from  this  expression,  and  upon  these  we  will  speak. 

I.  We  perceive  here  that  the  word  is  livijjg.  How  else  could  it  be 
said :  "  It  shall  talk  with  thee  "  ?  A  dead  book  cannot  talk,  nor  can  a 
dumb  book  speak.  It  is  clearly  a  living  book,  then,  and  a  speaking  book : 
**  The  word  of  God,  which  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever."  How  many  of 
us  have  found  this  to  be  most  certainly  true  I  A  large  proportion  of 
human  books  are  long  ago  dead,  and  even  shrivelled  like  Egyptian 
mummies;  the  mere  course  of  years  has  rendered  them  worthless, 
their  teaching  is  disproved,  and  they  have  no  life  for  us.  Entomb  them 
in  your  public  libraries  if  you  will,  but,  henceforth,  they  will  stir  no 
man's  pulse  and  warm  no  man's  heart.  But  this  thrice  blessed  book  of 
God,  though  it  has  been  extant  among  us  these  many  hundreds  of  years, 
is  immortal  in  its  life,  unwithering  in  its  strength :  the  dew  of  its  youth 
is  still  upon  it ;  its  speech  still  drops  as  the  rain  fresh  from  heaven ; 
its  truths  are  overflowing  founts  of  ever  fresh  consolation.  Never  book 
spake  like  this  book  ;  its  voice,  like  the  voice  of  God,  is  powerful  and 
full  of  majesty. 

Whence  comes  it  that  the  word  of  God  is  living?  Is  it  not,  first,  because 
//  18  pure  truth?  Error  is  deatli,  truth  is  life.  No  matter  how  well 
established  an  error  mav  be  by  pliilosophy,  or  by  force  of  arms,  or  the 
current  of  human  thought,  the  day  cometh  that  shall  bum  as  an  oven, 
and  all  untruth  shall  he  as  stubble  before  the  fire.  The  tooth  of  time 
devours  all  lies.  Falsehoods  are  soon  cut  down,  and  they  wither 
as  the  green  herb.     Truth  never  dies,  it  dates  its  origin  from  the 


THS  TALKIN6  BOOK.  591 

immortak.  Kindled  at  the  sonrce  of  light,  its  flame  cannot  be  quenched; 
if  by  persecntion  it  be  for  a  time  covered,  it  shall  blaze  forth  anew  to 
iake  reprisals  upon  its  adversaries.  Many  a  once  venerated  system  of 
error  now  rots  m  the  dead  past  among  the  tombs  of  the  forgotten; 
but  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  knows  no  sepulchre,  and  fears  no 
funeral;  it  lives  on,  and  mast  live  while  the  Eternal  fills  his  throne. 

The  word  of  God  is  living,  because  tl  is  the  utterance  of  an  immutable^ 
self-existing  Ood.  God  doth  not  speak  to-day  what  he  meant  not 
yesterday,  neither  will  he  to-morrow  blot  out  what  he  records  to-day. 
When  I  read  a  promise  spoken  three  thousand  years  ago,  it  is  as  fresh 
as  thongh  it  fell  from  the  eternal  lips  to-day.  There  are,  indeed,  no 
dates  to  the  Divine  promises ;  they  are  not  of  private  interpretation, 
nor  to  be  monopolised  by  any  generation.  I  say  *again,  as  fresh  to- 
day the  eternal  word  drops  from  the  Almighty' s  lips  as  when  he  uttered 
it  to  Moses,  or  to  Elias,  or  spake  it  by  the  tongue|of  Esaias  or  Jeremiidi. 
The  word  is  always  sure,  steadfast,  and  full  of  power.  It  is  never  out 
of  date.  Scripture  bubbles  up  evermore  with  good  matters,  it  is  an. 
eternal  Geyser,  a  spiritual  Niagara  of  grace,  for  ever  falling,  flashing, 
and  flowing  on ;  it  is  never  stagnant,  never  brackish  or  defiled,  but 
always  clear,  crystal,  fresh,  and  refreshing ;  so,  therefore,  ever  living. 

The  word  lives,  again,  becaase  it  enshrines  the  living  heart  of  Christ. 
The  heart  of  Christ  is  the  most  living  of  all  existences.  It  was  once 
pierced  with  a  spear,  but  it  lives  on,  and  yearns  towards  sinners,  and  is 
18  as  tender  and  compassionate  as  in  the  days  of  the  Redeemer's  flesh. 
Jesns,  the  Sinner's  Friend,  walks  in  the  avenues  of  Scripture  as  once 
he  traversed  the  plains  and  hills  of  Palestine :  you  can  see  him  still, 
if  you  have  opened  eyes,  in  the  ancient  prophecies ;  you  can  behold  him 
more  clearly  in  the  devout  evangelists ;  he  opens  and  lays  bare  his 
inmost  soul  to  you  in  the  epistles,  and  makes  you  hear  the  footsteps  of 
his  approaching  advent  in  the  symbols  of  the  Apocalypse.  The  living 
Christ  is  in  the  book  ;  you  behold  his  face  almost  in  every  page ;  and, 
con8e(][aently,  it  is  a  book  that  can  talk.  The  Christ  of  the  mount  of 
benedictions  speaks  in  it  still ;  the  God  who  said,  "  Let  there  be  light," 
gives  forth  from  its  pages  the  same  divine  fiat ;  while  the  incorruptible 
truth,  which  saturated  every  line  and  syllable  of  it  when  first  it  was 
penned  abides  therein  in  full  force,  and  preserves  it  from  the  finger  of 
decay.  *'  The  grass  withereth,  and  the  flower  thereof  falleth  away:  but 
the  word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever." 

Over  and  above  all  this,  the  Holy  Spirit  has  a  peculiar  connection  with 
the  word  of  Ood.  1  know  that  he  works  in  the  ministries  of  all  his 
servants  whom  he  hath  ordained  to  preach ;  but  for  the  most  part,  I  have 
remarked  that  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  men's  hearts  is  rather 
in  connection  with  the  texts  we  quote  than  with  our  explanations  of 
them.  **  Depend  upon  it,"  saj^s  a  deeply  spiritual  writer,  "  it  is  God's 
word,  not  man's  comment  on  it,  which  saves  sonls."  God  does  save 
souls  by  our  comment,  but  still  it  is  true  that  the  majority  of  conver- 
sions have  been  wrought  by  the  agency  of  a  text  of  Scripture.  It  is 
the  word  of  God  that  is  living,  and  powerful,  and  sharper  than  any 
two-edged  sword.  There  must  be  life  in  it,  for  by  it  men  are  born 
again.  As  for  believers,  the  Holy  Spirit  often  sets  the  word  on  a  blaze 
while  they  are  studying  it.    The  letters  were  at  one  time  before  us  as 


592  METROPOLITAN  TABBRKAOLB  PULPIT. 

mere   letters,  bat  the  Holy  GhnAt  suddenlj  came  npoQ   them,  and 
thej    Bpake   with    ton^aea.       The    chapter    is   lowly   as   the   bnsh 
at  Horeb,  bat  the  Spirit  descends  upon  it,  aad  lo  I    it   glowa  with 
celestial  splendour,  God  apf)earinor  in  the  words,  so  that  we  feel  like 
Moses  when  he  put  off  his  shoes  from  his  feet,  because  the  place  where- 
on he  f^tood  was  holy  ground.    It  is  true,  the  moss  *of  readers  under- 
stand not  this,  and  look  upon  the  Bible  as  a  common  book;  but  if 
they  understand  it  not,  at  least  let  them  allow  the  truthfalness  of  our 
assertion,  when  we  declare  that  hundreds  of  times  we  have  as  surely  felt 
the  presence  of  God  in  the  page  of  Si-ripture  as  ever  Elijah  did  when  he 
heard  the  Lord  speaking  in  a  still  small  voice.    The  Bible  has  often  ap- 
peared to  us  as  a  temple  God,  and  the  posts  of  its  doors  have  moved  at 
the  voice  of  him  that  cried,  whose  train  also  has  filled  the  temple.    We 
have  been  constraine  1  adoringly  to  cry,  with  the  seraphim,  *'  Holy,  holy, 
holy,  is  the  Lord  God  of  Hosts."     The  Jews  place  as  a  frontispiece  to 
their  great  Bible  the  text,  *^  Surely  God  is  in  this  place  ;  it  is  none 
other  than  the  house  of  God,  and  the  very  gate  of  heaven."     And  they 
say  well.    It  is,  indeed,  a  spiritual  temple,  a  most  holy  house,  garnished 
with  precious  stones  for  beauty,  and  overlaid  within  and  without  with 
pure  gold,  having  for  its  chief  glory  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  so 
gloriously  revealed,  that,  oftentimes,  tlie  priests  of  the  Lord  cannot  stand 
to  minister,  by  reason  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  which  fills  the  house. 
God  the  Holy  Spirit  vivifies  the  letter  with  his  presence,  and  then  it  is 
to  us  a  living  word  indeed. 

And  now,  dear  brethren,  if  these  things  be  so — and  our  experience 
certifies  them— let  us  take  care  how  we  trifle  with  a  book  which  is  so 
instinct  with  life.  Might  not  many  of  you  remember  your  faults  this 
day  were  we  to  ask  you  whether  you  are  habitual  students  of  holy 
writ  ?  Readers  of  it  I  believe  you  are;  but  are  you  searchers;  for  the 
promise  is  not  to  those  who  merely  read,  but  to  those  who  delight  in 
the  law  of  the  Lord,  and  meditate  therein  both  day  and  night.  Are  yon 
sitting  at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  with  his  word  as  your  school-book  ?  If 
not,  remember,  though  you  may  be  saved,  you  lack  very  much  of  the 
blessing  which  otherwise  you  might  enjoy.  Have  you  been  backsliding? 
Refresh  your  soul  bv  meditating  in  the  divine  statutes,  and  you  ym 
say,  with  David,  "  Thy  word  hath  quickened  me."  Are  you  faint  and 
weary  ?  Go  and  talk  with  this  living  book:  it  will  give  you  back  your 
energy,  and  you  shall  mount  again  as  with  the  wings  of  eagles.  But 
are  you  unconverted  altogether  ?  Then  I  cannot  direct  you  to  Bible- 
reading  as  being  the  way  of  salvation,  nor  speak  of  it  as  though  it  had 
any  merit  in  it ;  but  I  would,  nevertheless,  urge  upon  you  unconverted 
l)eople  great  reverence  for  Scripture,  an  intimate  acquaintance  with  its 
contents,  and  a  frequent  perusal  of  its  pages,  for  it  has  occurred  ten 
thousand  times  over  that  when  men  have  been  studying  the  word  of 
life,  the  word  has  brought  life  to  them.  **The  entrance  of  thy  word 
givoth  light."  Like  Elijah  and  the  dead  child,  the  word  has  stretched 
itself  upon  them,  and  their  dead  souls  have  been  made  to  live.  One  of  the 
likeliest  places  in  which  to  find  Christ  is  in  the  garden  of  the  Scriptures, 
for  there  he  i]eli«;hts  to  walk.  As  of  old,  the  blind  men  were  wont  to 
sit  by  the  wayside  begging,  so  that,  if  Jesus  passed  by,  they  might  cry  to 
him,  so  would  I  have  you  sit  down  by  the  wayside  of  the  Holy  Scrip- 


THE  TALKING  BOOK.  593 

tores.  Hear  the  promises,  listen  to  their  gracious  words ;  they  are  the 
footsteps  of  the  Saviour  ;  and,  as  you  hear  them,  may  you  be  led  to 
cry,  "  Thou  Son  of  David,  have  mercy  upon  me  !"  Attend  most  those 
ministries  which  preach  God's  word  most.  Do  not  select  those  that 
are  fullest  of  fine  speaking,  and  that  dazzle  you  with  expressions  which 
are  rather  ornamental  than  edifying ;  but  get  to  a  ministry  that  is  full 
of  God's  own  word,  and,  above  all,  learn  God's  word  itself.  Read  it 
with  a  desire  to  know  its  meaning,  and  I  am  persuaded  that,  thereby, 
many  of  you  who  are  now  far  from  God  will  be  brought  near  to  him, 
and  led  to  a  saving  faith  in  Jesus,  for  "  the  word  of  the  Lord  is  perfect, 
converting  the  soul."  "  Faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the 
word  of  God." 

II.  If  the  text  says,  "  When  thou  awakest,  it  shall  talk  with  thee," 
then  it  is  clear  the  word  is  personal.  *'  It  shall  talk  with  ihes''  It  is  not 
written,  "  It  shall  speak  to  the  air,  and  thou  shalt  hear  its  voice,"  but, 
**  It  shall  talk  with  Um,''  You  know  exactly  what  the  expression 
means.  I  am  not  exactly  talking  with  any  one  of  you  this  morning ; 
there  are  too  many  of  you,  and  I  am  bub  one  ;  but,  when  you  are  on  the 
road  home,  each  one  will  talk  with  his  fellow :  then  it  is  truly  talk  when 
man  speaks  to  man.  Now,  the  word  of  God  has  the  condescending 
habit  of  talking  to  men,  speaking  personally  to  them ;  and,  herein,  I 
desire  to  commend  the  word  of  God  to  your  love.  Oh  I  that  you  might 
esteem  it  very  precious  for  this  reason  I 

'^  It  shall  talK  wUh  thee,**  that  is  to  say,  God's  word  talks  about  men, 
and  about  modem  men ;  it  speaks  of  ourselves,  and  of  these  latter  days,  as 
precisely  as  if  it  had  only  appeared  this  last  week.  Some  go  to  the  word 
of  God  with  the  idea  that  they  shall  find  historical  information  about 
the  ancient  ages,  and  so  they  will,  but  that  is  not  the  object  of  the 
word.  Others  look  for  facts  upon  geology^  and  great  attempts  have 
been  made  either  to  bring  geology  round  to  Scripture,  or  Scripture  to 
geology.  We  may  always  rest  assured  that  truth  never  contradicts 
itself;  but,  as  nobody  knows  anything  yet  about  geology — for  its  theory 
IB  a  dream  and  an  imagination  altogether — we  will  wait*  till  the  philo- 
sophers settle  their  own  private  matters,  being  confident  that  when  they 
find  out  the  truth,  it  will  be  quite  consistent  with  what  God  has  revealed. 
At  any  rate,  we  may  leave  that.  The  main  teachings  of  Holy  Scripture 
are  al)out  men,  about  the  Paradise  of  unfallen  manhood,  the  &11,  the 
degeneracy  of  the  race,  and  the  means  of  its  redemption.  The  book 
speaks  of  victims  and  sacrifices,  priests  and  washings,  and  so  points  ns 
te  the  divine  plan  by  which  man  can  be  elevated  from  the  fall  and  be  re- 
conciled to  God.  Bead  Scripture  through,  and  yon  shall  find  that  its  great 
subject  is  that  which  concerns  the  race  as  to  their  most  important 
interests,  and  concerns  the  race,  not  as  Jews  or  as  Gentiles,  but  as  men ; 
not  as  Barbarians,  or  Scythians,  or  Greek,  or  bond,  or  free,  but  as  men  ; 
and  he  does  not  read  the  word  of  God  aright,  who  does  not  hear  it 
talking  to  him  about  things  which  intimately  concern  both  himself  and 
his  fellows.  It  is  a  book  that  talks,  talks  personally,  for  it  deals  with 
things  not  in  the  moon,  nor  in  the  planet  Jupiter,  nor  in  the  distant 
ages  long  gone  by,  nor  does  it  say  much  of  the  periods  yet  to  come,  but 
it  deals  with  us,  with  the  business  of  to-day ;  how  sin  may  be  to-day 
forgiven,  and  our  souls  brought  at  once  into  union  with  Christ. 


594  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Moreover,  this  book  is  so  personal,  that  it  speaks  io  men  in  aU  itatti 
and  cmidilions  before  Qod,  How  it  talks  to  sinners — ^talks,  I  say,  for  it 
puts  it  thus :  "  Come,  now,  and  let  us  reason  together ;  though  yonr 
sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  wool ;  though  thej  be  i-ed  like 
crimson,  they  shall  be  as  snow."  It  has  many  very  tender  exposta- 
lations  for  sinners.  It  stoops  to  their  condition  and  position.  I( 
they  will  not  stoop  to  God,  it  makes,  as  it  were,  eternal  mercy  stoop 
to  them.  It  talks  of  feasts  of  fat  things,  of  fat  things  fall  of  marrow; 
and  the  book,  as  it  talks,  reasons  with  mcn*s  hunger,  and  bids  them  eat 
and  be  satisfied.  It  speaks  of  garments  woven  in  the  loom  of  infinite 
wisdom  and  love,  and  so  it  talks  to  man's  nakedness,  and  entreats  him  to 
be  arrayed  in  the  divine  righteousness.  There  is  no  sinner,  in  any  con- 
dition, who  dare  say  there  is  nothing  in  the  word  of  God  to  suit  his  case. 
If  thou  hast  been  a  persecutor,  Saul's  history  talks  to  thee:  if  thou 
hadst  shed  innocent  blood  very  much,  Manasseh  would  speak  with  thee ; 
if  thou  hast  been  a  harlot,  or  a  thief,  it  has  special  passages  to  meet 
thee.  In  all  conditions  into  which  the  sinner  can  be  cast,  there  is  a 
word  that  precisely  meets  his  condition. 

And,  certainly,  when  we  become  the  children  of  God  the  book  talks 
with  us  wondrously.  In  the  family  of  heaven  it  is  the  child's  owd 
book.  We  no  sooner  know  our  Father  than  this  dear  book  comes  at 
once  as  a  love  letter  from  the  far-off  country,  signed  with  our  own 
Father's  hand,  and  perfumed  with  our  Father's  love.  If  we  grow  in 
grace,  or  if  wo  bacKslide,  in  either  case  Scripture  still  talks  with  as. 
Whatever  our  position  before  the  eternal  Goa,  the  book  seems  to  be 
written  on  purpose  to  meet  that  position.  It  talks  to  yon  as  yon  are, 
not  only  as  you  should  be,  or  as  others  have  been,  but  with  yon,  with 
you  personally,  about  your  present  condition. 

Have  you  never  noticed  how  personal  the  book  is  ^  to  all  your  statts 
of  mindy  in  reference  to  sadness  or  to  joy  ?  There  was  a  time  witli 
some  of  us  when  we  were  very  gloomy  and  sore  depressed,  and 
then  the  book  of  Job  mourned  to  the  same  dolorous  tune.  I  have 
turned  over  the  Lamentations  of  Jeremiah,  and  thought  that  I  ooold 
have  written  just  what  Jeremiah  wrote.  It  mourns  unto  ns  when 
we  lament.  On  the  other  hand,  when  the  soul  sets  up  to  the  ex- 
ceeding high  mountains,  to  the  top  of  Amana  and  Lebanon,  when  we 
behold  visions  of  glory,  and  see  our  Beloved  face  to  face,  lo  I  the  word 
is  at  our  side,  and  in  the  delightful  language  of  the  Psalms,  or  in  the 
yet  sweeter  expressions  of  the  Song  of  Solomon,  it  tells  ns  all  that  is  in 
our  heart,  and  talks  to  us  as  a  living  thing  that  has  been  in  the  deeps, 
and  has  been  on  the  heights,  that  has  known  the  overwhelmings  of 
affliction,  and  has  rejoiced  in  the  triumphs  of  delight.  The  word  of 
God  is  to  me  my  own  book  :  I  have  no  doubt,  brother,  it  is  the  same  to 
yon.  There  could  not  be  a  Bible  that  suited  me  better :  it  seems 
written  on  pui-pose  for  me.  Dear  sister,  have  not  yon  often  felt  as  yoa 
have  put  your  finger  on  a  promise,  **  Ah,  that  is  my  promise ;  if  there 
be  no  other  soul  whose  tearful  eyes  can  bedew  that  page  and  say,  *  It  is 
mine,'  yet  I,  a  poor  afflicted  one,  can  do  so !"  Oh,  yes  ;  the  book  is 
very  personal,  for  it  goes  into  all  the  details  of  our  case,  let  our  state 
be  what  it  may. 

And,  how  very  faithful  it  always  is.    You  never  find  the  word  of  God 


THE  TALKINa  BOOK.  595 

keeping  back  that  which  is  profitable  to  yon.  Like  Nathan  it  cries, 
"  Thou  art  the  man."  It  never  allows  our  sins  to  go  nnrebuked,  nor 
our  backslidings  to  escape  notice  till  they  grow  into  overt  sin.  It  gives 
us  timely  notice ;  it  cries  to  us  as  soon  as  we  begin  to  go  aside, 
"  Awake  thou  that  sleepest,"  "  Watch  and  pray/'  '*  Keep  thine  heart 
with  all  diligence,"  and  a  thousand  other  words  of  warning  does  it 
address  personally  to  each  one  of  us. 

Now  I  would  suggest,  before  I  leave  this  point,  a  little  self-exaraina- 
tion  as  healthful  for  each  of  us.  Does  the  word  of  God  after  this  fashion 
spak  to  my  soul  ?  Then  it  is  a  gross  folly  to  lose  by  generalisations 
that  precious  thing  which  can  only  be  realised  by  a  personal  grasp. 
How  sayest  thou,  dear  hearer?  dost  thou  read  the  book  for  thyself,  and 
does  the  book  speak  to  thee  ?  Has  it  ever  condemned  thee,  and  hast 
thou  trembled  before  the  word  of  God  ?  Has  it  ever  pointed  thee  to 
Christ,  and  hast  thou  looked  to  Jesus  the  incarnate  Saviour  ?  Does  the 
book  now  seal,  as  with  the  witness  of  the  Spirit,  the  witness  of  thine 
own  spirit  that  ihon  art  born  of  God?  Art  thou  in  the  habit  of  going  to 
the  book  to  know  thine  own  condition,  to  see  thine  own  face  as  in  a 
glass  ?  Is  it  thy  family  medicine  ?  Is  it  thy  test  and  tell-tale  to  let 
thee  know  thy  spiritual  condition  ?  Oh,  do  not  treat  the  book  other- 
wise than  this,  for  if  thou  dost  thus  unto  it,  and  takest  it  to  be  tiiy 
personal  friend,  happy  art  thou,  since  God  will  dwell  with  the  man  that 
trembles  at  his  word ;  but,  if  you  treat  it  as  anybody's  book  rather  than 
your  own,  then  beware,  lest  you  be  numbered  with  the  wicked  who 
deapise  God's  statutes. 

III.  From  the  text  we  learn  that  holy  soeiptureisvbryfamiliak. 
*'  When  thou  awakest,  it  shall  talk  with  thee.  To  talk  signifies  fellow- 
ship, communion,  familiarity.  It  does  not  say,  "  It  shall  preach  to 
thee."  Many  persons  have  a  high  esteem  for  the  book,  but  they  look 
upon  it  as  though  it  were  some  very  elevated  teacher  speaking  to  them 
from  a  lofty  tribunal,  while  they  stand  far  below.  I  will  not  altogether 
condemn  that  reverence,  but  it  were  for  better  if  they  would  understand 
the  familiarity  of  God's  word ;  it  does  not  so  much  preach  to  us  as 
talk  to  us.  It  is  not,  ''  When  thou  awakest,  it  shall  lecture  thee,"  or, 
'*  it  shall  scold  thee; "  no,  no,  " it  shall  talk  with  thee."  We  sit  at  its 
feet,  or  rather  at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  in  the  word,  and  it  comes  down  to 
ns ;  it  is  familiar  with  us,  as  a  man  talketh  to  his  friend.  And  here  let 
me  remind  you  of  the  delightftil  familiarity  of  Scripture  in  this  respect, 
that  it  speaks  the  language  of  men.  If  God  had  written  us  a  book  in  his 
own  language,  we  could  not  have  comprehended  it,  or  what  little  we 
understood  would  have  so  alarmed  us,  that  we  should  have  besought 
that  those  words  should  not  be  spoken  to  us  any  more ;  but  the  liord, 
in  his  word,  often  uses  language  which,  though  it  be  infallibly  true  in 
its  meaning,  is  not  after  the  knowledge  of  God,  but  according  to  the 
manner  of  man.  I  mean  this,  that  the  word  uses  similies  and  analogies 
of  which  we  may  say  that  they  speak  humanly,  and  not  according 
to  the  absolute  truth  as  God  himself  sees  it.  As  men  conversing  with 
babes  use  their  broken  speech,  so  doth  the  condescending  word.  It  is 
not  written  in  the  celestial  tongue,  but  in  the  patois  of  this  lowland 
country,  condescending  to  men  of  low  estate.  It  feeds  us  on  bread 
broken  down  to  our  capacity,  ^*  food  convenient  for  us."    It  speaks  of 


59G  METItOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

God's  arm,  his  hand,  his  finger,  his  wings,  and  evon  of  his  featbcn. 
Now,  all  this  is  ftimiliar  picturing,  to  meet  our  childish  capacities ;  fw 
the  Infinite  One  is  not  to  be  conceived  of  as  though  sach  similitadei 
were  literal  facts.  It  is  an  amazing  instance  of  divine  love,  that  he  pats 
those  things  so  that  we  may  be  helped  to  grasp  sublime  traths.  Letu 
thiuik  the  Lord  of  the  word  for  this. 

llow  tenderly  Sjripture  comes  down  to  aimplkUy.  Suppose  tiie 
sacred  volnme  had  all  been  like  the  book  of  the  prophet  Ezekiel, 
small  wonld  have  been  its  service  to  the  generality  of  mankind. 
Imagine  that  the  entire  volume  had  been  as  mysterious  as  the  Book  of 
Rovohition  :  it  might  have  been  our  duty  to  study  it,  but  if  its  bendit 
depended  upon  our  understanding  it,  we  should  have  failed  to  attain  it 
But  how  simple  are  the  gospels,  how  plain  these  words,  ''He  that 
bclieveth  and  is  baptised  shall  be  saved;'*  how  deliciously  dear  thoie 
parables  about  the  lost  piece  of  money,  the  lost  sheep,  and  the  prodigil 
son.  Wlierever  the  word  touches  upon  vital  points,  it  is  as  bright  as 
a  sunbeam.  Mysteries  there  are,  and  profound  doctrines,  deeps  where 
Leviathan  can  swim ;  but,  where  it  has  to  do  immediately  with  what 
concerns  us  for  eternity,  it  is  so  plain  that  the  babe  in  grace  may  safely 
wade  in  its  refreshing  streams.  In  the  gospel  narrative  the  w^&r- 
ing  man,  though  a  fool,  need  not  err.  It  is  familiar  talk ;  it  is  Uod*8 
great  mind  brought  down  to  our  littleness,  that  it  may  lift  ns  up. 

How  familiar  the  book  is  too — I  speak  now  as  to  my  own  feeliag»— 
as  to  all  tfuU  concerns  us.  It  talks  about  my  flesh,  and  my  corruptions, 
and  my  sins,  as  only  one  that  knew  me  could  speak.  It  talks  of  m 
trials  in  the  wisest  way ;  some,  I  dare  not  tell,  it  knows  all  about  It 
talks  about  my  difficulties;  some  would  sneer  at  them  and  laugh,  bat 
this  book  sympathises  with  them,  knows  my  tremblings,  and  my  fears, 
and  my  doubts,  and  all  the  storm  that  rages  within  the  little  world  of 
my  nature.  The  book  has  been  through  all  my  experience;  somehow 
or  other  it  maps  it  all  out,  and  talks  with  me  as  if  it  were  a  fellow- 
pilgrim.  It  does  not  speak  to  me  unpractically,  and  scold  me,  and  look 
down  upon  me  from  an  awful  height  of  stern  perfection,  as  if  it  were  an 
nngel,  and  could  not  sympathise  with  fallen  men ;  but  like  the  Loid 
whom  it  reveals,  the  book  seems  as  if  it  were  touched  with  a  feeling 
of  my  infirmities,  and  had  been  tempted  in  all  points  as  I  am.  Have 
you  not  often  wondered  at  the  human  utterances  of  the  divine  word:  it 
thunders  like  God  and  yet  weeps  like  man.  It  seems  impossible  that 
anything  should  be  too  little  for  the  word  of  God  to  notice,  or  too  bitter, 
or  even  too  sinful  for  that  book  to  overlook.  It  touches  humanity  at 
all  points.  Everywhere  it  is  a  personal,  familiar  acquaintance,  and 
seems  to  say  to  itself,  **  Shall  I  hide  this  thing  from  AbnJiam  my  frittid?'* 

And,  how  often  the  book  has  answered  enquiries  I  I  have  been 
amas^d  in  times  of  difficulties  to  see  how  plain  the  oracle  is.  You  have 
asked  friends,  and  they  could  not  advise  you ;  but  you  have  gone  to 
your  knees,  and  God  has  told  you.  You  have  questioned,  and  you  Imve 
puzzled,  and  you  have  tried  to  elucidate  the  problem,  and,  lo  I  in  the 
chapter  read  at  morning  prayer,  or  in  a  passage  of  Scripture  that 
lay  open  before  you,  the  direction  has  been  given.  Have  we  not 
seen  a  text,  as  it  were,  plume  its  wings,  and  fly  from  the  word  like  a 
seraph,  and  touch  our  lips  with  a  live  altar  coal?  It  lay  likeaslumbeiing 


TSM  XJLLKUCa  BOOK.  597 

angel  amidst  ^e  beds  of  spices  of  the  sacred  word,  but  it  received 
a  divine  misaioDi  and  brought  consolation  and  instruction  to  your 
heart. 

The  word  of  God,  then,  talks  with  us  in  the  sense  of  being  familiar 
with  us.  Do  we  understand  this  ?  I  will  close  this  point  bj  another 
word  of  application.  Who,  then,  that  finds  God's  word  so  dear  and 
kind  a  friend  would  spurn  or  neglect  it  ?  If  any  of  jou  have  despised 
it,  what  shall  I  say  to  you  ?  If  it  were  a  dreary  book,  written 
within  and  without  with  curses  and  lamentations,  whose  every  letter 
flashed  with  declarations  of  vengeance,  I  might  see  some  reason 
why  we  should  not  read  it;  but,  0  precious,  priceless  companion, 
dear  friend  of  all  my  sorrows,  making  my  bed  in  my  sickness,  the 
light  of  my  darkness,  and  the  joy  of  my  soul,  how  can  I  for- 
get thee — how  can  I  forsake  thee  ?  I  have  heard  of  one  who  said 
that  the  dust  on  some  men's  Bibles  lay  there  so  thick  and  long  that  you 
might  write  ** Damnation  "  on  it.  I  am  afraid  that  such  is  the  case  with 
some  of  you.  Mr.  Sogers,  of  Dedham,  on  one  occasion,  after  preach- 
ing about  the  preciousncss  of  the  Bible,  took  it  away  from  the  front  of 
the  pulpit,  ana,  putting  it  down  behind  him,  pictured  God  as  saying, 
''  You  ao  not  reaa  the  book  :  vou  do  not  care  about  it ;  I  will  take  it 
back — ^you  shall  not  be  weariea  with  it  any  more."  And  then  he  pour- 
trayed  the  grief  of  wise  men's  hearts  when  they  found  the  blessed  reve- 
lation withdrawn  from  men ;  and  how  they  would  besiege  the  throne 
of  grace,  day  and  night,  to  ask  it  back.  I  am  sure  he  spoke  the 
truth.  Though  we  too  much  neglect  it,  yet  ou^ht  we  to  prize  it  beyond 
all  price,  for,  if  it  were  taken  from  us,  we  shouM  have  lost  our  kindest 
oomforter  in  the  hour  of  need  God  grant  us  to  love  the  Scriptures 
more ! 

IV.  Fourthly,  and  with  brevity,  our  text  evidently  shows  that  thb 
WOBD  18  BESFONSIYE.  '<  When  thou  awakest,  it  shall  talk  with  thee," 
not  to  thee.  Now,  talk  with  a  man  is  not  all  on  one  side.  To  talk  with  a 
man  needs  answering  talk  from  him.  You  have  both  of  you  something 
to  say  when  you  talk  together.  It  is  a  conversation  to  which  each  one 
oontributes  his  part.  Now,  Scripture  is  a  marvellously  conversational 
book ;  it  talks,  and  makes  men  talk.  It  is  ever  ready  to  respond  to  us. 
Suppose  you  go  to  the  Scriptures  in  a  certain  state  of  spiritual  life :  you 
must  have  noticed,  I  think,  that  the  word  answers  to  that  state. 
If  you  are  dark  and  gloomy,  it  will  appear  as  though  it  had  put 
itself  in  mourning,  so  that  it  might  lament  with  you.  When  you 
are  on  the  dunghill,  there  sits  Scripture,  with  dust  and  ashes  on 
its  head,  weeping  side  by  side  with  you,  and  not* upbraiding  like  Job's 
miserable  comforters.  But  suppose  you  come  to  the  book  with  gleaming 
eyes  of  joy,  you  will  hear  it  lau^rh ;  it  will  sing  and  play  to  you  as  with 
Malteiy  and  harp,  it  will  bring  forth  the  high-sounding  cymbals. 
Enter  its  goodly  land  in  a  happy  state,  and  you  shall  go  forth  with  joy 
and  be  led  forth  with  peace,  its  mountains  and  its  hills  shall  break 
before  you  into  singing,  and  all  the  trees  of  the  field  shall  clap  their 
hands.  As  in  water  the  face  is  reflected,  so  in  the  living  stream  of 
revealed  truth  a  man  sees  his  own  image. 

If  you  come  to  Holy  Scripture  with  growth  in  grace,  and  with 
with  aspirations  for  yet  higher  attainments,  the  book  grows  with  you, 


598  mraoFOLiTAH  tabebitaole  pulpit. 

P'ows  upon  yon.  It  is  ever  beyond  yoa,  and  cheerily  crie8»  **  Highv 
yet ;  Excelsior ! "  Many  books  in  my  library  are  novr  behind  and  benesth 
me ;  I  read  fchem  years  ago,  with  considerable  pleasure ;  I  have 
read  them  since,  with  disappointment ;  I  shall  never  read  them  again, 
for  they  are  of  no  service  to  me.  They  were  good  in  their  way  oDoe, 
and  so  were  the  clothes  I  wore  when  I  was  ten  years  old ;  but  I  have 
ontgrown  them,  I  know  more  than  these  books  know,  and  know  whereiii 
they  are  faulty.  Nobody  ever  outgrows  Scripture ;  the  book  widens 
and  deepens  with  our  years.  It  is  true,  it  cannot  really  fs^^w,  fiv  it  is 
perfect ;  but  it  does  so  to  our  apprehension.  The  deeper  yon  dig  into 
Ssripture,  the  more  you  find  that  it  is  a  great  abyss  of  trat^.  The  be- 
gin aer  learns  four  or  five  points  of  orth<^oxy,  and  says, ''  I  understand 
the  gospel,  I  have  grasped  all  the  Bible.*'  Wait  a  bit,  and  when  his 
soul  grows  and  knows  more  of  Christ,  he  will  confess,  **  Thy  command- 
ment is  exceeding  broad,  I  have  only  begun  to  understand  it." 

There  is  one  thin^  about  Clod's  word  which  shows  its  responsiveness 
to  us,  and  that  is  when  you  reveal  your  heart  to  it,  it  reveals  its  heart 
to  you.  If,  as  you  read  the  word,  you  say,  **  0  blessed  truth,  thou  art 
indeed  realised  in  mj  experience ;  come  thou  still  further  into  my  heart 
I  pive  up  my  prejudices,  I  assign  myself,  like  the  wax,  to  be  stamped 
with  thy  seal," — when  von  do  tnat,  and  open  your  heart  to  Scnptare, 
Scripture  will  open  its  heart  to  you ;  for  it  has  secrets  which  it  does  not 
tell  to  the  casual  reader,  it  has  precious  things  of  the  eyarlastinf  hills 
which  can  only  be  discoTered  by  miners  who  know  how  to  dig  and  open 
the  secret  places,  and  penetrate  great  veins  of  everlasting  riches.  Give 
thyself  up  to  the  Bible,  and  the  Bible  will  give  itself  up  to  thee.  Be 
candid  with  it,  and  honest  with  thy  soul,  and  the  Scripture  will  take 
down  its  golden  key,  and  open  one  door  after  another,  and  diow  to 
thy  astonished  gaze  ingots  of  silver  which  thou  conldst  not  weigh,  and 
heaps  of  gold  which  thou  conldst  not  measure.  Happy  is  that  man 
who,  in  talking  with  the  Bible,  tells  it  all  his  heart,  and  learns  the 
secret  of  the  Lord  which  is  with  them  that  fear  him. 

And  how,  too,  if  you  love  the  Bible  and  talk  out  your  love  to  it,  the 
Bible  will  love  you  !  Its  wisdom  says,  '^Ilove  them  that  love  me." 
Embrace  the  word  of  God,  and  the  word  of  Qod  embraces  you  at  once. 
When  you  prize  its  every  letter,  then  it  smiles  upon  you  gracioaslv, 
greets  you  with  many  welcomes,  and  treats  you  as  an  honoured  guest. 
I  am  always  sorry  to  be  on  bad  terms  with  t^e  Bible,  for  then 
1  must  be  on  bad  terms  with  God.  Whenever  my  creed  does 
not  square  with  God's  word,  I  think  it  is  time  to  mould 
iny  creed  into  another  form.  As  for  God's  words,  they  must  not 
bu  touched  with  hammer  or  axe.  Oh,  the  chiselling,  and  cutting,  and 
hammering  in  certain  commentaries  to  make  G<^'s  Bible  orthodox 
and  systematic  I  How  much  better  to  leave  it  alone  I  The  woid  is 
right,  and  we  are  wrong,  wherein  we  agree  not  with  it.  The  teach- 
ings of  God's  word  are  infallible,  and  must  be  reverenced  as  fcuch. 
Now,  when  you  love  it  so  well  that  you  would  not  touch  a  sinji^le  line 
of  it,  and  prize  it  so  much  that  you  would  even  die  for  the  defence  <rf 
one  of  its  truths,  then,  as  it  is  dear  to  yon,  you  will  be  dear  to  it,  and  it 
will  grasp  you  and  unfold  itself  to  you  as  it  does  not  to  the  world. 
Dear  brethren  and  sisters,  I  must  leave  this  pointy  but  it  sliali  be 


THE  TALKING  BOOK.  599 

with  this  remark — ^Do  you  talk  to  God  ?  Does  God  talk  to  you  ?  Does 
your  heart  go  up  to  heaveu,  and  does  his. word  come  fresh  from  heaven 
to  your  soul  ?  If  not,  you  do  not  know  the  experience  of  the  living 
child  of  God,  and  I  can  earnestly  pray  you  may.  May  you  this  day  be 
brought  to  see  Ohrist  Jesus  in  the  word,  to  see  a  crucified  Saviour  there, 
and  to  put  your  trust  in  him,  and  then,  from  this  day  forward,  the 
word  will  echo  to  your  heart — it  will  respond  to  your  emotions. 

V.  Lastly,  Sceipture  is  influential.  That  I  gather  from  the  fact 
that  Solomon  says,  '^  When  thou  wakest,  it  shall  talk  with  thee  ;"  and 
follows  it  up  with  the  remark  that  it  keeps  man  from  the  strange  woman, 
and  from  other  sins  which  he  goes  on  to  mention.  When  the  word  of 
Ck>d  talks  with  us,  it  influences  us.  All  talk  inflaences  more  or  less.  I 
believe  there  is  more  done  in  this  world  for  good  or  bad  by  talk  than 
tiiere  is  by  preaching;  indeed,  the  preacher  preaches  best  when  he 
talks ;  there  is  no  oratory  in  the  world  that  is  equid  to  simple  talk  :  it 
is  th^  model  of  eloquence ;  and  all  your  rhetorician's  action  and  yerbiage 
are  so  much  rubbish.  The  most  efficient  way  of  preaching  is  simply 
talking;  the  man  permitting  his  heart  to  run  over  at  his  lips  into  otner 
men's  hearts.  Now,  this  book,  as  it  talks  with  us,  influences  us,  and  it 
does  so  in  many  ways. 

It  soothes  our  sorrows,  and  encourages  us.  Many  a  warrior  has  been 
ready  to  steal  away  from  God's  battle,  but  the  word  has  laid  its  hand 
on  him,  and  said,  "  Stand  on  thy  feet,  be  not  discouraged,  be  of  good 
cheer,  I  will  strengthen  thee,  I  will  help  thee ;  yea,  I  will  uphold  thee 
with  the  right  hand  of  my  righteousness."  Brave  saints  we  have  read 
of,  but  we  little  know  how  o^en  they  would  have  been  arrant  cowards, 
only  the  good  word  came  and  strengthened  them,  and  they  went  back 
to  be  stronger  than  lions  and  swifter  than  eagles. 

While  the  book  thus  soothes  and  cheers,  it  has  a  wonderfully 
elevating  power.  Have  you  never  felt  it  put  fresh  life-blood  into  you  ? 
You  have  thought,  "  How  can  I  continue  to  live  at  such  a  dying  rate 
as  I  have  lived,  something  nobler  must  I  gain  ?"  Read  that  part  of 
the  word  which  tells  of  the  agonies  of  your  Master,  and  you  will  feel — 

^  Now  for  the  love  I  bear  his  name. 
What  was  my  gain  I  count  my  loss 
My  former  pride  I  call  my  shame, 
And  nail  my  glory  to  his  cross.** 

Bead  of  the  glories  of  heaven  which  this  book  reveals,  and  you  will 
feel  that  you  can  run  the  race  with  quickened  speed,  because  a  crown 
80  bright  is  glittering  in  your  view.  Nothing  can  so  liflb  a  man  above 
the  gross  considerations  of  carnal  gain  or  human  applause  as  to  have 
his  soul  saturated  with  the  spirit  of  truth.    It  elevates  as  well  as  cheers. 

Then,  too,  how  often  it  warns  and  restrains.  I  had  gone  to  the 
right  or  to  the  left  if  the  law  of  the  Lord  had  not  said,  "  Let  thine  eyes 
look  right  on,  and  let  thine  eyelids  look  straight  before  thee." 

This  book's  consecrated  talk  sanctifies  and  moulds  the  mind  into  the 
image  of  Christ.  You  cannot  expect  to  grow  in  grace  if  you  do  not 
read  the  Scriptures.  If  you  are  not  familiar  with  the  word,  you  cannot 
expect  to  become  like  him  that  spake  it.  Oar  experience  is,  as  it  were, 
the  potter's  wheel  on  which  we  revolve ;  and  the  hand  of  God  is  in  the 


600  MSraOPOLITAX  TABEBNACLB  PULPIT. 

Scriptares  to  mould  ds  after  the  fiaBhioii  and  image  which  he  intaids  to 
bring  us  to.  Oh,  be  much  with  the  holy  word  of  God,  and  yon  wiUbe 
holy.  Be  much  with  the  silly  novels  of  the  day,  and  the  foolish  trifles 
of  the  hour,  and  you  will  degenerate  into  yapid  wasters  of  yo?.r  time; 
but  be  much  with  the  solid  teaching  of  God's  word,  and  ^ou  will  be- 
come solid  and  substantial  men  and  women :  drink  them  in,  and  feed 
upon  them,  and  they  shall  produce  in  you  a  Christ-likeness,  at  which  the 
world  shall  stand  astonished. 

Lastly,  let  the  Scripture  talk  with  you,  and  it  will  confirm  and  settte 
you.  We  hear  every  now  and  then  of  apostates  from  the  gospeL  They 
must  have  been  little  taught  in  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  A  great 
outcry  is  made,  every  now  and  then,  about  our  all  being  perverted  to 
liome.  I  was  assured  the  other  day  by  a  good  man,  with  a  great  deal 
of  alarm,  that  all  England  was  going  over  to  Popery.  I  told  him  I  did 
not  know  what  kind  of  God  he  worshipped,  but  my  God  was  a  good  deal 
bigger  than  the  devil,  and  did  not  intend  to  let  the  devil  have  his  way 
after  all,  and  that  I  was  not  half  as  much  afraid  of  the  Pope  at  Rome 
as  of  the  Ritualists  at  home.  But  mark  it,  there  is  some  truth  in 
these  fears.  There  will  be  a  going  over  to  one  form  of  error  or 
another,  unless  there  be  in  the  Christian  church  a  more  honest,  in- 
dustrious, and  general  reading  of  Holy  Scripture.  What  if  I  were  to 
say  most  of  you  church  members  do  not  read  your  Bibles,  should  1  be 
slandering  you  ?  You  hear  on  the  Sabbath  day  a  chapter  read,  and 
you  perhaps  read  a  passage  at  family  prayer,  but  a  very  large  number 
never  reaa  the  Bible  privately  for  themselves,  they  take  their  religion 
out  of  the  monthly  magazine,  or  accept  it  from  the  miuister*s  lipa. 
Oh,  for  the  Berean  spirit  back  again,  to  search  the  Scriptures  whether 
these  things  be  so.  I  would  like  to  see  a  huge  pile  of  all  the  books, 
good  and  bad  that  were  ever  written,  prayer-books,  and  sermons,  and 
hymn-books,  and  all,  smoking  like  Sodom  of  old,  if  the  reading  of  those 
books  keeps  you  away  from  the  reading  of  the  Bible ;  for  a  ton  weight 
of  human  literature  is  not  worth  an  ounce  of  Scripture;  one  single 
drop  of  the  essential  tincture  of  the  word  of  God  is  better  than  a 
sea  full  of  our  coramcntings  and  sermonisings,  and  the  like.  The 
word,  the  simple,  pure,  infallible  word  of  God,  we  must  live  upon  if 
we  are  to  become  strong  against  error,  and  tenacious  of  truth.  Brethren, 
may  you  be  established  in  the  faith,  rooted,  grounded,  built  up;  but  I 
know  you  cannot  be  except  ye  search  the  Scriptures  continually. 

The  time  is  coming  when  we  shall  all  fall  a.sleep  in  death.  Oh, 
how  blessed  it  will  be  to  find  when  we  awake  that  the  word  of  God 
will  talk  with  us  then,  and  remember  its  ancient  friendship.  Thea 
the  promise  which  we  loved  before  shall  be  fulfilled  ;  the  charming  in» 
tiniations  of  a  blessed  future  shall  be  all  realised,  and  the  face  of 
Clirist,  whom  we  saw  as  through  a  glass  darkly,  shall  be  all  uncovered, 
and  he  shall  shine  upon  us  as  the  sun  in  its  strength.  God  grant  as 
to  love  the  word,  ana  feed  thereon,  and  the  Lord  shall  have  the  glory 
for  ever  and  ever.    Amen  and  amen. 


rouTioN  OF  ScfiiPTURB  READ  BEFORE  Sbrmon. — Psalm  cxix.  161 — 179 ; 

Proverbs  vL  1—23. 


^ctrojnlttan  ilalr^niade  ftilBtt. 


PLEADING. 


31   ^^rmon 


Delivehed  on  Lobd's-dat  Mobnino,  Octobeb  29th,  1871,  BT 

C.  E  SPUROEON, 

AT     THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,     NEWINGTON. 


*'  Bat  I  am  poor  and  needy :  make  haste  unto  me,  O  God :  thou  art  my  help  and 
my  deliverer ;  O  Lord,  make  no  tarrying." — Psalm  Ixx.  5. 

Young  painters  were  anxious,  in  the  olden  times,  to  study  under  the 
great  masters.  Thej  tx)ncluded  that  they  should  more  easily  attain  to 
excellence  if  they  entered  the  schools  of  eminent  men.  At  this  present 
time,  men  will  pay  large  premiums  that  their  sons  may  be  apprenticed 
or  articled  to  those  who  best  understand  their  trades  or  professions , 
now,  if  any  of  us  would  learn  the  sacred  art  and  mystery  of  prayeii. 
it  is  well  for  us  to  study  the  productions  of  the  greatest  masters  of  thatt 
science.  I  am  unable  to  point  out  one  who  understood  it  better  than 
did  the  psalmist  David.  So  well  did  he  know  how  to  praise,  that 
his  psalms  hare  become  the  language  of  good  men  in  all  ages;  and  so 
well  did  he  understand  how  to  pray,  that  if  we  catch  his  spirit,  and 
follow  his  mode  of  prayer,  we  shall  hare  learned  to  plead  with  God 
alter  the  most  prevalent  sort.  Place  before  you,  first  of  all,  David*s  Son 
and  David's  Lord,  that  most  mighty  of  all  intercessors,  and,  next  to 
him,  ^ou  shall  find  David  to  be  one  of  the  most  admirable  models  for 
your  miitation. 

We  shall  consider  our  text,  then,  as  one  of  the  productions  of  a  great 
master  in  spiritual  matters,  and  we  will  study  it,  praying  all  the  while 
t^t  God  will  help  us  to  pray  after  the  like  fashion. 

In  our  text  we  have  the  soul  of  a  successful  pleader  under  four 
aspects  :  we  view,  first,  the  soul  eon/sssing :  "  I  am  poor  and  needy.'* 
You  have,  next,  ihs  soul  pleading,  for  he  makes  a  plea  out  of  his  poor 
oondition,  and  adds,  "  Make  haste  unto  me,  0  God  I"  You  see,  thirdly,  I 
a  9$ul  in  its  urgency ^  for  he  cries,  ''Make  haste,"  and  he  varies  the  ex- 
pressicm  but  keeps  the  same  idea:  ''Make  no  tarrying."  And  yoa 
nave,  in  the  fourth  and  last  view,  a  soul  grasping  Ood,  for  the  psalmist 
puts  it  thus  :  '*  Thou  art  my  help  and  my  deliveiler;"  thus  with  both 
hands  he  lays  hold  up<Mi  his  God,  so  as  not  to  let  him  go  till  a  blessing 
is  obtained. 
No.  1,018. 


G02  METBOPOUTAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

I.  To  be^n,  then,  wc  see  in  this  model  of  supplication^  A  soul  ooi- 
FESSiNG.  The  wrestler  strips  before  he  enters  upon  the  oontesti  aad 
confession  docs  the  like  for  the  man  who  is  about  to  plead  with  God. 
A  racer  on  the  plains  of  prayer  cannot  hope  to  win,  unless,  by  con- 
fession, repentance,  and  faith,  he  lays  aside  every  weight  of  sin. 

Now,  let  it  be  ever  remembered  that  confession  is  absolutely  needfld 
to  the  sinner  when  he  first  seeks  a  Saviour.  It  is  not  possible  for 
thee,  0  seeker,  to  obtain  peace  for  thy  troubled  heart,  till  thou  shall 
have  acknowledged  thy  transgression  and  thine  iniquity  before  the 
Lord.  Thou  mayest  do  what  thou  wilt,  ay,  even  attempt  to  believe 
in  Jesus,  but  thou  shalt  find  that  the  faith  of  God's  elect  is  noi 
in  thee,  unless  thou  art  willing  to  make  a  full  confession  of  tbj 
tranR<n*e^ion,  and  lay  bare  thy  heart  before  God.  We  do  ti<* 
usually  think  of  giving  charity  to  those  who  do  not  acknowledge  that 
they  need  it :  the  physician  docs  not  send  his  medicine  to  those  who 
are  not  sick.  There  is  too  much  to  be  done  in  the  world  of  necessary 
work  for  us  to  undertake  works  of  supererogation;  and,  surely,  to 
clothe  those  who  are  not  naked,  and  to  feed  those  that  are  not  hunpy, 
is  to  attempt  superfluous  work,  which  will  bring  us  no  credit.  God 
will  not  do  this:  you  must  ha  empty  before  you  can  be  filled  by 
him,  and  you  must  confess  your  emptiness,  too,  or  else  assuredly  fee 
will  not  come  to  fill  the  full,  nor  to  lift  up  those  who  are  already  higli 
enoui^h  in  their  own  esteem.  The  blind  man  in  the  gospels  had  to  fed 
his  blindness,  and  to  sit  by  the  wayside  begging;  if  he  had  entertained 
a  doubt  as  to  whether  he  were  blind  or  not,  the  Lord  would  have  passed 
him  by.  He  opens  the  eyes  of  those  who  confess  their  blindness,  W  of 
others,  he  says,  "  Because  ye  say  we  see,  therefore,  your  sin  rcmaineili." 
He  asks  of  tliose  who  are  brought  to  him,  *'  What  wilt  thou  that  1  aboBui 
do  unto  thee  ?"  in  order  that  their  need  may  be  publicly  avowed,  h 
must  be  so  with  all  of  us :  we  must  offer  the  confession,  or  we  canxtob 
gain  the  benediction. 

Let  mc  speak  especially  to  you  who  desire  to  find  peace  with  God,  and 
salvation  through  the  precious  blood :  you  will  do  well  to  make  your  con- 
fession before  God  very  frank,  very  sincere,  very  explicit  Surely  youhiv* 
nothing  to  hide,  for  there  is  nothing  that  you  can  hide.  He  knows  your 
guilt  already,  but  he  would  have  you  know  it,  and  therefore  hebida  yoa 
confess  it.  Go  into  the  details  of  your  sin  in  your  secret  acknowledg* 
ments  before  God;  strip  yourself  of  all  excuses,  make  no  apologies ;  sayi 
''  Against  thee,  thee  only,  have  I  sinned,  and  done  this  evil  in  thy  sight.  * 
that  thou  mightest  be  justified  when  thou  speakest,  and  be  dear  wbeD 
thou  judgest."  Acknowledge  the  evil  of  sin,  ask  God  to  make  you  feel  it; 
do  not  treat  it  as  a  trifle,  for  it  is  none.  To  redeem  the  sinner  from  thf^ 
effect  of  sin  Christ  himself  must  needs  die,  and  unless  you  be  delivered 
^m  it  you  must  die  eternally.  Therefore,  play  not  with  sin ;  do  not 
confess  it  as  though  it  were  some  venial  fi&ult,  which  would  not  have 
been  noticed  unless  God  had  been  too  severe ;  but  labour  to  see  sin  ai^ 
God  sees  it,  as  an  offence  against  all  that  is  good,  a  rebellion  against 
all  that  is  kind;  see  it  to  be  treason,  to  be  ingratitude,  to  be  a  meaB 
and  base  thing.  Do  not  think  that  yon  can  improve  your  condition 
before  God  by  painting  your  case  in  brighter  colours  than  it  should  bOi 
Blacken  it:   if  it  were  possible  blacken  it,  but  it  is  not  poflBible. 


PLBADINO.  :C03 

When  jon  &el  your  Bin  most  yon  have  not  half  felt  it;  when  yon  coo* 
fees  it  most  fhlly  yon  do  not  krow  a  tithe  of  it ;  bnt  oh,  to  the  ntmost 
of  yonr  ability  make  a  clean  breast  of  it,  and  say, "  I  have  sinned 
against  heaven,  and  before  thee."  Acknowledge  the  sins  of  yonr  yontb 
and  yonr  manhood,  the  sins  of  yonr  body  and  of  yonr  sonl,  the  sins  of 
omission  and  of  commission,  sins  against  the  law  and  offences  against  the 
gospel;  acknowledge  all,  neither  for  a  moment  seek  to  deny  one  por- 
tion of  the  eyil  with  which  Ood's  law,  yonr  own  oonscience,  and  his  Holy 
Spirit  justly  chaise  you. 

And  oh,  soul,  U  thou  wouldst  get  peace  and  approval  with  God  in 
prayer,  confess  the  ill  desert  of  thy  sin.  Submit  thyself  to  whatever 
divine  justice  may  sentence  thee  to  endure  :  confess  that  the  deepest 
bell  is  thy  desert,  and  confess  this  not  with  thy  lips  only,  bnt  with  thy 
aoul.    Let  this  be  the  doleful  ditty  of  thine  inmost  heart— 

*'  Should  sudden  vengeance  seize  my  breath, 
I  must  pronounce  thee  just  in  death ; 
And,  if  my  soul  were  sent  to  hell. 
Thy  righteous  law  approves  it  well.** 

If  thou  wilt  condemn  thyself,  Ood  will  acquit  thee;  if  thou  wilt  put 
the  rope  about  thy  neck,  and  sentence  thyself,  then  he  who  otherwise 
would  have  sentenced  thee  will  say,  "  I  forgive  thee,  through  the  meri<; 
of  my  Son."  But  never  expect  that  the  King  of  heaven  will  pardon  a 
traitor,  if  he  will  not  confess  and  forsake  his  treason.  Even  the  tenderesc 
&ther  expects  that  the  child  should  humble  himself  when  he  has 
offended,  and  he  will  not  withdraw  his  frown  from  him  till  with  tears 
he  has  said,  "Father,  I  have  sinned."  Darest  thou  expect  God  to 
humble  himself  to  thee,  and  would  it  not  be  so  if  he  did  not  constrain 
thee  to  humble  thyself  to  him  ?  Wouldst  thou  have  him  connive  at 
thy  faults  and  wink  at  thy  transgressions  ?  He  will  have  mercy,  but  he 
must  be  holy.  He  is  ready  to  forgive,  but  not  to  tolerate  sin ;  and, 
therefore,  he  cannot  let  theel)e  forgiven  if  thou  huggest  thy  sins,  or  if 
thou  presumest  to  say,  ''  I  have  not  sinned."  Hasten,  then,  0  seeker, 
hasten,  I  pray  thee,  to  the  mercy  seat  with  this  upon  thy  lips :  "  I  am 
poor  and  needy,  I  am  sinful,  I  am  lost ;  have  pity  on  me."  With  such 
an  acknowledgment  thou  beginnest  thy  prayer  well,  and  through  Jesus 
thon  shalt  prosper  in  it. 

Beloved  nearers,  the  same  principle  applies  to  the  church  of  God. 
We  are  praying  for  a  display  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  power  in  this  church, 
and,  in  order  to  successful  pleading  in  this  matter,  it  is  necessary  that 
we  should  nnanimously  make  the  confession  of  our  text,  "  I  am  poor 
and  needy."  We  must  own  that  we  are  powerless  in  this  business. 
Salvation  is  of  the  Lord  and  we  cannot  save  a  single  soul.  The  Spirit 
of  God  is  treasured  up  in  Christ,  and  we  must  seek  him  of  the  great 
head  of  the  church.  We  cannot  command  the  Spirit,  and  yet  we 
can  do  nothing  without  him.  He  bloweth  where  he  listeth.  We 
must  deeply  feel  and  honestly  acknowledge  this.  Will  you  not  heartily 
assent  to  it  my  brethren  and  sisters  at  this  hour.  May  I  not 
aak  yon  unanimously  to  renew  the  confession  this  morning  ?  We 
must  also  acknowledge  that  we  are  not  worthy  that  the  Holy  Spirit 
ahonld  condescend  to  work  with  ns  and  by  us.    There  is  no  fitness 


G04  METnOrOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

in  ns  for  his  purposes,  except  he  shall  give  ns  that  fitness.     Oor  ain^ 
might  well  provoke  him  to  leave  us :    he  has  striyen  with  ns,  he  hai 
bcHBU  tender  towards  us,  but  he  might  well  go  away  and  say, ''  I  will  do 
more  shine  upon  that  church,  and  no  more  bless  that  ministry.**  Let  m 
feel  our  unworthiness,  it  will  be  a  good  preparation  for  eam^  prafsr: 
for,  mark  you,  brethren,  God  will  have  his  church  before  he  blesses  a 
know  that  the  blessing  is  altogether  from  himself.    **  Not  by  miptii 
nor  by  power,  but  by  my  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord."    The  career  of  Gidofl 
was  a  very  remarkable  one,  and  it  conmienced  with  two  most  instractive 
signs.    I  think  our  heavenly  Father  would  have  all  of  ns  learn  the  verr 
same  lesson  which  he  taught  to  Oideon,  and  when  we   have  mastered 
that  lesson,  he  will  use  us  for  his  own  purposes.  Ton  remember  Gideoo 
laid  a  fleece  upon  the  bam  floor,  and  in  the  morning  all  round  vm 
dry  and  the  fleece  alone  was  wet.    God  alone  had  saturated  the  fleece  so 
that  he  could  wring  it  out,  and  its  moisture  was  not  due  to  its  beim; 
placed  in  a  favourable  situation,  for  all  around  was  dry.    He  wonJd 
have  us  learn  that,  if  the  dew  of  his  grace  fills  any  one  of  us  wiih 
its  heavenly  moisture,  it  is  not  because  we  lie  upon  the  bam-fioor  of  a 
ministry  which  God  usually  blesses,  or  because  we  are  in  a  church  whicJi 
the  Lord  graciously  visits ;  but  we  must  be  made  to  see  that  ibe 
visitations  of  his  Spirit  are  fruits  of  the  Lord's  sovereign  grace,  and 
gifts  of  his  infinite  love,  and  not  of  the  will  of  man,  neither  by  man. 
But  then  the  miracle  was  reversed,  for,  as  old  Thomas  Fuller  9Sj%, 
'*  God's  miracles  will  bear  to  be  turned  inside  out  and  look  as  glorioai 
one  way  as  another."      The  next  night  the  fleece  was  dry  and  all 
around  was  wet.     For  sceptics  might  have  said,  "  Yes,  but  a  fleece 
would  naturally  attract  moisture,  and  if  there  were  any  in  the  air,  it 
would  be  likely  to  be  absorbed  by  the  wool.**    But,  lo,  on  this  occo^oa. 
the  dew  is  not  where  it  might  be  expected  to  be,  even  though  it  lies 
thickly  all  around.    Damp  is  the  stone  and  dry  is  the  fleece.    So  God 
will  have  us  know  that  he  does  not  give  us  his  grace  because  of  anj 
natural  adaptation  in  us  to  receive  it,  and  even  where  he  has  given  a 
preparedness  of  heart  to  receive,  he  will  have  us  understand  that  his 
grace  and  his  Spirit  are  most  free  in  action,  and  sovereign  in  opem- 
tion :  and  that  he  is  not  bound  to  work  afler  any  rule  of  our  maanj^ 
If  the  fleece  be  wet  he  bedews  it,  and  that  not  because  it  is  a  fleett. 
but  because  he  chooses  to  do  so.    He  will  have  all  the  glory  of  all 
his  grace  from  first  to  last    Come  then,  my  brethren,  and  become 
disciples  to  this  truth.     Consider  that  from  tbe  great  Father  of  ]i;;!iUt 
every  good  and  perfect  gift  must  come.    We  are  his  workmanship,  he 
must  work  all  our  works  in  us.    Grace  is  not  to  be  commanded  by  our 
position  or  condition :  the  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth,  the  Lord 
works  and  no  man  can  hinder;  but  if  he  works  not,  the  mightiest  and 
the  most  zealous  labour  but  in  vain.  j 

It  is  very  significant  that  before  Christ  fed  the  thousands,  he  made 
the  disciples  sum  up  all  their  provisions.  It  was  well  to  let  them  see 
how  low  the  commissariat  had  become,  for  then  when  the  crowds 
were  fed  they  could  not  say  the  basket  f(^  them,  nor  that  the  lad  bad 
done  it.  God  will  make  us  feel  how  little  are  our  bailey  loaves,  and 
how  small  our  fishes,  and  compel  us  to  enquire,  **What  are  thef 
among  so  many  ?"    When  the  Saviour  bads  his  disciples  cast  the  net  OD 


PLEADING.  605 

the  right  side  of  the  ship,  and  they  dragged  each  a  mighty  shoal  to 
land,  he  did  network  the  miracle  tiU  thej  had  confessed  that  they  had 
toiled  all  the  night  and  had  taken  nothing.  They  were  thus  tanght 
that  the  success  of  their  fishery  was  dependent  upon  the  Lord,  and 
that  it  was  not  their  net,  nor  their  way  of  dragging  it,  nor  their  skill  and 
art  in  handling  their  vessels,  but  that  altogether  and  entirely  their 
saccess  came  ^m  their  Lord.  We  must  get  down  to  this,  and  the 
sooner  we  come  to  it  the  better. 

Before  the  ancient  Jews  kept  the  passover,  obserre  what  they  did.  The 
Qnleavened  bread  is  to  be  brought  in,  and  the  paschal  lamb  to  be  eaten ; 
but  there  shall  be  no  unleavened  bread,  and  no  paschal  lamb,  till  they 
have  purged  out  the  old  leaven.  If  you  have  any  old  strength  and  self- 
confidence  ;  if  you  have  anything  that  is  your  own,  and  is,  therefore, 
leavened,  it  must  be  swept  right  out;  there  must  be  a  bare  cupboard 
before  there  can  come  in  the  heavenly  provision,  upon  which  the 
spiritual  passover  can  be  kept.  I  thank  Ood  when  he  cleans  us  out; 
1  bless  his  name  when  he  brings  us  to  feel  our  soul-poverty  as  a  church, 
lor  then  the  blessing  will  be  sure  to  come. 

One  other  illustration  will  show  this,  perhaps,  more  distinctly  still. 
Behold  Elijah  with  the  priests  of  Baal  at  Carmel.  The  test  appointed  to 
decide  Israel's  choice  was  this — the  God  that  answereth  by  fire  let  him 
be  God.  Baal's  priests  invoked  the  heavenly  fiame  in  vain.  Elijah  is 
confident  that  it  will  come  upon  his  sacrifice,  but  he  is  also  sternly 
resolved  that  the  false  priests  and  the  fickle  people  shall  not  imagine 
that  he  himself  had  produced  the  fire.  He  determines  to  make  it  clear 
that  there  is  no  human  contrivance,  trickery,  or  manoeuvre  about  the 
matter.  The  flame  should  be  seen  to  be  of  the  Lord,  and  of  the  Lord 
HJone.  Remember  the  stem  prophet's  command,  "  Fill  four  barrels  with 
^vater,  and  pour  it  on  the  burnt  sacrifice,  and  on  the  wood.  And  he 
said,  Do  it  a  second  time  ;  and  they  did  it  a  second  time.  And  he  said, 
l)o  it  a  third  time ;  and  they  did  it  a  third  time.  And  the  water  ran 
round  about  the  altar  ;  and  he  filled  the  trench  also  with  water."  There 
could  be  no  latent  fires  there.  If  there  had  been  any  combustibles  or 
chemicals  calculated  to  produce  fire  after  the  manner  of  the  cheats  of 
the  time,  they  would  all  have  been  damped  and  spoiled.  When  no  one 
could  imagine  that  man  could  bum  the  sacrifice,  then  the  prophet  lifted 
up  his  eyes  to  heaven,  and  began  to  plead,  and  down  came  the  fire  of  the 
Tiord,  which  consumed  the  bumt  sacrifice  and  the  wood,  and  the  altar 
f^tones  and  the  dust,  and  even  licked  up  the  water  that  was  in  the  trench. 
Then  when  all  the  people  saw  it  they  fell  on  their  faces,  and  they  said, 
•*  Jehovah  is  the  God ;  Jehovah  is  the  God."  The  Lord  in  this  church, 
if  he  means  greatly  to  bless  us,  may  send  us  the  trial  of  pouring  on  the 
water  once,  and  twice,  and  thrice ;  he  may  discourage  us,  grieve  us,  and 
try  us,  and  bring  us  low,  till  all  shall  see  that  it  is  not  of  the  preacher,  it  is 
not  of  the  organization,  it  is  not  of  man,  but  altogether  of  Gcd,  the  Alpha 
and  the  Omega,  who  worketh  all  things  according  to  the  council  of  his  will. 

Thus  I  have  shown  you  that  for  a  successful  season  of  prayer  the  best 
banning  is  confession  that  we  are  poor  and  needy. 

II.  Secondly,  after  the  soul  has  unburdened  itself  of  all  weights  of 
merit  and  self-sufficiency,  it  proceeds  to  prayer,  and  we  have  before  us  A 
flOUL  FLEADING.    *'  I  am  poor  and  needy,  make  haste  unto  me,  0  God. 


r. 


60t>  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Tlioa  art  my  help  and  my  deliverer  :  0  Lord,  make  no  tanying."    He 
careful  reader  will  perceive  four  pleas  in  this  single  verse. 

Upon  this  topic  I  would  remark  that  it  is  the  habit  of  faith,  when 
she  is  praying,  to  use  pleas.     Mere,  prayer  sayers,  who  do  not  pray  at 
all,  forfi^et  to  argue  with  God;  but V\ose  wiio  would  prevail  briug  foitii 
their  reasons  and  their  strong  arguments,  and  they  debate  the  questioii 
with  the  Lord.     They  who  play  at  wrestling  catch  here  and  tneie  at 
random,  but  those  who  are  really  wrestling  have  a  certain  way  of 
grasping  the  opponent — a  certain  mode  of  throwing,  and  the  like;  they 
work  according  to  order  and  rule.    Faith's  art  of  wrestling  is  to  pleta 
with  God,  and  say  with  holy  boldness,  *'  Let  it  be  thus  and  thus,  tat 
these  reasons.''      Hosea  tells  us  of  Jacob  at  Jabbok,  "  that  there  he 
spake  with  us;"  from  which  I  understand  that  Jacob  instmcted  us  by 
his  example.    Xow,  the  two  pleas  which  Jacob  used  were  God's  precept 
and  God's  promise.    First,  he  said,  ''Thou  saidst  unto  me,  Return  rate 
thy  country  and  to  thy  kindred : "  as  much  as  if  he  pnt  it  thos:— 
**  Lord,  1  am  in  difficulty,  but  I  liave  come  here  through  obedience  to 
thee.    Thou  didst  tell  me  to  do  this;  now,  since  thou  commandest  me 
to  come  hither,  into  the  very  teeth  of  my  brother  Esaa,  who  comes  to 
meet  me  like  a  lion.  Lord,  thou  canst  not  be  so  unfaithful  as  to  bring 
me  into  danger  and  then  leave  me  in  it."    This  was  sound  reasoning,  and 
it  prevailed  with  God.    Then  Jacob  also  urged  a  promise :  **  Then 
saidst,  I  will  surely  do  thee  good."    Among  men,  it  is  a  masterly  way  of 
reasoning  when  you  can  challenge  your  opponent  with  his  own  words : 
you  may  quote  other  authorities,  and  he  may  say,  "  I  deny  their  force;" 
but,  when  you  quote  a  man  against  himself,  you  foil  him  completely. 
AVhen  you  bring  a  man's  promise  to  his  mind,  he  must  either  confess 
himself  to  be  unfaithful  and  changeable,  or,  if  he  holds  to  being  the 
same,  and  beinjr  true  to  his  word,  you  have  him,  and  you  have  won  your 
will  of  him.    Oh,  brethren,  let  us  learn  thus  to  plead  the  precepts,  the 
promises,  and  whatever  else  may  serve  our  turn ;  but  let  us  always  have 
something  to  plead.     Do  not  reckon  you  have  prayed  unless  you  have 
pleaded,  for  pleading  is  the  very  marrow  of  prayer.      He  who  pleads 
well  knows  the  secret  of  prevailing  with  God,  especially  if  he  pleads  the 
blood  of  Jesus,  for  that  unlocks  the  treasury  of  heaven.    Many  keys 
fit  many  locks,  but  the  master-key  is  the  blood  and  the  name  of  him  that 
died  but  rose  again,  and  ever  lives  in  heaven  to  save  unto  the  uttermost 

Faith's  pleas  are  plentiful,  and  this  is  well,  for  faith  is  placed  in  divers 
positions,  and  needs  them  all.  She  hath  many  needs,  and  having  a 
keen  eye  she  perceives  that  there  are  pleas  to  be  urged  in  every  case. 
I  will  not,  therefore,  tell  you  all  faith's  pleas,  but  I  will  just  mention 
some  of  them,  enough  to  let  you  see  how  abundant  they  are.  Faith 
will  plead  all  the  attributes  of  God.  "  Thou  art  just,  therefore  spare 
thou  the  soul  for  whom  the  Saviour  died.  Thou  art  merciful,  blot  out 
my  transgressions.  Thou  art  good,  reveal  thy  bounty  to  thy  servant 
Thou  art  immutable—thou  hast  done  thus  and  thus  to  others  of  thy 
servants,  do  thus  unto  me.  Thou  art  faithful,  canst  thou  break  thy 
promise,  canst  thou  turn  away  from  thy  covenant  ?"  Eightly  viewed, 
all  the  perfections  of  Deity  become  pleas  for  faith. 

Faith  will  boldly  plead  all  God's  gracious  relationships.  She  will  say 
to  him,  **Art  thou  not  the  Creator?    Wilt  thou  forsake  the  work  of 


PLEADING.  607 

thine  own  hands  ?  Art  thou  not  the  Redeemer,  thou  hast  redeemed  thy 
servant,  wilt  thou  cast  me  away  ?"  Faith  usually  delights  to  lay  hold 
upon  the  fatherhood  of  God.  This  is  generally  one  of  her  master 
points :  when  she  brings  this  into  the  field  she  wins  the  day.  "  Thou 
art  a  Father,  and  wouldst  thou  chasten  us  as  though  thou  wouldst  kill  ? 
A  Father,  and  wilt  thou  not  provide  ?  A  Father,  and  hast  thou  no  sym- 
pathy and  no  bowels  of  compassion  ?  A  Father,  and  canst  thou  deny 
what  thine  own  child  asks  of  thee?"  Whenever  I  am  impressed  with 
the  divine  majesty,  and  so,  prhaps,  a  little  dispirited  in  prayer,  I  find 
the  short  and  sweet  remedy  is  to  remember  that,  although  he  is  a  great 
King,  and  infinitely  glorious,  I  am  his  child,  and  no  matter  who  the 
father  is,  the  child  may  always  be  bold  with  his  father.  Yes,  faith  can 
plead  any  and  all  of  the  relationships  in  which  God  stands  to  his  chosen. 
Faith,  too,  can  ply  heaven  with  the  divine  promises.  I  need  not 
enlarge  here,  for  this  I  trust  you  all  do  so  continually.  "When  you  can 
as  it  were  bring  home  the  Lor(l's  word  to  himself,  it  is  well.  That  is  the 
conquering  argument,  **  Do  as  thou  hast  said."  "  Thou  hast  spoken 
it,  and  thou  hast  made  thy  promise  to  be  yea  and  amen  in  Christ 
Jesus  to  thine  own  glory  by  us,  wilt  thou  not  fulfil  it  ?  Wilt 
thou  run  back  from  thine  own  word  ?  Wilt  thou  fail  to  carry  out  thine 
own  declaration  ?  That  be  far  firom  thee,  Lord  I"  Brethren,  we  want  to 
be  more  business  like  and  common  sense  with  God  in  pleading  promises. 
If  you  were  to  go  to  one  of  the  banks  in  Lombard  Street,  and  see  a 
man  go  in  and  out  and  lay  a  piece  of  paper  on  the  table,  and  take  it 
up  again  and  nothing  ipore ;  if  he  did  that  several  times  a  day,  I  think 
there  would  soon  be  orders  issued  to  the  porter  to  keep  the  man  out, 
because  he  was  merely  wasting  the  clerk's  time,  and  doing  nothing  to 
purpose.  Those  city  men  who  come  to  the  bank  in  earnest  present 
their  cheques,  they  wait  till  they  receive  their  gold  and  then  they 
go,  but  not  without  having  transacted  real  business.  They  do  not  put 
Uie  paper  down,  speak  about  the  excellent  signature  and  discuss  the 
correctness  of  the  document,  but  they  want  their  money  for  it,  and 
they  are  not  content  without  it.  These  are  the  people  who  are  always 
■welcome  at  the  bank  and  not  the  triflers.    Alas,  a  great  many  people 

Slay  at  praying,  it  is  nothing  better.  I  say  they  play  at  praying,  they 
0  not  expect  God  to  give  them  an  answer,  ana  thus  they  are  mere 
triflers,  who  mock  the  Lord.  He  who  prays  in  a  business-like  way, 
meaning  what  he  says,  honours  the  Lord.  The  Lord  does  not  play  at 
promising,  Jesus  did  not  sport  at  confirming  the  word  by  his  blood, 
and  we  must  not  make  a  jest  of  prayer  by  going  about  it  in  a  listless 
nnexpecting  spirit. 

The  Holy  Spirit  is  in  earnest,  and  we  must  be  in  earnest  also.  We 
must  go  for  a  blessing,  and  not  be  satisfied  till  we  have  it ;  like  the 
huntef,  who  is  not  satisfied  because  he  has  run  so  many  miles,  but  is 
never  content  till  he  takes  his  prey. 

Faith,  moreover,  pleads  the  performances  of  God,  she  looks  back  on 
the  past  and  says,  *^  Lord,  thou  didst  deliver  me  on  such  and  such  an 
occasion ;  wilt  thou  fail  me  now."  She,  moreover,  takes  her  life  as  a 
whole,  and  pleads  thus : — 

**  After  so  much  mercv  past, 
Wilt  tbou  let  me  sink  at  last?" 


608  IIETBOFOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

"  Hast  thou  brought  me  so  far  that  I  may  be  put  to  shame  at  the  aid  T 
She  knows  how  to  bring  the  ancient  mercies  of  God,  and  make  them 
arguments  for  present  favours.  But  your  time  would  all  be  gone  if  I 
tried  to  exhibit,  even  a  thousandth  part  of  faith's  pleas. 

Sometimes,  however,  faith's  pleas  are  very  smgular.  As  in  this 
text,  it  is  by  no  means  according  to  the  proud  rule  of  human  nature  to 
plead — "  I  am  poor  and  needy,  make  haste  unto  me,  0  God."  It  is  like 
another  prayer  of  David  :  "  Have  mercy  upon  mine  iniquity,  for  it  is 
great."  It  is  not  the  manner  of  men  to  plead  so,  they  say,  "  Lord, 
have  mercy  on  me,  for  I  am  not  so  bad  a  sinner  as  some."  But  hiih 
reads  things  in  a  traer  light,  and  bases  her  pleas  on  truth.  "Lord, 
because  my  sin  is  great,  and  thou  art  a  great  God,  let  thy  great  merer 
be  magnified  in  me."  You  know  the  story  of  the  Sjrophenician 
woman ;  that  is  a  grand  instance  of  the  ingenuity  of  faith's  reasoniog. 
She  came  to  Christ  about  her  daughter,  and  he  answered  her  not  a 
word.  What  do  you  think  her  heart  said  ?  Why,  she  said  in  herself, 
**  It  is  well,  for  he  has  not  denied  me :  since  he  has  not  spoken  at  all,  he 
has  not  refused  me."  With  this  for  an  encouragement,  she  began  to 
plead  again.  Presently  Christ  spoke  to  her  sharply,  and  then  her  brave 
heart  said,  "  I  have  gained  words  from  him  at  last,  I  shall  have  deeds 
from  him  by-and-by."  That  also  cheered  her ;  and  then,  when  he 
called  her  a  dog.  "Ah,"  she  reasoned,  "but  a  dog  is  a  part  of 
the  family,  it  has  some  connection  with  the  master  of  the  house. 
Though  it  does  not  eat  meat  from  the  table,  it  gets  the  crumbs  under  it, 
and  BO  I  have  thee  now,  great  Master,  dog  as  I  am;  the  great 
mercy  that  I  ask  of  thee,  great  as  it  is  to  me,  is  only  a  crumb  to  thee; 
grant  it  then  I  beseech  thee."  Could  she  fail  to  have  her  request  ? 
Impossible  !  When  faith  hath  a  will,  she  always  finds  a  way,  and  she 
will  win  the  day  when  all  things  forebode  defeat. 

Faith*s  pleas  are  singular,  but,  let  me  add,  faith's  pleas  are  always 
sound;  for  after  all,  it  is  a  very  telling  plea  to  urge  that  we  are  poor  and 
needy.  Is  not  that  the  main  argument  with  mercy  ?  Necessity  is  the 
very  best  plea  with  benevolence,  either  human  or  divine.  Is  not  our  need 
the  best  reason  we  can  urge  ?  If  we  would  have  a  physician  come 
quickly  to  a  sick  man,  "  Sir,"  we  say,  "  it  is  no  common  case,  he  is  on 
tne  point  of  death,  come  to  him,  come  quickly  !"  If  we  wanted  our  city 
firemen  to  rush  to  a  fire,  we  should  not  say  to  them,  "  Make  haste,  for 
it  is  only  a  small  fire;"  but,  on  the  contrary,  we  urge  that  it  is 
an  old  house,  full  of  combustible  materials,  and  there  are  rumours  of 
petroleum  and  gunpowder  on  the  premises ;  besides,  it  is  near  a  timber 
yard,  hosts  of  wooden  cottages  are  close  by,  and  before  long  we  shall 
have  half  the  city  in  a  blaze."  We  put  the  case  as  badly  as  we  can. 
Oh  for  wisdom  to  be  equally  wise  in  pleading  with  God,  to  find  argu- 
ments everywhere,  but  especially  to  find  them  in  our  necessities. 

They  said  two  centuries  ago  that  the  trade  of  beggary  was  the  easiest 
one  to  carry  on,  but  it  paid  the  worst.  I  am  not  sure  about  the  last 
at  this  time,  but  certainly  the  trade  of  begging  with  God  is  a  hard  one, 
and  undoubtedly  it  pays  the  best  of  anything  in  the  world.  It  is  veiy 
noteworthy  that  beggars  with  men  have  usually  plenty  of  pleas  on  hand. 
When  a  man  is  hardly  driven  and  starving,  he  can  usually  find  a 
reason  why  he  should  ask  aid  of  every  likely  person.    Suppose  it  is  a. 


PLBADIXa.  609 

pergon  to  whom  he  is  already  under  many  obligations,  then  the  poor 
creature  argues,  ''  I  may  safely  ask  of  him  a^in,  for  he  knows  me,  and 
lias  been  always  very  Mnd.^  If  he  never  asked  of  the  person  before, 
then  he  says,  "  I  have  never  worried  him  before ;  he  cannot  say  he  has 
already  done  all  he  can  for  me ;  I  will  make  bold  to  begin  with  him." 
If  it  is  one  of  his  own  kin,  then  he  will  say,  *'  Sarely  yon  will  help  me 
ID  my  distress,  for  yon  are  a  relation ;"  and  if  it  be  a  stranger,  he  says, 
"•  I  hare  often  foand  strangers  kinder .  than  my  own  blood,  help  me,  I 
entreat  you."  If  he  asks  of  the  rich,  he  pleads  that  they  will  never  miss 
what  they  give;  and  if  he  begs  of  the  poor,  he  urges  that  they  know  what 
want  means,  and  he  is  sure  they  will  sympathise  with  him  in  his  great 
distress.  Oh  that  we  were  half  as  much  on  the  alert  to  fill  our  mouths 
with  arguments  when  we  are  before  the  Lord.  How  is  it  that  we  are 
not  half  awake,  and  do  not  seem  to  have  our  spiritual  senses  aroused. 
May  God  grant  that  we  may  learn  the  art  of  pleading  with  the  eternal 
God,  for  in  that  shall  rest  our  prevalence  with  him,  through  the 
merit  of  Jesus  Christ. 

III.  I  must  be  brief  on  the  next  point.  It  is  A  boul  urgent  : 
^*  Make  haste  unto  me,  0  God.  0  Lora,  mdke  no  tarrying."  We  may 
Tvell  be  urgent  with  God,  if  as  yet  we  are  not  saved,  for  our  need  is 
urgent;  we  are  in  constant  peril,  and  the  pei-il  is  of  the  most  tremen- 
dous kind.  0  sinner,  within  an  hour,  within  a  minute,  thou  mayest 
be  where  hope  can  never  visit  thee;  therefore,  cry,  **Make  haste,  0 
Ood,  to  deliver  me :  make  haste  to  help  me,  0  Lord !"  Yours  is  not  a 
case  that  can  bear  lingeriug:  you  have  not  time  to  procrastinate; 
therefore,  be  urgent,  for  your  need  is  so.  And,  remember,  if  you  really 
are  under  a  sense  of  need,  and  the  Spirit  of  God  is  at  work  with  you, 
you  will  and  must  be  urgent.  An  ordinary  sinner  may  be  content  to 
wait,  but  a  quickened  sinner  wants  mercy  now.  A  dead  sinner  will  lie 
quiet,  but  a  living  sinner  cannot  rest  till  pardon  is  sealed  home  to 
bis  soul.  If  you  are  urgent  this  morning,  I  am  glad  of  it,  because 
your  urgency,  I  trust,  arises  from  the  possession  of  spiritual  life. 
When  you  cannot  live  longer  without  a  Saviour,  the  Saviour  will  come 
to  you,  and  you  shall  rejoice  in  him. 

^Brethren,  members  of  this  church,  as  I  have  said  on  another  point, 
the  same  truth  holds  good  with  you.  God  will  come  to  bless  you,  and 
come  speedily,  when  your  sense  of  need  becomes  deep  aud  urgent.  Oh, 
how  great  is  this  church's  need !  We  shall  grow  cold,  unholy,  and 
worldly;  there  will  be  no  conversions,  there  will  be  no  additions 
to  our  numbers;  there  will  be  diminutions,  there  will  be  divisions, 
there  will  be  mischief  of  all  kinds ;  Satan  will  rejoice,  and  Christ 
will  be  dishonoured,  unless  we  obtain  a  larger  measure  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  Our  need  is  urgent,  and  when  we  feel  that  need  thoroughly, 
then  we  shall  get  the  blessing  which  we  want.  Does  any  melancholy 
spirit  say,  '*  We  are  in  so  bad  a  state  that  we  cannot  expect  a  large 
blessing  ?"  I  reply,  perhaps  if  we  were  worse,  we  should  obtain  it  all 
the  sooner.  I  do  not  mean  if  we  were  really  so,  but  if  we  felt  we  were 
worse,  we  should  be  nearer  the  blessing.  When  we  mourn  that  we  are 
in  an  ill  state,  then  we  cry  the  more  vehemently  to  God,  and  the  blessing 
<X)me8.  God  never  refused  to  go  with  Gideon  because  he  had  not  enough 
Taliant  men  with  him ;  but  he  paused  because  the  people  were  too  many. 


610  MBTROFOLITAH  TABBBKACUB  FUIPIT.  ^ 

He  brought  them  down  from  thonsands  to  hundreds,  and  hediminidial' 
the  hundrods  before  he  gave  them  victory.    When  you  feel  that  you  mut 
have  God's  presence,  bat  that  you  do  not  deserve  it,  and  when  your 
consciousness  of  this  lays  you  in  the  dust,  then  shall  the  blessing  be 
Youchsafed. 

For  my  part,  brethren  and  sisters,  I  desire  to  feel  a  spirit  of  urgeacf 
within  my  soul  as  I  plead  with  Gk>d  for  the  dew  of  his  grace  to  descend 
upon  this  church.  I  am  not  bashful  in  this  matter,  for  I  have  a 
license  to  pray.  Mendicancy  is  forbidden  in  the  streets,  but,  before 
the  Lord  1  am  a  licensed  beggar.  Jesus  has  said,  '^men  ooghK 
always  to  pray  and  not  to  faint."  You  land  on  the  shores  of  a 
foreign  country  with  the  greatest  confidence  when  yon  carry  a  pass- 
port with  you,  and  Grod  has  issued  passports  to  his  children,  by 
which  they  come  boldly  to  his  mercy  seat ;  he  has  invited  you,  he  has 
encouraged  you,  he  has  bidden  you  come  to  him,  and  he  has  promised 
that  whatsoever  ye  ask  in  prayer,  believing,  ye  shall  receive.  Corner 
then,  come  urgently,  come  importunately,  come  with  this  plea,  "  I  am 
poor  and  needy ;  make  no  tarrying,  0  my  God,"  and  a  blessing  shali 
surely  come ;  it  will  not  tarry.  God  grant  we  may  see  it,  and  give  him 
the  glory  of  it. 

IV.  I  am  sorry  to  have  been  so  brief  where  I  had  need  to  have 
enlarged,  but  I  must  close  with  the  fourth  point  Here  is  another  part 
of  the  art  and  mystery  of  prayer — ^thb  soul  GRASPDra  God.  She  has 
pleaded,  and  she  has  oeen  urgent,  but  now  she  comes  to  close  quarters; 
she  grasps  the  covenant  angel  with  one  hand,  '*  Thou  art  my  help,"  and 
with  the  other,  "  Thou  art  my  deliverer."  Oh,  those  blessed  "  ray's,** 
those  potent  "  my's."  The  sweetness  of  the  Bible  lies  in  the  possessive 
pronouns,  and  he  who  is  taught  to  use  them  as  the  psalmist  did,  shall 
come  off  a  conqueror  with  the  eternal  God.  Now  sinner,  I  pray  God 
thou  maycst  be  helped  to  sajrtihis  morning  to  the  blessed  Christ  of  God, 
"  Thou  art  my  help  and  my  deliverer."  Perhaps  you  mourn  (hat  you 
cannot  get  that  length,  but,  poor  soul,  hast  thou  any  other  help  ?  If  thou 
hast,  then  thou  canst  not  hold  two  helpers  with  the  same  hand.  ''  Oh, 
no,"  say  you,  "  I  have  no  help  anywhere.  I  have  no  hope  except 
in  Christ."  Well,  then,  poor  soul,  since  thy  hand  is  empty,  that 
€mpty  hand  was  made  on  purpose  to  grasp  thy  Lord  with :  lay  hold  on 
him  I  Say  to  him,  this  day,  '*  Lord,  I  will  hang  on  thee  as  poor  lame 
Jacob  did ;  now  I  cannot  help  myself,  I  will  cleave  to  thee :  I  will 
not  let  thee  go  except  thou  bless  me."  ''  Ah,  it  would  be  too  bold,'' 
says  one.  But  the  Lord  loves  holy  boldness  in  poor  sinners;  he 
would  have  you  be  bolder  than  you  think  of  being.  It  is  an  un- 
hnllowcd  bashfulness  that  dares  not  trust  a  crucified  Saviour. .  He 
died  on  purpose  to  save  such  as  thou  art;  let  him  have  his  way  with 
thee,  and  do  thou  trust  him.  "  Oh,"  saith  one,  "  but  I  am  so  un- 
worthy." He  came  to  seek  and  save  the  unworthy.  He  is  not  the 
Saviour  of  the  self-righteous :  he  is  the  sinners'  Saviour — "  friend  of 
sinners  "  is  his  name.  Unworthy  one,  lay  hold  on  him !  "  Oh,"  ssaA 
one,  "  but  I  have  no  right."  Well,  but  that  is  the  very  reason  you 
should  grasp  him,  for  right  is  for  the  court  of  justice,  not  for  the  hall 
of  mercy.  I  would  advise  thee  not  to  try  thy  rights,  for  thou  hast  no 
right  but  to  be  condemned ;  but  thou  needest  no  rights  when  dealing 


PLEADING.  611 

with  Jesas.  Nothing  makes  a  charitable  person  refase  his  alms  like  a 
beggar's  saying,  "  I  have  a  right."  "  Nay,"  says  the  piver,  "  If  you 
have  rights,  go  and  get  them ;  I  will  give  yon  nothing."  Since  you  have 
no  right,  your  need  shall  be  your  claim :  it  is  all  the  claim  you  want. 
Methinks  I  hear  one  say,  **  It  is  too  late  for  me  to  plead  for  grace."  It 
cannot  be :  it  is  impossible.  While  you  live  and  desire  mercy,  it  is  not 
too  late  to  seek  it  Notice  the  parable  of  the  man  who  wanted  three 
loaves.  I  will  tell  you  what  crossed  ray  mind  when  I  read  it :  the  man 
went  to  his  friend  at  midnight;  it  was  late,  was  it  not?  Why,  his 
friend  might  have  said,  and,  indeed,  did  in  effect  say  to  him,  that  it 
ivas  too  late,  but  yet  the  pleader  gained  the  bread  after  ail.  In  the 
parable  the  time  was  late,  it  could  not  have  been  later ;  for  if  it  had 
been  a  little  later  than  midnight,  it  would  have  been  early  in  the  next 
morning,  and  so  not  late  at  all.  It  was  midnight,  and  it  could  not  be 
later;  and  so,  if  it  is  downright  midnight  with  your  soul,  yet,  be  of  good 
cheer,  Jesus  is  an  out  of  season  Saviour;  many  of  his  servants  are  "  bora 
out  of  due  time."  Any  season  is  the  right  season  to  call  upon  the  name 
of  Jesus ;  therefore,  only  do  not  let  the  devil  tempt  thee  with  the 
thought  that  it  can  be  too  late.  Go  to  Jesus  now,  go  at  once,  and  lay 
hold  on  the  horns  of  the  altar  by  a  venturesome  faith,  and  say,  '*  Sac- 
rifice for  sinners,  thou  art  a  sacrifice  for  me.  Intercessor  for  the  grace- 
less, thou  art  an  intercessor  for  me.  Thou  who  distributest  gifls  to  the 
rebellious,  distribute  gifts  to  me,  for  a  rebel  I  have  been.  When  we 
were  yet  ^without  strength,  in  due  time  Chi-ist  died  for  the  ungodly. 
Snch  am  I,  good  Master;  let  the  power  of  thy  death  be  seen  in  me  to 
save  my  soul." 

Oh,  you  that  are  saved  and,  therefore,  love  Christ,  I  want  you,  dear 
brethren,  as  the  saints  of  God,  to  practice  this  last  part  of  my  sub- 
ject; and  be  sure  to  lay  hold  upon  God  in  prayer.     "Thou  art  my 
help  and  my  deliverer."    As  a  church  we  throw  ourselves  upon  the 
strength  of  God,  and  we  can  do  nothing  without  him  ;  but  we  do  not 
mean  to  be  without  him,  we  will  hold  him  fast.    "  Thou  art  my  help 
and  my  deliverer."    There  was  a  boy  at  Athens,  according  to  the  old 
story,  who  used  to  boast  that  he  ruled  all  Athens,  and  when  they  asked 
him  how,  he  said,  "  Why,  I  rule  my  mother,  my  mother  rules  my  father, 
and  my  father  rules  the  city."    He  who  knows  how  to  be  master  of 
prayer  will  rule  the  heart  of  Christ,  and  Christ  can  and  will  do  all 
things  for  his  people,   for  the  Father  hath  committed  all  things 
into  his  hands.    You  can  be  omnipotent  if  you  know  how  to  pray, 
omnipotent  in  all  things  which  glorify  God.    What  doth  the  Word  itself 
say  ?    "  Let  him  lay  hold  on  my  strength."    Prayer  moves  the  arm  that 
moves  the  world.    Oh  for  grace  to  grasp  Almighty  love  in  this  fashion. 
We  want  more  holdfast  prayer;    more  tugging,  and  gripping,  and 
wrestling  prayer,  that  saith,  **  I  will  not  let  thee  go."    That  pictun* 
of  Jacob  at  Jabbok  shall  suffice  for  us  to  close  with.    The  covenant 
angel  is  there,  and  Jacob  wants  a  blessing  from  him:  he  seems  to 
put   him  off,  but  no  put-offs  will  do   for  Jacob.     Then  the  angel 
sndeavours  to  escape  from  him,  and  tugs  and  strives :  so  he  may,  bnt 
do  efforts  shall  make  Jacob  relax  his  grasp.    At  last  the  angel  fallH 
from  ordinary  wrestling  to  wounding  him  in  the  very  seat  of  his 
strength ;  and  Jacob  will  let  his  thigh  go,  and  all  his  limbs  go.  but 


612  METROPOLITAN  TABEBNACLE  PULPIT. 

he  will  not  let  the  angel  go.     The  poor  man*s  strength  shriTels  xadet 
Uie  withering  touch,  but  in  his  weakness  he  is  still  strong :  he  throws 
his  arms  about  the  mysterious  man,  and  holds  him  as  in  a  death-grip. 
Then  the  other  says,  "  Let  me  go,  for  the  day  breaketh."   Mark,  he  did 
not  shake  him  off,  he  only  said,  **  Let  me  go;"  the  angel  will  do  nothing 
to  force  him  to  relax  his  hold,  he  leaves  that  to  his  voluntary  will 
The  valiant  Jacob  cries,  "  No,  I  am  set  on  it^  I  am  resolred  to  wia  an 
answer  to  my  prayer.  I  will  not  let  thee  go  except  thou  bless  me."  Now, 
when  the  church  begins  to  pray,  it  may  be  at  first,  the  Lord  will  make 
as  though  he  would  have  gone  further,  and  we  may  fear  that  no  answer 
will  be  given.     Hold  on,  dear  brethren.    Be  ye  steadfast,  unmoveable, 
notwithstanding  all.    By-and-by,  it  may  be,  there  will  come  discourage- 
ments where  we  looked  for  a  flowing  success  ;  we  shall  find  brethren 
hindering,  some  will  be  slumbering,  and  others  sinning ;  backsliders 
and  impenitent  souls  will  abound ;  but  let  us  not  be  turned  aside. 
Let  us  be  all  the  more  eager.    And  if  it  should  so  happen  that  we  oar* 
selves  become  distressed  and  dispirited,  and  feel  we  never  were  so  weak 
as  we  are  now ;  never  mind,  brethren,  still  hold  on,  for  when  the  sinew 
is  shrunk  the  victory  is  near.    Grasp  with  a  tighter  clutch  than  ever. 
Be  this  our  resolution,  "  I  will  not  let  thee  go  except  thou  bless  me." 
Remember  the  longer  the  blessing  is  coming  the  richer  it  will  be  when 
it  arrives.    That  which  is  gained  speedily  by  a  single  prayer  is  some- 
times only  a  second  rate  blessing  ;  but  that  which  is  gained  after  many 
a  desperate  tug,  and  many  an  awful  struggle,  is  a  fall  weighted  and 
precious  blessing.    The  children  of  importunity  are  always  fair  to  look 
upon.    The  blessing  which  costs  us  the  most  prayer  will  bo  worth  the 
most.     Only  let  us  be  persevering  in  supplication,  and  we  shall  gain  a 
broad  far-reaching  benediction  for  ourselves,  the  churches,  and  the 
world.    I  wish  it  were  in  my  power  to  stir  you  all  to  fervent  prayer  ; 
but  I  must  leave  it  with  the  great  author  of  all  true  supplication, 
namely,  the  Holy  Spirit.    May  he  work  in  us  mightily,  for  Jesos* 
sake.    Amen. 


Portion  op  Scripture  read  before  Sermon—  G  cncsis  xxxii. ; 

Luke  xi.  1 — IS. 


—  I. 


^^tr0plitan  Sfat^matk  §n^\t. 


HOUSEHOLD  SALVATION. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  November  Sth,  1871,  by 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINQTON. 


"And  they  spake  unto  him  the  word  of  the  Lord,  and  to  all  that  were  in  his  house. 
And  he  took  them  the  same  hour  of  the  night,  and  washed  their  stripes ;  and  was 
iMtptized,  he  and  all  his,  straightway.  And  when  he  had  hrought  them  into  his  house, 
he  set  meat  before  them,  and  rejoiced,  believing  in  God  with  all  his  house." — Acts 
xvi.  82—34. 

It  sometimes  happens  that  a  good  man  has  to  go  alone  to  hearen: 
Ood's  election  has  separated  him  from  the  midst  of  an  ungodly  family, 
and,  notwithstanding  his  example  and  his  prayers,  and  his  admonitions, 
they  still  remain  unconverted,  and  he  himself,  a  solitary  one,  a  specklsd 
bira  amongst  them,  has  to  pursue  his  lonely  flight  to  the  skies.  Far 
oftener,  however,  it  happens  that  the  God  who  is  the  God  of  Abraham 
becomes  the  God  of  Sarah,  and  then  of  Isaac,  and  then  of  Jacob,  and 
though  grace  does  not  run  in  the  blood,  and  regeneration  is  not  of 
blood  nor  of  birth,  yet  doth  it  very  frequently — I  was  about  to  say 
almost  always — happen  that  God,  by  means  of  one  of  a  household, 
draws  the  rest  to  himself.  He  calls  an  individual,  and  then  uses  him 
to  be  a  sort  of  spiritual  decoy  to  bring  the  rest  of  the  family  into  the 
gospel  net.  John  Bunyan,  in  the  first  part  of  his  **  Pilgrim's  Progress," 
describes  Christian  as  a  lonely  traveller,  pursuing  his  road  to  the  Celes- 
tial City  alone ;  occasionally  he  is  attended  by  Faithful,  or  he  meets 
with  a  Hopeful ;  but  these  are  casual  acquaintances,  and  are  not  of  his 
kith  or  kin :  brother  or  child  after  the  flesh  he  has  none  with  him.  The 
second  part  of  Bunyan's  book  exhibits  family  piety,  for  we  see  Chris- 
tiana, and  the  children,  and  many  friends,  all  travelling  in  company  to 
the  better  land;  and,  though  it  ia  often  said  that  the  second  part  of  ^ 
Banyan's  wondrous  aJlegory  is  somewhat  weaker  than  the  former,  and 
prol>ably  it  is  so,  yet  many  a  gentle  spirit  has  found  it  sweeter  than  the 
former,  and  it  has  ^ven  to  many  a  loving  heart  great  delight  to  feel 
that  there  is  a  possibility,  beneath  the  leadership  of  one  of  the  Lord's 
Oreathearts,  to  form  a  convoy  to  the  skiesy  so  that  a  sacred  caravan 
flball  traverse  the  desert  of  earth,  and  women  and  children  shall  find 
No.  1,019. 


CI 4  MirnioroMTAN  tabkrnacle  pulpit. 

tlicir  V,  ;v,  in  iiiii'pv  risstuiulion,  to  tl\e  City  of  Ilal-itations.  Wo  rejoice 
!o  think'ur  wlioli/ljiniilics  om*l«>:=c«l  within  the  h'lies  of  electing  jrrace, 
ami  uitiiM'  lionsrholds,  ivileiiucd  hy  blood,  devotin^r  tbemsekcs  to  the 
Hirv  ii«'  nl  i1m»  (Jod  of  bve.  1  am  sure  any  of  you,  who  yonrseives  hare 
tasirl  that  ilio  ii  '111  is  u;rafious,  are  most  anxious  to  hrin.ir  others  into 
n'l'oiuiisation  with  (Jod.  It  is  an  instinct  with  the  Christian  to  desire 
that  his  l\'l!ownn'U  sluuild,  as  ho  has  done,  hoth  taste  and  see  th?.r  the 
Lord  is  !:ood.  .hulaism  wraj>s  itself  up  within  itsolt;  and  claims  a 
mt»nojM»ly  iA*  hli'SsiuLT  for  the  chosen  nation.  The  h^ir  after  th-?  flesh 
^na»»h«s  \\\\\\  his  ti-i'tii  when  we  declare  that  the  tru.7  heirs  of  Abraham 
arc  born  alter  tlic  Spirit  and  are  Ibund  in  every  lasid.  They  wcu'.d  re- 
srrvo  nil  hc;ivcTily  privilcircs  to  tho  circumcised,  aud  ks-.-p  up  th-;-:in:ie::: 
mid  He  w.dl  ol"  paniiion.  It  is  the  very  ^'ciiius  of  ri.r:^: ".*:.:: j  to 
embr.h'c  all  mankind  in  its  love.  If  thr're  be  anv:hi::j  ir::-?.  If:  sll 
bcii'-\c  it  :  if  ilu-rc  be  anvihiuir  i:t>'»d,  K-:  all  r».'c-Mv-  i:.  Wf  los'.re 
no  i:a:i's  rf  brass  lo  sliui  out  liie  mu:tiiiidi';  and  if  '.here  'f  •:-  r irrifrs, 
A\c  \\.-uI.l  [ hrow  tlu'iu  d-^w u.  and  pray  e:ern:il  mercy  lo  in-iii^:-  ::.-:•  ;^ .-nizz 
niiiLous  ;.»  draw  nc:\r  to  ti.c  fountain  of  Hfe.  1:  a  ill  n>:  i-c  "^ri'r. 
but.  o-i  i!..*  c.»:i:ra:v,  Tu.'Sl  iia'ural  aud  loavv,  :::.\i  v-r  -iv^.Ti  ^:z 
t!'.c  >»:i'\  i:i.u  of.'t'.urs  s'.iouM,  lirs:  of  all.  r^-.-:  r.p  *\\  y.  nr  c^z  fini'j-^. 
If   \'; :  :  v   '  .■.:i:i-i  at    li-.vuc.   ?■».   as-iurotllv.   vww  wV.l.       Tjif-    zi'n 

m  k  m  m  ^ 

s] \ ■.■•.;•.;,■'..•.:>;; Vv^ ;i  us  w i i o  i^;* : ! i or  aro u ud  ou r  l a ; ■! e  an  I  •:  - r  if  iri. 
<Mi  ■..s-  u  ■.  :  \,:scd  ihe  laws  of  nature,  lu:  h:-  I...?  s.\u::.iri  iiiz. 
by  i".c  r.il.^s  of  j::\i.'c :  i:  ;i-.:::;:rs  uotiiiu^'  of  svl:>'.r.-:5sS  :i:.:  i  znz 
sh.'i:".  1  ■:■-:  ^.'.\  ;.^  I'.ave  his  ^  wu  kinlrcd  saved.     I   wil".   ^-.r-:-   r:"Jirj 


:i    ^ 


^r,9 


to;- \    .:";'.o..'  :'-:-:;c  w:;.^  w,ri-.:,   it  y«-u  r.;;ve  n.-: 

m         ■■■  ••  ak  .        «  1       <vv**i       %         ".•         li**^  ii*i«*       ■^■''^         ■*  •■"•  ^^ ;   ^"    :  ^      ^ 

«  . 

%      -■  ....       '      :      \*  ".      .l.s      .O  M-.»    ^' '  .     1    It.l."  '      »i..      ........     ..w.     *.'.*.  .i_  m.^^: 

■  •  _ 

-■«  ««^«k««  B4  ■  —  P 

■  v         '^  •  ■.    .  ..v'  ..■.."..  v\.l  *  i    ..;... I  ;      >0  a.c   A  V  .  .     > .-.  i.    -_ :     _  •  •-     L 

»■ \    *».  I \    V ^e   "  I.o  ari    '.'I    '.    ..    .  ••  ..    — :  A_     i ■— r— 

11                     •                         '"i"             'til             *  •■" 

•  •-  '    .\  ■     *«     -...'i.    .;..v^il> ;..,ti.kll •    ...    ^7v____  _■::     Jz» 

I  .     '■  .  -     i V  *     '    "■  V     W"  I  ••     •*•■■'■■•     ■       ■-        •  ii        :  —  -i         -     -p* 

•  •  - 

*•*  *..   •   .,-•    ^  .'v«t.i....^>   •-■.   v.«..'^.?«   L■t.^   -  -->v    *--'^  »        ■-  -  ^    *— ^_  •_    .  ^   — '.B 

••  .      -     .     »  ■ «  --•-•-•■         ■    *.  * 

^^■*^  «       -...^      ««A«       «<.B^        fti-«.*.*««^«  \l  '«*V*         ««••&*»»         •«        «.•.«*  «*_?^^_  .^'. 

\r  .„  ,,^  ;•*!*    '  ■  ^-"^    ''^  \T»' 

:::e  l*.-,>s:::c  wLi.l.  >:   \kTz-.^  r.^ii'I  i:*-  las 
N  ..  ...  .-.7  ::x;  r.^o  :h:r.r5.     We  hivo  ,t  rr',.  V  "     .v'-  Li  /,  .7-/v  it 

■  ■  ■  ■  ■  ^     ■  ■  ■  •^^  >■■■»«••  «.-•■■  ■■■_J  '^  -•  -  J-  _1 

i  ■  •  %  • 

:..s  vr,>.%'.  .■:"?::   :v::.aris  :':.£r  hii     Wi-  i^ye  n.  :-:r:Lz.  :•.  i 

«  «  «  ^^^  ■       ■     —     — 


.1  > 


J 


HOUSEHOLD  SALYATIOK.  615 

at  midnight  in  the  ears  of  the  jailor  and  hifl  household  for  the  first 
time^  and,  on  that  remarkable  occasion,  they  all  heard  it  together.  The 
fftt^  first,  in  his  alarm,  asked  the  question,  ''  What  must  I  do  to  be 
saved  T*  and  received  personally  the  answer,  ''Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  and  thou  shalt  oe  saved,  and  thy  house ; "  and  then  it  appears 
that  all  the  familv  gathered  around  their  parent,  and  the  two  holy  men, 
while  Paul  and  Silas  spake  unto  him  the  word  of  the  Lord,  and  also  to  all 
that  were  in  his  house.  We  do  not  know  whether  there  were  children 
there,  but  if  so,  and  we  will  assume  it  for  this  occasion,  all  were 
hearers  that  night.  There  was  not  a  solitary  exception,  no  one 
was  away  from  that  sermon  in  a  jail.  His  wife,  his  children,  his  ser- 
vants, all  that  were  in  his  house,  listened  to  the  heavenly  message.  It 
is  true,  he  who  preached  was  a  prisoner,  but  that  made  the  word 
none  the  less  powerfal,  for  he  was  to  them  an  ambassador  in  bonds. 
Prisoner  as  he  was,  he  preached  to  them  a  free  gospel,  and  a  gospel  of 
divine  authority.  He  erred  not  firom  the  truth  in  what  he  taught ;  he 
preached  unto  them  the  **word  of  God."  Would  to  God  that  all 
preachers  would  keepto  the  word  of  God,  and,  above  all  things,  would 
exalt  The  Incarnate  Word  of  God.  This  were  infinitely  better  than  to 
delude  men's  minds  with  those  "  germs  of  thought,"  those  strikingly 
new  ideas,  those  metaphysical  subtleties,  and  speculations,  and  theories, 
and  discoveries  of  science,  falsely  so  called,  which  are  now-a-days  so 
fashionable.  If  all  ministers  would  preach  the  word,  the  revealed  mind 
and  will  of  God,  then  hearers  would  m  larger  numbers  become  converts; 
for  God  will  bless  his  own  word,  but  he  will  not  bless  anything  else. 
The  jailor's  household  all  heard  God's  word  faithfully  declared,  and 
there  was  the  main  cause  of  blessing,  for,  alas  I  with  many  hearers,  the 
Sabbath  is  utterly  wasted ;  for,  though  they  are  attentive  listeners,  they 
are  left  without  a  blessing,  because  that  which  they  hear  is  not  the 
gospel  of  JesQS  Christ. 

I  have  myself  heard  sermons  which,  I  am  persuaded,  God  Almighty 
himself  coidd  not  bless  to  the  conversion  of  anybody.  He  could  not, 
because  it  wonld  have  been  a  denial  of  himself.  The  discourses  were 
not  true,  nor  according  to  his  word ;  they  were  not  such  as  were  cal- 
culated to  honour  himself,  and  how  can  he  bless  that  which  is  not  to 
his  own  honour  ?  and  how  can  he  set  his  seal  to  a  lie  7  The  word  of 
God  must  be  preached,  and  then  the  place,  the  hour,  or  the  garb  of 
the  preacher  will  matter  nothing.  The  minister  may  have  been  led  up 
fh>m  a  prison,  and  the  smell  of  the  dungeon  may  be  upon  him,  but 
when  he  opens  his  month  with  the  glad  tidings,  the  name  of  Jesus  will 
be  as  ointment  poured  forth. 

I  began  my  remarks  on  this  point  by  noting  that  they  all  heard  Paul ; 
and  observe  the  need  of  this,  as  a  starting-point,  for  '*  faith  cometh  by 
hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  word  of  God."  It  is  not  all  who  hear  that 
will  be  saved,  but  the  ordinary  way  with  God  is  for  men  first  to  hear, 
then  to  believe,  and  so  to  be  saved.  *'  Being  in  the  way,  God  met  with 
me,"  said  Obadiah ;  and  the  road  which  a  soul  should  follow  to  be  met 
with  by  God  is  the  way  of  hearing.  Though  it  may  seem  a  very 
trite  thing  to  say,  it  is  nevertheless  exceedingly  important,  if  we  are  to 
have  household  conversion,  that  there  should  be  a  household  hearing 
of  the  word.     This  is  the  chosen  instrumentality,  and  we  must  bring 


61G  UETBOFOUTAN  TABEBNAOLB  FDLFIT. 

all  nndcr  the  instnimeiitality  if  we  wish  them  to  obtain  the  bleasmg. 
Now,  in  this  City,  many  fathers  never  hear  the  word  of  God,  because 
they  regard  the  Sabbath  Day  as  a  day  of  laziness.     They  work  so  haid 
all  the  week,  they  say,  that  they  are  not  fit  to  rise  from  their  beds  ia 
the  morning,  and  then,  after  a  heayy  dinner,  the  evening  most  be  tsgoA 
in  loitering  abont,  and  chatting  away  time.    Brethren,  if  yon  want  to 
see  your  fellow- workmen  saved,  you  should  earnestly  endeavour  to  bring 
them  under  the  sound  of  the  gospel.     Here  is  a  very  nsefal  occupation 
for  many  of  you.     You  cannot  preach,  but  you  can  gather  a  congr^- 
tion  for  those  who  do.  A  little  persuasion  would  succeed  in  many  cases, 
and  once  bring  them  here,  we  would  hope  to  hold  them.     If  I  conU 
not  be  the  instrument  of  converting  a  soul  by  preaching  the  gospel 
myself,  I  would  habitually  addict  myself  to  the  bringing  of  straoigen 
to  listen  to  those  whom  God  has  owned  to  the  conversion  of  sonk 
Why,  our  congregations  need  never  be  thin — I  speak  not  now  for  my- 
self, for  I  have  no  need — but  in  no  place  where  the  gospel  is  preached 
need  there  be  a  thin  audience,  if  those  who  already  appreciate  the 
Gospel  would  feel  it  to  bo  a  Christian  duty  to  bring  others  to  hear  it 
Do  this,  I  pray  you.    I  believe  it  to  be  one  of  the  most  important 
efforts  which  a  Christian  man  can  make,  to  endeavour  to  bnng  the 
working  men  of  London,  and,  indeed,  all  classes  of  men  everywhere,  to 
listen  to  the  Gospel  of  Christ.     The  men,  the  fathers,  the  heads  of 
households,  we  must  have. 

If  we  are  to  have  the  household  saved,  however,  the  mothers  must 
hear  the  wor<l  as  well  as  the  fathers.  Many  of  them  do,  but  I  know 
cases,  and,  perhaps,  there  may  be  such  present,  and  I  wish  to  speak 
what  is  practical  ;  where  a  man  comes  to  hear  the  word  himself  bnt 
his  wife  is  detained  at  home  with  the  children.  Perhaps  she  is  not 
converted,  and  has  not  much  care  to  go  to  the  service ;  perhaps  she  is 
a  Christian  woman,  and  tliougli  she  would  wish  to  go  she  must  look 
after  the  children ;  in  either  case  it  is  the  duty  of  every  such  father,  if 
he  docs  not  keep  a  servant  to  attend  to  the  children,  to  take  his  turn 
with  the  wife  and  let  her  have  her  fair  share  of  opportunity  for  hearing 
the  gospel.  He  meanly  shirks  the  duty  of  a  husband,  who,  being  a 
working  man,  does  not  take  his  turn  at  home  and  give  his  wife  as  good 
an  opportunity  of  learning  the  way  of  salvation  as  himself.  This  may 
be  a  new  suggestion  to  some,  I  only  hope  they  will  carry  it  out*    It  is 

Elain  that  if  we  are  to  have  whole  households  saved,  we  must  have  whole 
ouseholds  hearing  the  word,  and  if  the  mother  cannot  hear  the  word, 
we  cannot  rationally  expect  the  blessing  to  come  to  her. 

Then  the  children  also  must  be  thought  of.  We  desire  to  see  them 
converted  as  children.  There  is  no  need  that  they  should  wait  until 
they  ai*c  grown  up,  and  have  run  into  sin  as  their  fathers  did,  that  they 
may  be  afterwards  brought  back  ;  it  would  be  infinitely  better  if  they 
were  preserved  from  such  wanderings,  and  early  brought  into  the 
fold  of  Jesus.  Tiie  blessing  which  God  gave  to  the  jailor's  children 
by  hearing,  he  gives  in  the  same  way  to  other  children.  Let  the  little 
ones  be  brought  to  hear  the  Gospel.  They  can  hear  it  in  the  Sabbath 
School,  and  there  are  special  services  adapted  to  them ;  but,  for  mY 
part,  1  like  also  so  to  preach  that  boys  and  girls  shall  be  interested, 
and  I  shall  feel  that  I  am  very  faulty  in  my  style  if  children  cannot 


HOUSEHOLD  SALVATION.  617 

understand  mnch  that  I  teach  Id  the  congregation.  Bring  all  who  have 
reached  years  of  nnderstanding  with  you.  Suffer  none  to  be  at  home, 
except  for  good  reasons.  Bring  each  young  Samuel  to  the  house  of  the 
Lord.  Let  it  be  said  of  you,  as  it  is  written  in  the  Book  of  Chronicles, 
"  And  all  Judah  stood  before  the  Lord,  with  thefr  little  ones,  their 
wives,  and  their  children."  If  nothing  else  shall  come  from  children's 
attending  our  worship,  the  holy  habit  of  going  up  to  God's  house  will 
be  a  perpetual  heritage  to  them ;  and  who  knows  but  while  they  arc  yet 
young  their  hearing  the  word  shall  be  the  means  of  their  salvation. 

Then  there  are  the  servants,  and  by  no  means  are  they  to  be  over- 
looked. To  have  all  that  are  in  the  house  saved,  all  that  are  in  the 
house  must  hear  the  Gospel.  Do  you  all  make  such  opportunities  for 
your  servants  on  the  Sabbath  as  you  should?  I  do  not  know,  of 
course,  how  you  conduct  your  family  arrangements ;  but  I  know  of 
some  who  do  not  think  enough  of  their  servants'  hearing  the  Gospel. 
Servants  frequently  are  sent  out  in  the  afternoon,  when  there  is  no 
preaching  worth  the  hearing.  It  may  be  unavoidable  in  many  cases  ; 
out  I  would  ask,  "What  is  the  use  of  their  going  out  at  an  hour  when 
no  preaching  is  to  be  found?  If  we  give  them  only  opportunities  of 
going  out  when  there  is  nothing  to  hear,  we  certainly  have  not  given 
them  a  fair  portion  of  the  Lord's-day.  By  some  contrivance  or  otiier, 
perhaps  with  a  little  pinch  and  self-sacrifice,  our  servants  might  hear  our 
own  minister.  You  cannot  pray  God  to  save  your  household,  and  be 
honest,  unless  you  give  the  whole  household  an  opportunity  of  being 
saved,  and  God's  way  of  saving  souls,  we  repeat  it,  is  by  the  preaching 
and  the  hearing  of  the  word.  Oh !  let  every  one  of  us  be  able  to 
say,  as  masters  and  as  parents,  "  I  cannot  save  my  children,  and  I 
cannot  save  my  servants,  but  this  I  have  done,  I  have  directed  them  , 
to  a  man  of  God  who  preaches  the  gospel  faithfully ;  I  do  not  send 
them  to  a  place  merely  because  there  is  talent  or  fashion  there,  but  I 
have  selected  for  them  a  ministry  which  God  blesses,  and  I  do  my  best 
to  put  them  all  in  the  way  of  the  blessing,  praying  and  beseeching 
the  Lord  to  call  them  all  by  his  grace."  I  anticipate  the  many  diffi- 
culties you  will  urge,  but  would  again  say,  if  we  love  souls,  we  should 
try  to  meet  these  difficulties,  and  if  we  cannot  do  all  we  would,  we 
should  at  least  do  all  we  can,  that  we  may  have  all  our  households 
eveiT  Sabbath-day  hearing  the  glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed  God. 

II.  We  now  turn  to  the  next,  which  is  a  most  comfortable  and  cheer- 
ing sight.  Here  is  A  whole  household  believing.  We  know  that 
the  whole  household  believed,  for  we  are  told  so  in  the  thirty-fourth 
verse ;  "  Believing  in  God  with  all  his  house  : " — all,  all,  all  were 
powerfully  affected,  savingly  affected  by  the  gospel  which  Paul 
preached  to  them.  I  have  already  remarked,  that  they  were  very  prob- 
ably new  hearers.  Certainly,  if  they  had  heard  the  word  before,  it 
could  not  have  been  many  times ;  and  yet  they  all  believed.  *  Is  it  not 
a  most  sad  fact  that  many  of  my  old  hearers  have  not  believed  ?  The  ' 
battering-ram  has  beaten  often  on  their  walls,  but  it  has  not  shaken 
them  yet;  wooing  invitations  of  the  gospel  have  been  presented  to 
them  again  and  again,  accompanied  by  the  soul-piercing  music  of  a 
Saviour's  dying  cries ;  and  yet,  for  all  that,  they  remain  unconverted 
still.      Ohl    the  responsibilities  that  are  heaped  up  upon  gospel- 


^23  UETBOFOLITAN  TABEELNACLE  PULPIT. 

hardened  sinners !  Take  home  to  yonrselves  thafc  waminc;  word,  I  piaj 
you.  This  household  heard  the  gospel  probably  bat  once,  certmly 
only  once  or  twice,  yet  they  believed,  and  here  are  some  of  us  w1k> 
have  heard  it  from  our  youth  up,  and  remain  rebellious  stilL 

Of  this  family  it  may  be  said  that  as  they  were  new  hearers,  so 
they  were  most  unlikely  hearers.  The  Komans  did  not  select  for 
jailors  the  most  tender  hearted  of  men.  Frequently  they  were 
old  legionaries  who  had  seen  service  in  bloody  wars,  and  been  inured 
to  cruel  fights  ;  and,  when  these  men  settled  down  as,  in  a  measure, 
pensioners  of  the  empire,  they  were  allotted  such  offices  as  that 
which  the  jailor  held.  In  the  society  and  associations  of  a  jail  there 
was  very  little  that  could  be  likely  to  improve  the  mother,  to  benefit 
the  children,  or  elevate  the  servants.  They  were,  then,  most  un- 
promising hearers.  Yet  how  often  are  the  most  unlikely  persons 
convinced  of  sin,  and  led  to  the  Saviour.  How  true  is  it  still  of 
many  who  are  most  moral  and  excellent,  and  even  outwardly  religious, 
that  "  the  publicans  and  harlots  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heav^ 
before  them.'*  This  is  an  encouragement  to  you  who  work  in  lodging- 
houses  and  in  the  slums  of  this  vast  city,  to  bring  all  kinds  of  people 
to  hear  the  word,  for  if  a  jailor  and  his  household  were  numbered  among 
the  first  fruits  unto  God  at  Philippi,  may  we  not  hope  that  others  of  an 
nnlikely  class  may  be  converted  too  ?  Who  are  you,  that  you  should  say, 
"  It  is  of  no  use  to  invite  such  a  man  to  hear,  for  he  would  not  be  con- 
verted?" The  more  improbable  it  seems  to  be  in  your  judgment^ 
perhaps  the  more  likely  it  is  that  God  will  look  upon  him  with  an  eye 
of  love.  How  happv  a  thing  it  was  for  the  jailor  that,  in  the  provi- 
dence  of  God,  his  hardened  but  probably  honest  spirit  was  bronght 
under  the  influence  of  the  earnest  apostle.  Bring  others,  like  him,  into 
the  place  of  worship,  for  who  can  txjll? 

Note,  that  though  they  were  thus  unlikely  hearers,  yet  they  were 
immediately  converted,  there  and  then.  It  took  but  a  short  time.  I  do 
not  know  how  long  Paul's  sermon  was;  he  was  a  wise  man,  and  I  should 
not  think  he  would  preach  a  long  sermon  in  the  dead  of  the  night,  just 
after  an  earthquake.  I  have  no  doubt  it  was  a  simple  exposition  of  the 
doctrine  of  the  cross.  And  then  Silas  talked  too  ;  perhaps,  when  Paul 
had  done,  Silas  gave  a  little  exhortation,  a  brief  address  to  finish  np 
with,  and  fill  up  anything  which  Paul  had  left  out.  The  teaching  was 
soon  over,  and  at  its  close  the  jailor,  his  wife,  his  children  (if  he  had 
any),  his  servants,  and  indeed  all  that  were  in  the  house,  avowed  them- 
selves to  be  believers.  It  does  not  take  a  month  to  convert  a  sonL 
Glory  be  to  God,  if  he  wills  to  do  it,  he  can  convert  all  here  this  morning, 
in  a  moment.  Once  hearing  the  gospel  may  be  sufficient  to  make  a 
man  a  Christian.  When  the  eternal  word  of  God  comes  forth  wiUi 
omnipotent  energy,  it  turns  lions  into  lambs,  and  that  in  a  single  instant 
of  time.  As  the  lightning  flash  can  split  the  oak  from  its  loftiest  bough 
to  the  earth  in  a  single  second,  so  the  ever  blessed  lightning  of  God's 
Spirit  can  cleave  the  heart  of  man  in  a  moment.  Our  text  shows  us  a 
whole  family  saved  at  once. 

It  is  said  particularly  of  them  all  that  "  they  believed."  Was  that 
the  only  thing  ?  Could  it  not  be  said  that  they  all  prayed  ?  I  dare 
say  it  could,  and  many  other  good  things ;  but  then  faith  was  at  tiw 


HOUSEHOLD  SALVATION.  61^ 

root  of  them  all.  It  was  the  sneer  of  an  old  Greek  philosopher  against 
the  Christians  of  his  day :  **  Faith,"  he  said,  "  is  yonr  only  wisdom." 
Yes,  and  we  rejoice  in  the  same  wisdom  now — faith  ;  for  the  moment 
we  receive  faith  we  are  saved.  It  is  the  one  essential  grace  ; — "  Believe 
on  the  Lord  Jesns  Christ,  and  thon  shalt  be  saved."  The  moment  God 
^ives  a  man  faith — and  that  he  can  do  at  any  time — ^the  instant  the 
heart  casts  itself  into  the  arms  of  Jesns  cmcified,  and  rests  there,  who- 
ever it  is,  he  is  saved  in  an  instant :  effectnally  and  infallibly  saved  ; 
he  is,  in  all  respects,  a  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesns.  Faith  is  an  in- 
stantaneous act  at  its  beginning,  and  then  it  remains  as  an  abiding 
grace ;  its  first  act,  by  the  power  of  God,  puts  a  man  into  the  present 
possession  of  immediate  salvation.  I  wonder  if  we  preachers  fully  believe 
this  as  a  matter  of  fact.  If  I  were  to  go  iuto  a  jail  to-morrow  eveuing, 
and  were  to  preach  to  the  jailor  and  his  household,  should  I  expect  to 
see  all  saved  there  and  then  ?  And  if  they  were,  should  I  believe  it  ? 
Most  likely  I  should  not  see  it,  and  the  reason  would  be  because  I  should 
not  have  faith  enough  to  expect  it.  We  preach  the  gospel,  no  doubt,  but 
it  is  with  the  slender  hope  that  some  may  be  converted,  and  they  are 
converted,  here  and  there;  but  if  God  would  clothe  us  with  the  faith 
of  the  apostles,  we  should  see  far  greater  things.  When  he  works  in  us 
a  larger  faith,  he  will  also  restore  to  us  the  hundredfold  harvest,  which, 
alas !  is  so  rare  in  these  days. 

Notice  very  particularly,  that  these  persons  though  converted  thus 
suddenly,  all  of  them  were,  nevertheless,  very  hearty  converts.  They 
did  that  night,  as  I  shall  show  you  soon,  abundantly  prove  how  thoroughly 
converted  they  were.  They  were  quick  to  do  all  that  in  them  lay  for 
the  apostle,  and  for  the  good  cause.  They  were  not  half  converted,  as 
many  people  are.  I  like  to  see  a  man  renewed  all  over  from  head  to 
foot.  It  is  delightful  to  meet  your  hearty  Christian,  who,  when  he  gave 
his  heart  to  Jesus,  meant  it,  and  devoted  his  whole  body,  soul,  and 
spirit  to  the  good  Lord  who  had  bought  him  with  his  blood.  Some  of 
you  have  only  got  a  little  finger  conversion,  just  enough  to  wear  the 
ring  of  profession,  and  look  respectable,  but  oh  1  to  have  hand  and  foot, 
lungs,  heart,  voice,  and  soul,  all  saturated  with  the  Spirit's  influence 
and  consecrated  to  the  cause  of  God.  We  have  a  few  such  men,  full 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  but,  alas,  we  have  too  many  other  converts,  who 
are  rather  tinctured  with  grace,  than  saturated  with  it,  and  to 
whom  sprinkling  is  a  very  significant  ordinance,  for  it  would  appear 
that  they  never  have  received  anything  but  a  sprinkling  of  grace.  Oh, 
for  saints  in  whom  there  will  be  a  thorough  death  and  burial  to  the 
world,  and  a  new  life,  in  the  resurrection  image  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  which  is  the  true  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

However,  I  must  return  on  this  head  to  the  point,  that  they  all 
believed.  What  a  sweet  picture  for  you  to  look  upon.  The  father  is  a 
believer  in  Jesus,  but  he  has  not  to  kneel  down  and  pray,  "  Lord, 
save  my  dear  wife;"  for  see,  and  rejoice  as  you  see  it,  she  is  a 
believer  too.  And  then  there  is  the  elder  son  and  the  daughters; 
we  know  not,  and  we  must  not  guess,  how  many  there  might  be, 
but  there  they  are  all  rejoicing  in  their  father's  God.  And  then 
there  are  the  servants,  the  old  nurse  who  brought  up  the  little 
ones,  and  the  little  maid,  and  the  warders  who  have  to  look  after  the 


620  METIIOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

prisoners,  they  are  all  of  them  ready  to  siDg  the  psalm  of  praise^  sad 
all  delighted  to  look  upon  those  who  were  once  their  prisoners  as 
now  their  instructors  and  their  fathers  in  the  faith.  O  brethren,  if 
some  of  us  should  ever  see  all  our  children  and  our  servants  sayed,  we 
would  cry  like  Simeon  of  old,  "  Lord,  now  lettest  then  thy  servant 
depart  in  peace  according  to  thy  word."  Many  have  seen  it ;  the 
jailor's  case  is  by  no  means  an  exceptional  one,  and  I  hope  all  of  us  are 
earnestly  crying  to  God  that  we  may  gain  the  same  nnspeakable 
privilege. 

III.  We  liave,  in  the  third  place,  in  our  text,  a  whole  house- 
hold BAPTISED.  "  He  was  baptised,  he  and  all  his  straightway." 
In  almost  every  case  in  Scripture  where  you  read  of  a  household 
baptism,  you  arc  distinctly  informed  that  they  were  also  a  believing 
household.  In  the  case  of  Lydia  it  may  not  be  so ;  bat  then  there 
are  remarkable  circumstances  about  her  case  which  render  that  in- 
formation needless.  In  this  instance  they  were  all  believers,  and, 
therefore,  they  were  all  of  them  baptised.  First,  "he"  was  bap- 
tised,— the  jailor ;  he  was  ready  first  to  submit  himself  to  the 
ordinance  in  which  he  declared  himself  to  be  dead  to  the  world, 
and  risen  anew  in  Christ  Jesus.  Then  "  all  his  "  followed.  What  a 
glorious  baptism,  amidst  the  glare  of  the  torches  that  night !  perhaps 
in  the  prison  bath,  or  in  the  impluvium  which  was  usnally  in  the 
centre  of  most  oriental  houses,  or  perhaps  the  stream  that  watered 
Philipj)i  ran  by  the  prison  wall,  ana  was  used  for  the  occasion.  It 
matters  not,  but  into  the  water  they  descended,  one  after  another, 
mother,  children,  servants ;  and  Paul  and  Silas  stood  there  delighted  to 
aid  them  in  declaring  themselves  to  be  on  the  Lord's  side,  "  buried 
with  him  in  baptism.'* 

And  this  was  done,  mark  you,  siravjhtway.  There  was  not  one  who 
wished  to  have  it  put  off  till  he  had  tried  himself  a  little,  and  seen 
whether  he  was  really  regenerated.  In  those  days  no  one  had  any 
scruple  or  objection  to  obey  ;  none  advocated  the  following  of  some 
ancient  and  doubtful  tradition  ;  all  were  obedient  to  the  divine  will. 
No  one  shrank  from  baptism  for  fear  that  water  might  damage  his 
health,  or  in  some  way  cause  him  inconvenience  ;  but  he  and  all  his, 
wishing  to  follow  the  plain  example  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  were 
baptised,  and  that  straightway, — at  once,  and  on  the  spot.  No 
minister  has  any  right  to  refuse  to  baptise  any  person  who  professes 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  unless  there  be  some  glaring  fact  to  cast  doubt 
upon  the  candidate's  sincerity.  I,  for  one,  would  never  ask  from  any 
person  weeks  and  months  of  delay,  in  which  the  man  should  prove 
to  me  that  he  was  a  believer;  but  1  would  follow  the  example  of  the 
apostle.  The  gospel  of  Christ  was  preached,  the  people  were  con- 
verted, and  they  were  baptised,  and  all  perhaps  in  the  space  of  an 
hour.  The  whole  transaction  may  not  have  taken  up  so  much  time 
as  I  shall  occupy  in  preaching  about  it  this  morning.  How,  then,  is 
it  with  you,  who  wait  so  long  ?  Where  is  the  precept  or  example  to 
warrant  your  hesitation?  Permit  me  to  remind  you  that  duties 
delayed  are  sins.  Will  you  take  that  home  with  you,  yon  who  have 
been  believers  for  years  and  yet  are  not  baptised?  Permit  me  to 
remind  you,  also,  that  privileges  postponed  are  losses.    Pat  the  two 


HOUSEHOLD  BALVATIOH.  621 

together,  and  \9hete  duty  and  privilege  meefc  do  not  incur  the  sin  and 
the  I0S89  bnt»  like  David.  ''  make  haste  and  delay  not "  to  keep  the 
divine  command. 

"  Why  say  so  much  about  baptism  ?"  says  somebody.  Much  about 
baptism  I  Never  was  a  remark  more  ungenerous,  if  it  is  made  against 
me.  I  might,  far  more  justly,  be  censured  for  saying  so  little  about  it. 
Much  about  baptism  1  I  call  you  all  to  witness  that,  unless  it  comes 
across  my  path  in  the  Scriptures,  I  never  go  away  from  the  text  to  drag 
it  in.  I  am  no  partisan  :  I  never  made  baptism  my  main  teaching,  and 
<3od  forbid  I  should;  but  I  will  not  be  hindered  from  preaching  the 
whole  truth,  and,  I  dare  say,  no  less  than  I  am  now  saying.  The  Holy 
Ghost  has  recorded  the  baptism  here :  will  you  think  little  of  what  he 
chooses  to  record?  Paul  and  Silas,  an  apostle  and  his  companion, 
dared  not  neglect  the  ordinance :  how  dare  you  despise  it  7 

It  was  the  dead  of  the  night,  it  was  in  a  prison;  if  it  might  have 
been  put  off,  it  surely  might  have  been  then:  it  was  not  a  reputable 
place  to  dispense  baptism,  some  would  have  said ;  it  was  hardly  a 
seasonable  hour,  but  they  thought  it  so  important  that  there  and  then, 
and  at  once,  they  baptised  the  whole  household.  If  this  be  God*s  com- 
mand— and  I  solemnly  believe  it  to  be  so — do  not  despise  it,  I  beseech 
you ;  as  you  love  Christ,  do  not  talk  about  its  being  non-essential.  If  the 
Lord  command,  shall  his  servant  talk  about  its  being  non-essential  ?  It  is 
essential  in  all  things  to  do  my  Master's  will,  and  to  preach  it ;  for  hath 
he  not  said,  '*  He  i£at  shall  break  one  of  the  least  of  these  my  com- 
mandments, and  shall  teach  men  so,  the  same  shall  be  least  in  the 
kingdom  of  heaven "  ?  I  hope  it  may  be  our  privilege  here  to  see 
whole  families  baptised.  Come  along  with  you,  beloved  father,  if  you 
are  a  believer  in  Jesus:  come  with  him,  mother:  come  with  him, 
daughters :  come  with  your  mother,  yc  godly  sons,  and  come  ye  servants 
too.  If  you  have  come  to  the  cross,  and  aU  your  hope  is  placed  there, 
then  come  and  declare  that  you  are  Christ's.  Touch  not  the  ordinance 
till  you  believe  in  Jesus  Christ :  it  may  work  you  mighty  mischief  if 
you  do.  The  sacramentarianism,  which  is  so  rampant  in  this  age,  is 
of  all  lies  I  think  the  most  deadly,  and  you  encourage  sacramentarianism 
if  you  give  a  Christian  ordinance  to  an  unconverted  person.  Touch  it 
not,  then,  until  you  are  saved.  Until  you  are  believers,  ordinances  are 
not  for  you,  and  it  is  a  sacrilege  for  you  to  intrude  yourselves  into 
them.  How  I  long  to  see  whole  households  believe,  for  then  I  may 
safely  rejoice  at  seeing  them  baptised  I 

IV.  Next,  we  have  A  whole  household  at  wobk  for  God.  Read  the 
passage,  and  you  will  see  that  they  all  did  something.  The  father  called 
for  a  light,  the  servants  bring  the  torches,  and  the  lamps  such  as  were 
used  in  the  prisons.  He  took  his  prisoners  the  same  hour  of  the 
night,  and  washed  their  stripes.  Here  is  work  for  himself,  and  work 
for  gentle  hands  to  do,  to  assuage  the  pains  of  those  poor  bleeding 
backs  ;  to  wash  out  the  grit  that  had  come  there  through  their  lying 
on  their  backs  on  the  dungeon  floor,  and  to  mollify  and  bind  up  their 
wounds.  There  was  suitaLle  occupation  for  the  mother  and  for  the 
servants,  for  they  set  meat  before  the  holy  men.  The  kitehen  was 
sanctified  to  supply  the  needs  of  the  ministers  of  Christ.  Everything 
was  done  for  their  comfort.    They  were  hungry,  and  they  gave  them 


622  HETBOFOLTTAN  TABSBNACLB  FULPIT. 

meat ;  they  were  bleeding  and  they  bathed  their  wonnds.  The  whole 
household  was  astir  that  night.  They  had  all  belieyed  and  been 
baptised,  and  their  very  first  enquiry  is,  "  What  can  we  do  for  Jesus  ?" 
It  was  clear  to  them  that  they  could  help  the  two  men  who  had  bronght 
them  to  Christ,  and  they  did  so  aflfectionately.  No  Martha  had  to 
complain  that  her  sister  left  her  to  serve  alone.  I  am  persaaded  there 
was  not  one  of  the  family  who  shirked  the  pleasant  dntj  of  hospitality, 
though  it  was  at  dead  of  night.  They  soon  had  a  meal  ready ;  and  hov 
pleased  they  felt  when  they  saw  the  two  holy  men  reclining  at  their  ease 
at  the  table,  instead  of  lying  with  their  feet  fast  in  the  stocks  in  the  prison. 
They  did  not  take  the  food  down  to  the  prison  to  them,  or  wash  th^ 
and  send  them  back  to  the  dungeon ;  bat  they  brought  them  up  from 
the  cell  into  their  own  house,  and  accommodated  them  with  the  best 
they  had.  Now,  beloved,  it  is  a  great  mercy  when  you  have  a  family 
saved  and  baptised,  if  the  whole  household  sets  to  work  to  serve  GoJ, 
for  there  is  something  for  all  to  do.  Is  there  a  lazy  church 
member  here?  Friend,  you  miss  a  great  blessing.  Is  there  a 
mother  here  whose  husband  is  very  diligent  in  serving  God,  but 
she  neglects  to  lead  her  children  in  the  way  of  truth?  Ah,  dear 
woman,  you  are  losing  what  would  be  a  great  comfort  to  your  own 
soul.  I  know  you  are ;  for  one  of  the  best  means  for  a  soul  to  be  built 
up  in  Christ  is  for  it  to  do  something  for  Christ.  We  cease  to  grow 
wnen  wo  cease  either  to  labour  or  to  suffer  for  the  Lord.  Bringing 
forth  fruit  unto  God  is,  unto  ourselves,  a  most  pleasant  and  profitable 
operation.  Even  our  children  when  they  are  saved  can  do  something 
for  the  Master.  The  little  hand  that  drops  its  halfpence  into  the  offer- 
ing box,  out  of  love  to  Jcsns,  is  accepted  of  the  Lord.  The  voung  child 
trying  to  tell  its  brother  or  sister  of  the  dear  Saviour  who  has  loved  it 
IS  a  true  missionary  of  the  cross.  We  should  train  our  children  as  the 
Spartans  trained  their  sons  early  for  feats  of  war.  We  must  hare 
them  first  saved,  but  after  that  we  must  never  think  that  they  may  be 
idle  till  they  come  to  a  certain  period  of  life.  I  have  known  a  little 
boy  take  his  young  companion  aside,  and  kneel  down  in  a  field  and 
pray  with  him,  and  I  have  heard  of  that  young  lad's  being  now,  in  the 

i'udgment  of  his  parents,  a  believer  in  Christ  I  have  seen  it,  and  my 
leart  has  been  touched  when  I  have  seen  it — two  or  three  boys 
gathered  round  another  to  seek  that  boy*s  salvation,  and  praying  to 
God  as  heartily  and  earnestly  as  their  parents  could  have  done.  There 
is  room  for  all  to  work  to  help  on  the  growing  kingdom ;  and  blessed 
shall  that  father  be  who  shall  see  all  his  children  enlisted  in  the  grand 
army  of  God's  elect,  and  all  striving  together  for  the  promotion  of  the 
Redeemer's  kingdom. 

V.  That  brings  me  to  the  fifth  sight,  which  is  A  FAMn*Y  ALL  BB- 
JOiciNG,  for  he  rejoices  in  God  with  all  his  home.  According  to  the 
run  of  the  text  the  object  of  their  joy  was  that  they  had  ^lieved. 
Believing  obtains  the  pardon  of  all  sin,  and  brings  Christ's  ri^hteousnesB 
into  our  possession,  it  declares  us  to  be  the  sons  of  God,  gives  ns 
heirship  with  Christ,  and  secures  us  his  blessing  here  and  glory  here- 
after: \^ho  would  not  rejoice  at  this  ?  If  the  family  had  been  Irfta 
fortune  they  would  have  rejoiced,  but  they  had  found  more  than  all  the 
world's  wealth  at  once  in  finding  a  Saviour,  therefore  were  they  glad. 


HOUSEHOLD  SALVATION.  623 

But  thongh  their  joy  sprang  mainly  from  their  believing,  it  also  arose 
from  their  being  baptised,  for  do  we  not  read  of  the  Ethiopian  of  old 
after  he  was  baptised  that  he  "  went  on  his  way  rejoicing."    God  often 

F'ves  a  clearing  of  the  skies  to  those  who  are  ooedient  to  his  command. 
have  known  persons  habitually  the  subjects  of  doubts  and  fears,  who 
have  suddenly  leaped  into  joy  and  strength  when  they  have  done  as 
their  Lord  commanded  them.  Not  for  keeping,  but "  in  keeping  his  com- 
mandments there  is  great  reward." 

They  rejoiced,  no  doubt,  also  because  they  had  enjoyed  an  opportu- 
nity of  serving  the  church  in  waiting  upon  the  apostle.  They  felt  qjlad 
to  think  that  Paul  was  at  their  table;  very  sorry  that  he  had  been 
imprisoned,  but  glad  that  they  were  his  jailors  ;  sorry  that  he  had  been 
beaten,  but  thankful  that  they  could  wash  his  stripes.  And  Christian 
people  are  never  so  happy  as  when  they  are  busy  for  Jesus.  When  you 
do  most  for  Christ  you  shall  feel  most  of  His  love  in  your  hearts.  Why 
it  makes  my  heart  tingle  with  joy  when  I  feel  that  I  can  honour  my 
God.  Rejoice,  my  brethren,  that  you  have  doors  of  usefulness  set 
open  before  you,  and  say,  now  we  can  glorify  the  Saviour's  name  ;  now 
we  can  visit  the  sick ;  now  we  can  teach  the  ignorant ;  now  we  can 
bring  sinners  to  the  Saviour.  Why,  there  is  no  joy  except  the  joy  of 
heaven  itself,  which  excels  the  bliss  of  serving  the  Saviour  who  has 
done  so  much  for  us ! 

I  have  no  doubt  that  their  joy  was  permanent  and  continued.  There 
would  not  be  any  quarrelling  in  that  house  now,  no  disobedient  children, 
no  short  tempered  father,  no  fretful  mother,  no  cruel  brother,  no  exact- 
ing sister,  no  purloining  servants,  or  eyeservers ;  no  warders  who  would 
exceed  their  duty,  or  be  capable  of  receiving  bribes  from  the  prisoners. 
The  whole  house  would  become  a  holy  house,  and  a  happy  house  hence- 
forth. It  is  remarkable  they  should  be  so  happy,  because  they  might 
have  thought  sorrowfully  of  what  they  had  been.  They  had  fastened 
the  apostle's  feet  in  the  stocks.  Ah  I  but  that  was  all  gone,  and  they 
were  nappy  to  know  that  it  was  all  forgiven.  The  father  had  been 
a  rongh soldier,  and  perhaps  his  sons  had  been  little  better;  but  it  was 
all  blotted  out,  Christ's  blood  had  covered  all  their  sin,  they  were  happ/' 
thongh  they  were  penitent.  It  is  true,  they  had  a  poor  prospect  befort 
them,  as  the  world  would  say,  for  they  would  be  likely  to  be  persecuted, 
and  to  suffer  much.  Here  were  two  of  the  great  ones  of  the  church  who 
had  been  scourged  and  put  in  prison :  the  humble  members  could  not 
expect  to  faie  letter.  Ah,  never  mind,  they  rejoiced  in  God.  If  they 
had  known  they  would  have  to  die  for  it,  they  would  have  rejoiced,  for 
to  have  a  Saviour  is  such  a  source  of  thankfulness  to  believing  souls, 
that  if  we  had  to  burn  to-morrow,  we  would  rejoice  to-day ;  if  we  had 
to  die  a  thousand  deaths  in  the  course  of  the  next  month,  yet,  to  find 
a  Saviour  such  as  Jesus  Christ  is,  is  joy  enough  to  make  us  laugh  at 
death  itself.  They  were  a  rejoicing  family  because  they  were  a  renewed 
fimily. 

In  closing,  regard  these  two  words.  That  household  is  now  in  glory : 
they  are  all  there — ^the  jailor,  and  his  spouse,  and  his  children,  and  hia 
servants;  they  are  all  there,  for  is  it  not  written,  ''He  that  believeth 
and  is  baptised  shall  be  saved?"  They  were  obedient  to  that  word, 
and  they  are  saved.    Now,  with  some  of  you  the  father  is  in  heaven. 


624  METROl'OLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

and  the  mother  is  on  the  road,  but  the  children,  ah,  the  ehildreal 
With  others  of  you,  your  little  ones  have  gone  before  yon,  snatched 
away  from  the  mother's  breast ;  and  your  grandsire  is  also  in  glory; 
but,  ah  1  husband  and  wife,  your  faces  are  turned  towards  the  ways  aad 
wages  of  sin,  and  you  will  never  meet  your  children  and  your  parents. 
There  will  be  broken  households  around  the  throne,  and  if  it  could  mar 
their  joy — if  anything  could — it  would  be  the  thought  that  there  is  a 
son  in  hell,  or  perhaps  a  husband  in  the  flames^  while  the  wife  and 
mother  sings  the  endless  song.  0  God,  grant  it  never  may  be  so. 
May  no  child  of  our  loins  die  an  heir  of  wrath ;  none  that  have  slept 
in  our  bosoms  be  banished  from  Jehovah's  presence.  By  the  bliss  of  a 
united  family,  I  beseech  you  seek  after  it  that  you  may  have  that  united 
family  in  heaven.  For  this  is  the  last  question,  "  Will  my  family  be 
there  ? "  Will  yours  be  there  ?  Turn  it  over  in  your  minds,  my  brothers 
and  sisters,  and  if  you  can  give  the  happy  answer,  and  say,  "  Yes,  by 
the  blessing  of  God,  I  believe  we  shall  all  be  there,"  then,  I  will  ask 
you  to  serve  God  very  much,  for  you  owe  him  very  much.  You  are 
deep  debtors  to  the  mercy  of  God,  you  parents  who  have  godly  children. 
You  ought  to  do  twice  as  much  ;  nay,  seven  times  as  much  for  Jesns 
as  any  other  Christians.  But  on  the  other  hand,  if  you  have  to  give  a 
painful  answer,  then  let  this  day  be  a  day  of  prayer,  and  I  would  say  to 
you,  could  not  you,  fathers,  who  love  the  Lord,  call  your  children  to- 
gether this  afternoon,  and  tell  them  what  I  have  been  talking  about.  Say 
to  the  boy,  "  My  dear  boy,  our  minister  this  morning  has  been  speaking 
about  a  household  in  heaven,  and  a  household  being  baptised  because 
they  believed  ;  I  pray  that  you  may  be  a  believer."  Pray  with  the 
boys,  pray  with  the  girls,  pray  with  the  mother;  and  I  do  not  know  but 
what  this  very  afternoon  your  whole  household  may  be  brought  to  the 
Saviour.     Who  can  tell  ? 

You,  dear  boys,  just  below  me,  who  are  a  few  out  of  my  largo  fanuly 
at  the  Orphanage,  some  of  you  have  fathers  in  heaven,  I  hope  you  will 
follow  them  in  the  right  way.  The  church  of  God  tries  to  take  care  of 
you  because  you  are  orphans,  and  God  has  promised  to  be  the  father  of 
the  fatherless :  0  dear  boys  give  him  your  hearts.  Some  of  you  have 
godly  mothers,  I  know  them,  and  I  know  that  they  pray  for  you.  May 
their  prayers  be  heard  for  you.  I  hope  you  will  trust  the  Saviour,  and 
grow  up  to  serve  him.  May  it  not  be  long  before  you  profess  your  faith 
in  baptism ;  and  may  we  all  of  us  meet  in  glory  above,  everyone  with- 
out exception.    The  Lord  grant  it,  for  Christ's  si^e.    Am6ti. 


POUTION  OP  SCRIPTURB  READ  BEPORB  SkRMON. — ^ActS  XVL  6 — 40. 


Mr.  Spurgeon  begs  to  inform  his  friends  that  the  usual  Almanack  is  now 
ready  for  1872,  and  also  a  sheet  for  the  walls,  by  John  Ploushman.  Both  are 
to  be  had  for  one  penny  each,  and  it  is  hoped  that  their  circulation  will  do  good 
both  spiritually  and  morally.  Friends  are  requested  to  circulate  them.  Ther 
are  both  published  by  Messrs.  Passmore  and  AlabasteTy  and  may  be  had  id  •& 
booksellers. 


IPletr^pIitiin  iFalremacfe  f  ttlpit. 


«  THE  SUN  OP  EIGHTEOUSNESS." 


^  ^^rmon 


DHJVEBED  ON  LORD'fl-DAY  MOEKING,   NOVEMBER  12TH,   1871,  BY 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT     THE     METROPOLITAN     TABERNACLE,     NBWINGTON. 


"  In  them  hath  ho  set  a  tabernacle  for  the  sun,  which  is  as  a  bridegroom  coming 
out  of  his  chamber,  and  rejoioeth  as  a  strong  man  to  run  a  race.  His  going  forth 
is  from  the  end  of  the  heaven,  and  his  circuit  unto  the  ends  of  it:  and  there  is 
nothing  hid  from  the  heat  thereof.^ — Psalm  xix.  4,  5,  6. 

"The  Sun  of  righteousness.'* — Malachi  iv.  2. 

We  should  feel  quite  justified  in  applying  the  language  of  the  19th 
Psalm  to  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  from  the  simple  fact  that  he  is  so  fre- 
quently compared  to  the  sun ;  and  especially  in  the  passage  which  we  have 
giren  you  as  our  second  text,  wherein  he  is  called  **  the  Sun  of  Right- 
eousness/' But  we  have  a  higher  justification  for  such  a  reading  of  the 
passage,  for  it  will  be  in  your  memories  that,  in  the  lOth  chapter  of 
the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  the  Apostle  Paul,  slightly  altering  the 
iprords  of  this  psalm,  applies  them  to  the  gospel  and  the  preachers 
thereof.  "  Have  they  not  heard  ?  "  said  he,  "  lea,  verily,  their  sound 
went  into  all  the  earth,  and  their  words  unto  the  ends  of  the  world." 
8o  that  what  was  here  spoken  of  the  sun  by  David,  is  referred  by 
Paul  to  the  gospel,  which  is  the  light  streaming  from  Jesus  Christ, 
•*  the  Sun  of  Righteousness."  We  can  never  err  if  we  allow  the  New 
Testament  to  interpret  the  Old:  comparing  spiritual  things  with 
spiritual  is  a  good  mental  and  spiritual  exercise  for  us ;  and  I  feel, 
therefore,  that  we  shall  not  be  guuty  of  straining  the  text  at  all  when 
we  take  the  language  of  David  in  relation  to  the  sun,  and  use  it  in 
reference  to  our  Lonl  Jesus  Christ. 

Do  not  your  hearts  often  say,  **  What  shall  we  do,  or  what  shall  we 
saj  to  render  honor  unto  our  Redeemer  ?*'  Have  you  not  often  felt 
confounded  as  to  what  offering  you  shall  bring  to  him?  If  vou  had 
been  possessor  of  all  the  worlds,  you  would  have  laid  them  at  nis  feet ; 
if  the  universe  had  been  your  heritage,  you  would  cheerfully  have 
rasigned  it  to  him,  and  felt  happy  in  stripping  yourself  of  everything, 
that  he  might  be  rendered  the  more  glorious  by  your  sacrifice.  Since 
No.  1,030. 


626  METROPOLITAN  TABEUNACLB  PULPIT. 

you  have  not  all  this  wealth,  have  you  not  again  and  again  asked  of 
your  soul, 

«•  Oil  what  shall  I  do. 
My  Saviour  to  praise  V 

I  would  write  the  best  of  poems  if  ao  I  conld  extol  him,  but  the 
faculty  is  not  in  me ;  I  would  sing  the  sweetest  of  songs,  and  compoee 
the  most  melting  music,  if  I  could,  and  count  art,  and  wit,  and 
music  exalted  by  being  handmaidens  to  him ;  but,  wherewitlial  shall  I 
adore  him,  before  whom  the  best  music  on  earth  must  be  but  discord; 
and  how  shall  I  set  him  forth,  the  very  skirts  of  whose  garments  are 
bright  with  insufferable  light?  At  such  times  you  have  looked  Ihe 
whole  world  throu^^h  to  find  metaphors  to  heap  upon  him ;  yon  have 
culled  all  the  fair  flowers  of  nature,  and  made  them  into  garlands  to  cast 
at  his  feet,  and  you  have  gathered  all  earth's  gems  and  precious  things 
wherewith  to  crown  his  head,  but  you  have  been  disappointed  with  the 
result,  and  have  cried  out  with  our  poet: — 

*'  The  whole  creation  can  afford 
Bnt  some  faint  shadows  of  my  Lord ; 
Nature,  to  make  liis  heauties  known, 
Must  mingle  colours  not  her  own." 

At  such  times,  while  ransacking  land,  nnd  sea,  and  sky  for  metaphoif, 
you  have  probably  looked  upon  the  sun,  and  have  said  :  **  This  great 
orb,  the  lord  of  light  and  lamp  of  day,  is  like  my  Saviour ;  it  is  the 
faint  image  of  his  excellent  glory  whose  countenance  shineth  as  the  son 
in  its  strength."  You  have  done  well  to  seize  on  such  a  figure.  What 
Milton  calls  the  golden-tressM  sun  is  the  most  glorious  object  in  cre- 
ation, and  in  Jesus  the  fulness  of  glory  dwells ;  the  sun  is  at  the  same 
time  the  most  influential  of  existences,  acting  upon  the  whole  world, 
and  truly  our  Lord  is,  in  the  deepest  sense,  "  of  this  great  world  both 
eye  and  soul;  he  "  with  benignant  ray  sheds  beauty,  life,  and  joyancc 
from  above.  The  sun  is,  moreover,  the  most  abiding  of  creatures; 
and  therein  it  is  also  a  type  of  him  who  remaineth  from  generation  to 
generation,  and  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.  The  king 
of  day  is  so  vast  and  so  bright  that  the  human  eye  cannot  bear  to 
gaze  upon  him ;  we  delight  in  his  beams,  but  we  should  be  blinded 
should  we  continue  to  peer  into  his  face ;  even  yet  more  brilliant  is 
our  liord  by  nature,  for  as  God  he  is  a  consuming  fire,  but  he  deigns  to 
smile  upon  us  with  milder  beams  as  our  brother  and  Redeemer.  Jesus, 
like  the  sun,  is  the  centre  and  soul  of  all  things,  the  fulness  of  all  good, 
the  lamp  that  lights  us,  the  fire  that  warms  us,  the  magnet  that  guides 
and  controls  us  ;  he  is  the  source  and  fountain  of  all  li^  beauty,  frnii- 
fulness,  and  strength ;  he  is  the  fosterer  of  tender  herbs  of  penitence, 
the  quickener  of  the  vital  sap  of  grace,  the  ripener  of  fruits  of  holiness^ 
and  the  life  of  everything  that  grows  within  the  garden  of  the  Lord. 
Whereas  to  adore  the  sun  would  be  idolatry;  it  were  treason  notta 
worship  ardently  the  divine  Sun  of  Righteousness. 

Jesus  Christ  is  the  great,  the  glorious,  the  infinitely  blessed;  eventhei 
sun  fails  to  set  him  forth  ;  but,  as  it  is  one  of  the  best  figures  we  cttt 
find,  be  it  ours  to  use  it  this  day.    We  will  think  of  Jesus  as  the  San  this 


7HS  SUN  OF  BiaHTEOUSKSSS.  627 

morning;  first,  as  in  the  text;  secondly,  as  he  is  to  us;  and  then, 
thircUy,  for  a  few  minutes,  we  will  bask  in  his  beams. 

I.  First,  then,  we  will  contemplate  Jesus  as  the  Sun  in  the  text. 

Note  how  the  passage  begins :  ^*  In  them  hath  he  set  a  tabernacle  for 
Ihe  son."  Kingis  were  accustomed  in  their  pompous  progresses  through 
their  dominions  to  have  canopies  of  splendour  borne  aloft  over  them, 
BO  that  marching  in  the  midst  of  their  glittering  soldiery  they  were 
themselTes  the  main  attraction  of  the  gorgeous  pageant.  Our  Lord 
Jesns  Ohrifit  in  his  church  is,  as  it  were,  traversing  the  heavens  in  a 
majestic  tabernacle,  and,  like  the  sun,  scattering  his  beams  among  men. 
The  Bedeemer  is  canopied  by  the  adoration  of  his  saints,  for  he 
**  inhabiteth  the  praises  of  Israel."  He  is  from  day  to  day  advancing 
in  his  glorious  marchings  through  the  universe,  conquering  and  to  con- 
qner,  and  he  will  journey  onward  till  the  dispensation  shall  terminate, 
and  the  gospel  age  shall  be  closed  by  his  second  advent.  When  the  text 
Baith  that  there  is  a  tabernacle  set  for  the  sun  in  the  firmament,  we  are 
reminded  of  Christ  as  dwelling  in  the  highest  heavens.  He  is  not  alone 
the  Christ  of  ancient  history,  but  he  is  the  Christ  of  to-day.  Think 
not  always  of  him  as  the  lowly  man  despised  and  rejected,  as  nailed  to 
the  cross,  or  buried  in  the  tomb ;  he  is  not  here,  for  he  is  risen,  but  he 
'  still  exists,  not  as  a  dream-  or  phantom,  but  as  the  real  Christ.  Doubt 
it  not,  for  up  yonder,  in  the  seventh  heaven,  the  Lord  has  set  a  taber- 
nacle for  the  San  of  Bighteousness.  There  Jesus  abides  in  splendour 
inconceivable,  the  joy  and  glory  of  all  those  blessed  spirits  who,  having 
believed  in  him  on  the  earth,  have  come  to  behold  him  in  the  heavens. 

**  Bright,  like  a  sun,  the  Saviour  sits, 
Aad  spreads  eternal  noon ; 
No  evenings  there,  nor  gloomy  nights. 
To  want  the  feeble  moon." 

That  Jesns  lives  is  a  deep  well  of  consolation  to  the  saints,  and  did 
we  always  remember  it  our  hearts  would  not  be  troubled.  If  we  always 
remembered  that  Jesns  both  lives  and  reigns,  our  joys  would  never 
wither.  We  worship  him,  it  is  true,  as  one  who  was  slain  and  hath 
redeemed  us  unto  God  by  his  blood  ;  but  we  also  extol  him  as  one  who 
18  "alive  for  evermore,  and  hath  the  keys  of  d^ath  and  of  hell." 

Let  your  faith  to-day  behold  Jesus  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God, 
even  the  Father.  He  sits  there  because  his  atonine;  work  is  done, 
and  he  is  receiving  the  infinite  reward  which  his  Father  promised 
him.  He  is  exalted  as  a  king  upon  his  throne,  expecting  until 
his  enemies  are  made  his  footstool.  He  dwells  within  his  tabernacle 
of  praise,  adored  and  admired  by  angels  and  glorified  spirits.  He 
sits  there,  not  as  a  weary  one,  feeble  and  exhausted,  but  with  the 
keys  of  universal  monarchy  at  his  girdle,  for  "  the  government  is  upon 
his  shoulder,  and  his  name  is  called  Wonderful,  Counsellor,  the  mighty 
God."  I  want  you  fully  to  grasp  the  thought  of  the  living  Saviour, — of 
the  8nn  in  his  tabernacle  in  the  highest  heavens,  for  this  must  be  the 
folcmm  upon  which  we  shall  work  this  morning.  We  shall  get  our 
levmge  here :  the  living  Saviour,  the  mighty  Saviour,  the  reigning 
Saviour ;  he  is  the  church's  joy  and  hope  in  the  present  and  for  aU 
•jean  to  come. 


628  METROPOLITAN  TABBtUtAOLB  PULPIT. 

The  text  proceeds  to  speak  of  Jesas  as  the  sun,  and  deicribes  him 
first  as  a  bridegroom  coming  out  of  his  chamber,    A  beaatifal  description 
indeed  of  the  sun  when  he  rises  in  the  early  morning.     He  comes 
forth  from  the  vast  obscure,  as  from  within  a  secret  chamber.    He 
withdraws  the  veil  of  night,  and  floods  the  earth  with  flnid  gold.    Fran 
curtains  of  purple  and  vermillion,  he  looks  forth,  and  scatters  orient 
pearl  aronnd  him.    Clad  with  a  blaze  of  glory,  he  begins  the  race  of  day. 
Thus  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  when  he  rose  from  the  aead,  was  as  Uie  sim 
nnveih'ng  itself.     He  came  forth  from  the  sepulchre  as  a  brid^;room 
from  his  chamber.    Observe  that  dear  name  of  bridegroom.    The  Lori 
of  heaven  antl  earth,  between  whom  and  ns  there  was  an  infinite 
distance,  has  deigned  to  take  our  humanity  into  union  with  himself  of 
,the  most  intimate  kind.  Among  men,  there  is  no  surer  mode  of  making 
peace  between  two  contending  parlies,  than  for  a  marriage  to  be  estab- 
lished between  them.    It  has  often  so  been  done,  and  thus  wars  hafe 
been  ended,  and  alliances  have  been  established.    The  Prince  of  Peace 
on  heaven's  side  condescends  to  be  married  to  our  nature,  that  hence- 
forth heaven  and  earth  may  be  as  one.    Our  Lord  came  as  the  bride- 
groom  of  his  church  out  of  his  chamber,  when  he  was  born  of  the 
virgin  and  was  revealed  to  the  shepherds  and  the  wise  men  of  ttie  east; 
yet,  in  a  certain  sense,  he  still  continued  in  his  chamber  as  a  bridegroom 
all  his  life,  for  he  w*as  hidden  and  veiled,  the  Jewish  world  knew  not 
their  king  ;  though  he  spake  openly  in  their  streets  and  sought  not 
mystery,  yet  he  was  unknown,  they  did  not  discern  him ;  and  in  some 
respects  he  did  not  then  desire  to  be  discerned,  for  he  often  bade  his  dis- 
ciples to  tell  no  man  what  was  done*    That  was  the  time  when  the 
bridegroom  was  in  his  chamber,  being  made  perfect  through  snffering 
and  perfectly  conformed  unto  his  church,  bearing  her  sicknesses  and  her 
sorrows,  suffering  her  wants,  enduring  her  shame,  and  thus  completing 
the  marriage  union  between  the  two.    To  this  end,  he  actually  descended 
by  dark  steps  of  anguish  into  the  silent  inner  room  of  the  grave,  aD«l 
tnere  he  slept  in  his  chamber,  perfectly  wedded  to  his  church.    Come 
and  look  at  him,  you  who  admire  the  lover  of  your  souls ;  he  stooped 
to  death  and  the  sepulchre,  because  manhood  had  fallen  under  their 
yoke ;  his  church  was  subject  to  death,  and  he  must  die.    She  deserved 
to  suffer  the  penalty  due  to  God*s  insulted  law,  and,  therefore,  Jesns 
bowed  his  head  to  the  stroke. 

**  Yea,  said  the  Son,  with  her  Y\\  go 
Through  all  the  depths  of  sin  and  woe; 
And  on  the  cross  will  even  dare 
The  bitter  pains  of  death  to  bear." 

And  he  did  bear  them,  and  in  the  darksome  chamber  of  the  tomb,  he 
proved  how  true  a  bridegroom  he  was  to  his  church.  Before  his  grest 
race  began,  of  which  we  are  soon  to  speak,  it  behoved  our  mighty 
champion  to  descend  into  the  lowest  parts  of  the  earth,  and  ^eep 
among  the  dead.  Before  every  day  there  is  a  night  wherein  darkness 
seems  to  triumph.  It  behoved  Christ  to  suffer,  and  then  to  rise  again. 
His  descent  was  necessary  to  his  ascent ;  his  sojourn  in  the  chamber 
to  his  race  and  victory. 
Thus  I  have  in^rodu?ed  to  you  the  prelude  of  the  race,  the  brid«- 


TEE  SITK  OF   BIQHT£0U8N£SS.  629 

groom  in  his  chamber.  Now  observe  the  coming  out  of  it.  The  sun 
comes  forth,  at  the  appointed  hour,  from  the  gates  of  day,  and  begins 
to  gladden  the  earth;  eyen  so  on  the  *third  day,  early  in  the  morning, 
Jesus,  our  Lord,  arose  from  his  sleep,  and  there  was  a  great  earthquake,  for 
the  angelof  theLord  descended  from  heaven  androUed  back  the  stone  from 
the  door  of  the  sepulchre.  Then  did  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  arise.  Then 
did  the  great  Bridegroom  come'  forth  from  his  chamber,  and  begin  his 
joyful  race  It  must  have  been  a  ravishing  sight  to  have  beheld  the 
risen  Saviour;  well  might  the  disciples  hold  him  by  the  feet  and 
worship  him.  Methinks,  if  ever  angels  sung  more  sweetly  at  one  time 
than  another,  it  must  have  been  on  that  first  Easter  morning,  when 
they  saw  the  divine  champion  break  his  bonds  of  death  asunder,  and 
rise  into  the  glorious  resurrection  life.  Then  was  he  revealed  to  the 
sons  of  men  ;  and,  no  longer  hidden :  he  began  to  tell  his  disciples  the 
meaning  of  those  enigmas  which  had  been  dark  to  them;  things 
which  they  had  not  understood,  which  seemed  inexplicable,  were 
all  opened  up  by  him,  for  now  was  his  time  to  come  out  of  his  chamber. 
His  words,  though  plain  enough,  had  aforetime  hidden  him  even  from 
those  who  loved  him ;  but  now  he  speaketh  no  more  in  proverbs,  but 
showeth  them  openly  concerning  himself  and  the  Father.  He  hath 
laid  aside  the  incognito  in  which  he  traversed  the  earth  as  a  stranger, 
and  he  is  now  divinely  familiar  with  his  fnends,  bidding  them  even 
touch  his  hands  and  his  side.  In  his  death  the  veil  was  rent,  and  in 
his  resurrection  the  High  Priest  came  forth  in  his  robes  of  glory  and 
beauty.  A  little  while  he  was  gone  away,  but  he  returned  from  the 
secret  chambers  of  the  ivory  palaces,  and  showed  himself  unto  his  disciples. 
Blessed  were  the  eyes  that  saw  him  in  that  day. 

Though  during  the  forty  days  in  which  our  Lord  lingered  among  his 
followers  upon  earth  we  may  truly  sav  that  he  had  come  out  of  his 
chamber,  we  perceive  that  he  more  fully  did  so  when,  after  the  forty 
days  had  been  accomplished,  he  took  his  disciples  to  the  top  of  Olivet, 
and  there  ascended  into  heaven,  out  of  their  sight.  Then  had  the  sun 
indeed  ascended  above  the  horizon  to  make  his  glories  stream  along  the 
heavens.  See  jre  not  the  angelic  bands  poising  themselves  upon  the 
wing  in  mid-air,  waiting  until  he  shall  return  all  glowing  with  the 
victory  won  in  long  and  deadly  fight.  Mark  ye  well  that  matchless 
spectacle  as  he  is  ''  seen  of  angels." 

'*  The  helmed  cherubim 
And  swoi*ded  seraphim, 
Are  seen  in  glittering  ranks,  with  wings  displayed.** 

They  have  hastened  to  meet  the  Prince  of  Glory,  and  attend  him  to  his 
aucient  patrimony.  Right  glad  are  all  the  heavenly  band  to  welcome 
back  the  Captain  of  the  Lord's  host,  and,  therefore,  they  harp  in  loud 
and  solemn  quire  to  Heaven's  triumphant  Heir.  As  for  the  glorified  of 
mortal  race,  redeemed  of  old  by  his  blood  which  in  the  fulness  of  time  was 
shed,  they  hail  him  with  gladdest  hymn,  and  lift  up  their  sweetest  sym- 

Ehonies  to  extol  him  who  finished  transgression,  made  an  end  of  sin,  and 
rought  in  everlasting  righteousness.  Then  the  bridegroom  came  out 
of  his  chamber  with  fit  marriage  music :  his  beauties  hidden  awhile  in 
the  chamber,  where  he  was  regarded  a3  without  form  or  comeliness, 


630  METROPOLITAK  TABBQKACLB  PULPIT. 

blazed  fbrth  with  renewed  splendour,  snch  as  confounded  both  son  and 
moon. 

In  another  respect,  Christ  came  ont  of  his  chamber  at  his  ascension, 
because,  when   he  ascended  on  high,   leading  captivitj   captire,  he 
received    and    gave    gifts    for  men.      The  gifls  were  intended  for 
the  manifestation  of  himself.      His  church,  which  is  hia  bodj,  wu 
by  his  own  command  sitting  still    in   the   chamber,   tarrying  till 
power  was  given.     But,  on  a  sudden,  the  bridegroom*8  power  was 
felt,  for  there  was  heard  the  sound  as  of  a  rushing  mighty  wind,  which 
filled  all  the  place,  and  then  descending  upon  eaim  favour^  head 
came  the  cloven  tongue,  and,  straightway,  you  could  see  that  the  bride- 
groom had  come  out  of  his  chamber,  for  the  multitude  in  the  street 
began  to  hear  his  Yoice.    It  was  Peter  that  spake,  we  say,  but  fiur 
rather  was  it  Christ,  the  bridegroom,  who  spake  by  Peter.     It  was  the 
sun,  from  the  chambers  of  the  east,  bursting  through  the  clouds,  and 
beginning  to  shine  on  Parthians,  and  Modes,  and*  Elamites,  and  the 
dwellers  in  Mesopotamia,  and  Rome,  and  Egypt,  and  making  the  mol- 
titudes  in  far  off  lands  to  see  the  day  which  prophets  and  kings  had 
waited  for,  bnt  which  had  never  visited  their  eyes.     Do  yon  hear  the 
joyful  motion  among  the  people,  the  joy  mingled  with  the  sorrows  of 
repentance  ?    This  is  the  singing  of  birds,  and  these  the  dewdropi 
which  hail  the  rising  sun.    The  people  cry,  **  What  must  we  do  to  be 
saved  ? " — the  shadows  are  fleeing.     They  believe  in  Jesns,  and  are 
baptised  into  his  name, — the  true  light  is  shining.     Three  thousand 
souls  are  added  in  one  day  to  the  church,  for  truly  the  bridegroom  is 
awaked  as  one  out  of  sleep,  and  like  a  mighty  man  that  shonfieih  by 
reason  of  wine  (Psalm  Ixxviii.  65).    Then  was  the  gospel  race  com- 
menced with  a  glorious  burst  of  strength,  such  as  only  our  champion 
could  have  displayed.    Meditate  at  your  leisure  upon  this  first  g^end 
manifestation  of  our  Lord  to  the  general  multitude.     He  had  n^  gone 
out  of  Israel  before.     **  I  am  not  sent,"  said  he,  **  save  to  tiie  lost 
sheep  of  the  House  of  Israel."    Palestine  was  his  chamber  :  he  went 
to  the  windows  of  it,  and  looked  forth  on  Tyre  and  Sidon  wistfully; 
bnt  he  had  not  come  forth  of  his  chamber  till  that  day,  when  thegomd 
began  to  be  preached  to  the  Gentiles  also,  and  in  fulfilment  of  the 
gift  of  Pentecost,  when  the  Spirit  was  poured  ont  upon  all  flesh,  the 
apostles  went  everywhere  preaching  the  word.    When  even  we,  the 
dwellers  in  the  far  off  northern  isles,  received  the  gospel,  then,  indeed, 
had  the  bridegroom  come  forth  out  of  his  chamber. 

But  enough  of  this,  or  time  will  fail  me.  After  the  coming  forth, 
we  have  to  coiiBidcr  in  the  text  his  course.  The  course  of  Jesus  has 
been  as  timt  of  the  sun,  or  like  that  of  a  mighty  champion  girded  for 
running. 

Notice,  under  this  head,  his  eantinuance.  Our  Lord's  gospel  has  bem 
no  meteor  that  flashed  for  a  while  and  then  passed  away,  but  it  has  re- 
mained as  the  Sim  in  the  heavens.  What  systems  of  philosophy  have 
come  and  gone  since  on  Calvary  the  Christ  of  God  was  lifted  up  I  What 
speculations,  what  lo-heres  and  lo-theres  have  shone  forth,  have  dazsled 
fools,  and  have  been  quenched  in  night,  since  he  left  the  chamber  of 
his  marriage  !  Yet  he  continues  still  the  same;  nor,  brethren,  are  there 
any  marks  of  decrepitude  either  in  him  or  in  his  gospel.      They  tdl 


THB  SUN  OF  RIGHTEOUSNESS.  631 

US  that  the  idolatry  of  Hindostan  is  evidently  crumbling  :  it  falls  not 
yet,  but  it  is  worm-eaten  through  and  through.  Equally  sure  is  it 
that  the  false  prophet  holds  but  a  feeble  sway  among  his  followers,  and 
we  can  all  see  that  though  popery  makes  desperate  efforts,  and  its  ex- 
tremities are  vigorous,  yet  it  isjgaralysed  at  its  heart,  and  the  Vatican 
is  made  to  feel  that  its  time  of  power  is  short. 

As  for  the  gospel,  it  wears  the  dew  of  its  youth  after  eighteen  cen- 
turies of  straggles  ;  and  it  predominates  most  iu  those  young  nations  which 
have  evidently  a  history  before  them.  The  old  systems  are  now  most 
favoured  bv  those  nations  which  are  left  behind  in  the  race  of  civilisa- 
tion, but  the  peoples  whom  God  has  made  quick  by  nature  are  those 
to  whom  he  has  given  to  be  receptive  of  his  grace.  There  are  grand 
days  coming  for  the  church  of  God.  Voltaire  said  that  he  lived  in  the 
twilight  of  Christianity  ;  and  so  he  did,  but  it  was  the  twilight  of  the 
morning,  not  the  twihght  of  the  evening.  Glory  be  unto  God,  the 
litde  cloud  the  size  of  a  man's  hand  is  spreading  ;  it  begins  to  cover 
the  heavens,  and  the  day  is  not  far  distant  when  the  sound  of  abund- 
ance of  rain  shall  be  heard.  Christ  was  not  a  strong  man,  who  bounded 
forth  at  a  leap,  and  then  put  forth  no  more  strength,  but  he  rejoiced  to 
continue  his  work,  and  to  run  his  race.  He  was  not  a  shooting  star 
that  sparkles  for  a  moment,  but  a  sun  that  shall  shine  throughout  the 
livelong  day. 

Note  next  in  this  metaphor  the  unity  of  our  LorcPs  courscy  for  it 
is  clear  in  the  text :  "  Rejoicing  as  a  strong  man  to  run  the  race." 
A  race  is  one  thin^ ;  there  is  the  one  goal,  and  the  man  gathers  up 
bis  strength  to  reach  it.  He  has  nothing  else  to  think  of.  They  may 
throw  the  golden  apples  in  his  road,  but  he  does  not  observe  them ; 
they  may  sound  harp  and  sackbut  to  the  right,  and  breathe  the  lute  or 
sweeter  mstruments  of  music  to  the  left,  but  he  is  deaf  to  all  ;  he  has  a 
a  race  to  run,  and  he  throws  his  whole  strength  into  it.  This  is  a  fit 
image  of  our  Lord ;  he  has  never  turned  aside,  he  has  never  been 
compelled  to  retrace  his  steps,  to  revise  his  doctrine,  to  amend  his 
system,  or  change  his  tactics.  On,  on,  on  has  the  course  of  Jesus  been, 
shining  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day. 

A  certain  people  now-a-days  who  yet  dare  to  call  themselves  Cliris- 
tians,  are  always  hankering  after  something  new,  pining  for  novelties, 
and  boasting  of  their  fresh  discoveries,  though,  forsooth,  their  fresh 
things  are  only  fragments  of  broken  images  of  heresies,  which  our 
fathers  dashed  to  shivers  centuries  ago.  The  great  thinkers  of  the 
present  day  are  nothing  more  than  mere  translators — ^you  know  the 
London  meaning  of  that  word — ^buyers  of  old  shoes  who  patch  them 
np,  and  send  them  forth  again  as  if  they  were  something  new.  Old 
shoes  and  clouted  are  common  enough  among  those  Gibeonitcs  who 
would  deceive  Israel,  and  whose  boast  is  that  they  have  come  from  far, 
and  bring  us  treasures  of  wisdom  from  remote  regions.  Sirs,  we  want 
not  your  new  things,  for  our  Lord*s  race  is  the  same  as  of  old,  and  as 
he  continues  in  one  course  so  also  will  we.  To  spread  righteousness 
and,  in  so  doing,  to  save  sinners  and  to  glorify  God,  this  is  the  one 
pui*pose  of  Christ ;  from  it  he  will  never  cease,  and  nothing  shall  ever 
tempt  him  from  the  pursuit  of  it.  Look,  I  pray  you,  with  pleasure  and 
see  how  our  Lord,  from  his  first  coming  out  of  his  chamber  until  now. 


632  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  FCJLPIT. 

has  continued  still  in  the  gospel  to  shine  forth  with  rajs  of  glory, 
without  variableness  or  shadow  of  a  turning.  Though  we  belierc  not, 
he  abideth  faithful,  he  cannot  deny  himself;  he  changes  not  in  work  or 
way.  For  Zion*s  sake  he  worketh  hitherto,  and  the  pleasure  of  the 
Lord  prospers  in  his  hand. 

But  now,  observe  next,  the  notable  idea  of  strength  which  the  text 
conveys  to  us.  *'  Rejoicing  as  a  strong  man  to  run  his  race."  It  is  no 
drudgery  to  the  ascended  Lord  to  carry  on  his  cause  : 

"  The  baffled  prince  of  bell 

In  vain  new^  efforts  tries, 

Truth's  empire  to  repel 

By  cruelty  and  lies ; 
Th'  infernal  gates  shall  rage  in  vain. 
Conquest  awaits  the  Lamb  once  slain.** 

Tlicrc  is  a  race  to  be  run  but  Jesus  is  strong  enongh  for  it ;  he  does 
not  come  panting  up  to  the  starting  place,  and  thence  go  creeping 
on,  but  like  a  strong  man  he  surveys  the  course.  He  knows  that  he  is 
equal  to  it,  and,  therefore,  he  delights  in  it.  When  he  began  his  race  he 
was  opposed,  but  the  opposition  only  made  him  triumph  the  more 
readily,  for  "  they  .thut  were  scattered  abroad  went  every  where  preaching 
tlie  word."  When  our  Lord  arose  like  the  snn,  the  clouds  were  thick 
and  heavy,  but  he  painted  their  fleecy  skirts  with  gold ;  persecution 
hung  over  the  eastern  horizon,  but  he  turned  it  into  the  imperial  purple 
of  his  sovereignty.  Ashe  pursued  his  course  the  ice  of  centuries  melteJ, 
the  dense  gloom  of  ages  disappeared.  No  chains  could  bind  him,  and 
no  bonds  could  hold  him.  He  dashed  on  with  undiminished  energy, 
and  the  gates  of  hell  could  not  prevail. 

As  no  cloud  has  ever  stayed  the  sua  as  he  has  ''  whirled  his  car  along 
the  ethereal  plain,"  so  no  difficulties  impeded  the  onward  course  of  the 
gospel  in  the  days  of  its  dawning.  To  the  first  days  of  the  church 
Thomson's  lines  to  the  sun  are  fully  applicable — 

*'  Now,  flaming  up  the  heavens,  the  potent  sun 
Melts  into  limpi<i  air  the  high-raised  clouds, 
And  morning  fogs,  that  hover'd  round  the  hills, 
In  party-coloured  bands;  till  wide,  unveil'd, 
The  face  of  nature  shines,  from  where  earth  seems 
Fur  stretch*d  around,  to  meet  the  bending  sphere.** 

The  gospel  soon  shed  its  light  in  every  land,  and  all  nations  felt  its 
benign  power.     Men  ceased  to  persecute,  and  bowed  before  the  cross. 

Anon  fresh  clouds  arose,  and  the  church  passed  fiirough  them.  Errors 
and  heresies  multiplied,  filthy  dreamers  led  away  a  huge  apostacy,  Rome 
became  the  mother  of  harlots  and  abominations,  but  the  true  church,  and 
the  true  Christ  within  her,  went  right  on.  The  church  was  not  less  trium- 
phant in  her  second  trial  than  in  her  first.  Rome  Papal  was  overcome  as 
surely  ns  Rome  Pagan.  Popes  were  no  more  her  conquerors  than  bloody 
emperors  had  been  of  yore.  To  the  thoughtful  eye  the  sun  of  Christ  is  not 
less  bright  over  the  valleys  of  Piedmont  than  over  the  waves  of  the  sea 
which  bore  Paul  and  his  fellow  apostles.  The  champion*8  race  was  as 
eager  and  as  triumphant  as  before. 

Since  then,  dense  banks  of  spiritual  deadness  and  false  teaching  have 


THE  8UK  OF  BIGHTEOUSKEBB.  633 

baiTed  the  Tibible  heayens,  and  have  appeared  to  mortal  6ip:lit  an  ebon 
wall  impenetrable  as  steel,  but  the  Lord  reigneth.  He  tliat  sitbcth  in 
the  heavens  doth  laagh,  the  Lord  doth  have  them  in  derision.  Sti'ong 
is  his  right  hand,  and  his  enemies  shall  be  broken.  On  goes  the  Snn  of 
Righteousness,  nothing  impedes  him,  his  tabernacle  is  above  them  all, 
he  rideth  on  the  heavens,  yea,  he  rideth  on  the  wings  of  the  wind. 
Tmst  ye  in  the  Lord  for  ever,  for  in  the  Lord  Jehovah  there  is  ever- 
lasting strength.  Christ  has  failed  in  nothing,  the  decrees  have  been 
executed,  the  eternal  purposes  have  been  fulfilled,  the  elect  hfive  been 
saved,  his  kingdom  is  established,  and  shall  continue  as  long  as  the  sun. 
Who  shall  stay  his  hand  ?     Who  shall  resist  his  will  ? 

Observe,  therefore,  how  the  force  is  coupled  with  joy.  Weakness 
brings  sorrow,  but  strength  begets  joy.  Christ  is  always  glad,  and 
he  would  have  his  people  rejoice,  for  his  cause  goeth  right  on  and  he 
shall  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged.  He  rejoices  as  he  divides  the  spoil 
with  the  strong.  When  a  man  has  a  task  to  do  which  is  easy  to  liim, 
and  which  he  can  readily  perform,  he  sings  at  his  work ;  and  so  this 
day  doth  Christ  rejoice  over  his  church  with  joy,  and  triumph  over  her 
with  singing.  His  cause  goes  on  in  spite  of  foes,  and  his  strength  is 
so  great,  that  even  the  battle  fills  him  with  delijiht.  I  remember  to 
have  heard  a  Welsh  preacher  make  use  of  the  following  simile.  He 
was  speaking  of  the  joy  of  Christ  in  heaven,  and  he  said,  **  You  tell  me 
that  the  church  is  sorrowful  on  earth  and  I  tell  you  that  Christ  is 
joyous  in  heaven ;  and  then  you  ask  me  how  this  can  be  ?  You  see 
yonder  mother  with  her  babe,  and  she  is  washing  the  child ;  its  face  is 
foul  and  she  desires  to  see  it  shine  with  brightness,  she  would  see  it 
white  as  the  marble  mingled  with  the  redness  of  the  rose.  Therefore 
she  washes  it ;  but  the  child  cries,  it  is  fretful  and  knows  not  what  is 
good  for  it,  so  it  whines  and  struggles ;  the  mother  does  not  cry,  or 
share  its  sorrow,  she  keeps  on  singing  because  she  knows  that  all  is 
right,  and  that  her  darling  will  smile  like  a  cherub  when  all  is  over  ; 
she  sees  the  good  results  coming,  while  the  babe  only  feels  the  present 
discomfort,  so  she  sings  her  song  and  never  stops,  let  the  child  cry  as  it 
may."  And  so  the  Lord  Jesus  has  pleasure  in  his  work ;  he  is  purifying 
his  church,  and  making  her  fit  to  be  presented  to  himself,  and  though 
8he  winces  and  laments,  it  is  the  flesh  that  makes  her  so  to  do.  The 
rx)rd  sings  still  joyously,  because  he  sees  the  end  from  the  beginning ! 
Earth  may  be  swathed  in  mist,  but  the  sun  is  never  so,  he  shines 
gloriously  evermore. 

The  text  mentions  one  other  fact  connected  with  Jesus  as  the  sun, — 
**  There  is  nothing  hid  from  the  heat  thei'eof ; "  by  which  is  meant, 
nothing  is  able  to  escape  the  powerful  influence  of  Christ  Jesus.  His 
own  chosen  people  must,  in  due  season,  feel  his  power  to  save.  They 
may  wander  as  they  do,  and  sin  as  they  may,  but  when  the  time 
ap|)ointed  comes,  they  shall  be  redeemed  out  of  the  land  of  the  enemy. 
The  sun's  power  is  felt  in  the  darkest  and  deepest  mines;  that 
there  is  a  sun  still  shining  might  be  discoverable  even  in  the  bowels 
of  the  earth  I  and  so,  in  the  darkest  haunts  of  sin,  God's  elect  shall 
be  made  to  feel  the  sovereign  power  and  omniix)tent  grace  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  When  you  and  I  shall  die,  and  when  we  shall 
be  buried  in  the  grave,  we  shall  not  there  be  hid  from  the  heat  of 


634  METEOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

this  Sun  of  Kighteousness,  for  by-and-by  he  shall  kindle  life  within 
our  bones  again;  he  shall  create  a  soul  within  the  ribft  of  death, 
and  we  shall  spring  upward  as  the  grass,  and  as  the  willows  by  the 
watercourses,  when  the  sun  renews  the  year.  Our  dry  bones  shall 
live,  and  in  our  flesh  shall  we  see  God.  Meanwhile,  while  the  gracious 
operations  of  Christ  thus  full  on  all  his  elect,  and  ^herc  is  nothing  hid 
from  the  heat  thereof,  other  operations  arc  at  work  on  all  the  sons 
of  men.  lie  rules  in  providence  over  all  }ieople,  whether  they  believe 
in  him  or  not,  and  if  men  do  not  accept  the  gospel,  yet  they  are 
affected  by  it,  in  some  way  or  other.  Even  the  darkest  parts  of  the 
world  feel  something  of  the  presence  of  the  Christ  of  God.  Respon- 
sibility is  heaped  on  those  that  hear  of  him  and  reject  him ;  he  becomes 
a  savour  of  death  unto  death  where  he  is  not  a  savour  of  li.'e  unto  life. 
Tliere  is  nothing  hid  from  the  heat  thereof.  Oh,  how  this  ought  to 
encourage  you  Christian  people  to  work !  The  Lord  has  gone  before 
you ;  there  is  nothiug  hid  from  the  heat  of  his  presence.  Jesus  is 
King  of  the  darkest  settlements  of  the  heathen,  and  he  reigns  in 
the  lowest  haunts  of  London's  vice.  Go  there,  for  you  are  not  in- 
truders ;  you  have  a  right  to  go  anywhere  in  your  Master^s  dominions; 
and  the  earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  the  fuluess  thereof.  Be  not  afraid 
to  face  the  vilest  blasphemer,  or  the  most  foul-mouthed  infidel,  for 
Christ  is  Master,  and  if  you  bring  the  gospel  before  his  enemy,  he 
will  be  made  to  feel  its  power,  either  so  as  to  yield  to  it  a  willing 
submission,  or  else  to  be  condemned  by  it.  In  either  case^  yon  shafi 
have  done  your  part,  and  uttered  your  testimony,  and  freed  your  head 
of  his  blodd. 

In  these  thoughts  combined,  we  see  Christ  Jesus,  the  risen  Sayionr, 
pursuing  his  ever  glorious  course  till  he  shall  descend  again  the  second 
time  to  take  his  people  to  himself  to  reign  with  him. 

II.  Very  briefly  indeed  in  the  second  plaoe.  Let  us  think  for  a 
moment  of  Jesus  as  a  sun  to  us.  Worship  and  bless  our  SavioHr,  it  Ia 
ever  meet  and  right  to  do  so.  Let  him  be  extolled  and  be  yety  high. 
Some  would  give  him  a  secondary  place,  let  it  never  be  so  with  ns.  As 
the  sun  is  the  centre,  so  is  Christ ;  as  the  sun  is  the  great  motor,  the 
first  source  of  motive  power,  so  is  Christ  to  his  people ;  as  the  sni 
is  the  fountain  from  which  light,  life,  and  heat  perpetually  flow,  so  is  the 
Saviour  ;  as  the  sun  is  the  fructifler  by  which  fruits  multiply  and  ripen, 
so  is  Christ :  and  as  the  sun  is  the  regulator  and  rules  the  day,  and 
marks  the  seasons,  even  so  is  Jcsns  owned  as  Lord  to  the  glory  of  God 
the  Father. 

Think  these  thoughts  over  in  the  following  respects.  When  yon  take 
the  Bible  remember  that  Christ  is  the  centre  of  the  Scriptures.  Do  not 
put  election  in  the  centre  ;  some  do,  and  they  make  a  one-sided  system. 
Do  not  put  man  in  the  centre, — some  do,  and  they  Ml  into  grievous 
errors.  Christ  is  the  centre  of  the  entire  system  of  the  gospel,  and  all 
will  be  seen  to  move  with  re«;ularity  when  you  perceive  that  he  is  the 
chief  fixed  point ;  you  cannot  be  right  in  the  rest  unless  you  think 
rightly  of  him.    lie  is  the  centre  and  King  of  all  truth. 

He  is  the  centre  of  the  Church  too.  Not  the  pastor,  not  the  church 
itself,  not  any  rule  or  government,  no  bishop,  no  priest,  and  no  Pope 
can  be  our  centre,  Christ  alone  is  our  central  sun.    We  follow  as  planets 


THE  SUN  OF  RIGHTEOUSNESS.  635 

here  he  leads  the  way :  around  him  we  revolve,  but  we  own  no  other 
ord. 

Let  it  be  so  in  (he  world.    Believe  that  even  there  Christ  governs  and 

the  centre  of  all  history.  Yen  will  understand  history  better  when 
)u  know  this,  for  this  is  the  key  of  the  world's  story,  the  reason  for 
le  rise  and  fall  of  empires.  Tou  shall  understand  all  things  when  you 
Qow  Iromanuel,  God  with  us. 

And  let  him  have  this  place  in  your  hearts.  There  enthrone  him ! 
stablish  him  as  the  central  sun,  and  let  him  rule  your  entire  being, 
ilightening  your  understanding,  warming  your  hearts,  filling  all  your 
}wers,  passions,  and  faculties  with  the  fulness  of  his  presence.  To 
ave  Christ  in  us,  the  hope  of  glory — oh,  what  blessedness !  But  let 
3  take  care  that  it  is  so,  for  we  know  not  Christ  aright  unless  we  give 
[m  such  a  place  in  our  hearts  as  the  sun  occupies  in  God's  world. 

III.  Bui  time  fails  me,  and  we  must  now  pass  on  to  the  last  point, 
id  let  us  for  a  minute  or  two  bask  in  his  beams.  How  shall  we 
3  it? 

First,  we  must  realise  that  he  is.  Sinner,  saint,  Christ  lives  :  he  who 
od  the  wave  of  Galilee  lives  on.  He  who  was  marked  with  the  nails 
lies  on.  Oh,  sinner,  does  not  that  comfort  you  ?  The  Saviour  lives, 
le  redeemer  lives ;  he  who  forgives  sins  still  lives.  Saint,  does  not 
lis  comfort  you  ?  The  man  of  the  tender  heart  still  lives,  with  a 
3som  still  to  be  leaned  upon,  and  with  lips  still  ready  to  speak  endear- 
ig  words.  There  is  a  tabernacle  for  the  snn;  he  is  not  extinct; 
3  shineth  still,  he  blesses  still.  Bask  in  his  beams,  then,  by  realising 
lat  he  is. 

Then  come  and  lay  your  souls  beneafh  his  dimne  influence.  0  my  sou^, 
'  thou  art  guilty  come  and  rest  in  his  atonement,  if  thou  art  un- 
ghteons  come  and  take  his  righteousness.  If  thou  art  feeble  lay  hold 
pon  his  strength.  If  then  canst  not  pray  accept  him  as  thine  inter- 
^Esor.  If  thou  art  in  thyself  nothing,  take  him  to  be  thy  all  in  all. 
ome  creatures  delight  to  warm  themselves  in  the  snn,  but  oh,  what  a 
leasure  it  is  to  sun  ones  self  in  the  presence  of  Christ.  Never  mind 
ow  little  I  am,  how  nothing  I  am,  how  vile  I  am,  how  foul  I  am  ;  all 

am  he  has  taken  to  himself,  and  all  he  has  belongs  to  me.  I  sin,  but 
e  has  taken  all  my  sin:  he  is  righteous  and  all  his  righteousness  is 
line.  I  am  feeble,  he  is  mighty;  his  mightiness  is  mine,  I  wrap 
lyself  in  his  omnipotence.  Christ  is  all  and  Christ  is  mine.  Why,  I 
tterly  fail  when  trying  to  talk  about  such  things  as  these;  talking  is 
nt  stuttering  on  such  a  theme.  Faith  must  enjoy  rather  than  ex- 
ress  her  delight.  Come,  plunge  ye  all  into  this  sea  of  sweetness,  dive 
eep  into  this  abyss  of  happiness — Christ  Jesus  is  youra  for  ever  and 
)r  ever.  The  sun  is  verv  great  but  it  is  all  for  me,  <ind  Christ  is  very 
riorht  and  glorious,  but  he  is  all  my  own. 

Then  next,  if  you  would  sun  yourself  in  his  beams,  imlihe  the  joy 
^  his  strength.  He  is  like  a  bridegroom  rejoicing  to  run  his  race. 
Tow,  brethren  and  sisters,  I  am  often  afraid  lest  in  serving  God,  we 
lould  grow  dispirited  and  downcast,  and  think  that  things  are  not 
oing  on  as  they  should.  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength.  If 
on  begin  to  say,  "  Our  cause  is  very  feeble,  the  gospel  will  not  prevail 
mong  us,  you  will  slacken  your  eflPorts."    Do  not  so,  but  remember 


G3G  M£TROPOUTAN  TABE^JTAGLB  PULPIT. 

that  Jesus  Christ  docs  not  fret  or  sadden  himself  about  his  kingdom. 
He  runs  on  full  of  strenp^th  nnd  rejoices  as  he  mns ;  and  I  bid 
you,  in  ti.e  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  do  the  same.  Oast  away  your 
doubts  and  fears,  the  kingdom  is  the  Lord's,  and  he  will  deliver  his 
adversaries  into  your  hands.  I  fret  and  worry  myself  sometimes 
about  these  inventors  of  new  doctrines,  and  those  ritnaliats  who 
bring  up  the  old  rags  and  stale  tallow  of  the  past  ages.  Let  ns  fret 
no  more,  but  think  that  these  are  only  like  the  doads  to  the  great 
sun ;  tlie  gospel  will  still  proceed  in  its  career.  Let  us  langh  the 
enemies  of  God  to  scorn  and  defy  them  to  their  &ce8.  They  defy  the 
L'brd  God  of  Israel  as  did  the  rhilistine  of  old,  but  Ood  himself  is 
mightier  than  they,  and  the  victory  is  snre  to  the  true  charch  and  to 
the  gos{)el  of  his  Son.  Be  ye  very  courageous  I  Be  not  alarmed 
with  sudden  fear !  Trust  in  Jehovah,  for  the  Lord  will  surely  girc 
unto  his  own  servants  the  victory  in  the  day  of  battle. 

And  brethren,  if  you  would  sun  yourselves  in  Christ's  beams,  let 
nie  bid  you  reflect  his  light  whenever  you  receive  it.  He  is  the  snn, 
and  you  are  the  planet,  but  every  planet  shines,  shines  with  borrowed 
light.  It  conceals  no  light,  but  sends  back  to  other  worlds  what  the 
sun  has  given  to  it.  Oast  back  on  men  the  light  which  Jesus  gives 
you.  Triumph  in  Christ's  circuit,  that  it  is  so  broad  as  to  comprehend 
the  world,  and  compass  all  time.  Enlarge  your  own  hearts,  and  let 
your  light  shine  far  and  wide,  believing  that  the  power  of  God  which 
gives  you  light  will  go  with  the  light  which  you  reflect.  Comfort 
your  hearts  !  "  Be  ye  stedfast,  unmoveable,  always  abounding  ia 
the  work  of  the  Lord,  forasnuuh  as  ye  know  that  your  labour  is  not 
in  vain  in  the  Lord."  Who  shall  stop  the  Christ  of  God  in  his  race? 
Let  him  first  go  pluck  the  sun  from  his  sphere.  Who  shall  stay  the 
champion  of  God  who  has  girt  himself  for  his  race  ?  Whosoever 
Cometh  in  his  way  woe  unto  him,  for  if  Sumson  smote  a  thousand  men 
hip  and  thigh,  what  shall  our  immortal  Samson  do  ?  Let  all  tlie 
armies  of  poi>c  and  devil  come  against  him,  he  will  utterly  defy  them, 
and  drive  them  like  chaff  before  the  wind. 

Sing  3  e  unto  his  name,  for  he  hath  triumphed  g^lorionsly !  Begia 
the  everliisting  song,  for  he  is  the  Lord  and  God,  and  to  the  uttermost 
ages  shall  he  reign ;  yea,  for  ever  and  ever  is  he  prie^  and  king. 

God  bless  you,  for  Christ's  sake.     Amen. 


POUTIOK   OF  SCRIPTUEE  READ   BEFORE   SeBMOH. — Psslm  Xix. 


Jttrfi[0p0Kta«  ^ixhmmlt  fitlpit, 


HEAVEN'S  ITUESE  CHILDREN. 


DBLIVEBED  BT 

C.  H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THK  MKTROPOLITAN  TABSBNAOLB,  NXWINGTOM. 


I  taught  Ephraim  also  to  go,  taking  them  by  their  arms." — ^Hosea  xi.  3. 

If  you  note  well  the  opening  part  of  this  chapter,  you  wUl  find  that 
it  consists  of  a  wonderful  chain  of  mercies;  e^ery  one  single  line  is  a 
rare  jewel,  and  the  whole  passage  is  a  casket  unspeakably  precious. 
The  chapter  begins  with  love;  ancient,  sovereign,  electing  love.  "  When 
Israel  was  a  child,  then  I  loved  him."  When  the  Israelitish  nation 
was  in  a  very  low  and  poor  estate,  and  was  brought  into  slavery  and 
subjection  in  Egypt,  (jrod  had  set  his  love  upon  it,  and  c^ed  it  his 
own  inheritance.  Not  for  their  numbers  or  greatness  as  a  nation 
were  they  chosen,  but  when  they  were  little  and  despised  they  were 
yet  beloved  of  God.  Distinguishing  grace  had  written  the  name  of 
Israel  upon  Jehovah's  heart.  Spiritually  we  who  have  believed  are 
in  the  same  favoured  condition,  and  our  hearts  rejoice  this  day  at 
the  memory  of  "  His  great  love,  wherewith  he  loved  us,  even  when  we 
were  dead  m  trespasses  and  sins."  This  is  the  river-head,  from  which 
all  the  streams  of  after-mercy  flow, — **  I  have  loved  thee  with  an  ever- 
lasting love,  therefore,  with  lovingkindness  have  I  drawn  thee."  Like 
the  golden- sanded  river  which  had  its  rise  in  Eden,  electing  love 
branches  off  into  many  streams,  and  waters  all  the  garden  of  the  Lord. 
This  is  the  root  from  whiph  the  tree  of  blessing  springs.  "  He  hath 
blessed  us  with  all  spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly  places  in  Christ 
Jesus :  according  as  he  hath  chosen  us  in  him  before  the  foundation  of 
the  world."  Eph.  i.  3, 4.  Let  others  say  what  they  wiU,  electing  love 
will  always  be  most  precious  to  us;  for  it  is  the  foundation  blessing,  the 
first  of  all  favours,  the  mother  of  mercies.  We  naU  to  our  mast  the  old 
flag  of  free  grace,  and  believe  with  the  apostle  (Eph.  i.  11)  that  we  were 
*'  predestinated  according  to  the  purpose  of  him  who  worketh  all  things 
after  the  counsel  of  his  own  will." 

The  next  sweet  word  in  the  chapter  is  sonship ;  "  When  Israel  waa 
a  child,  then  I  loved  him,  and  called  my  son  out  of  Egypt."  We  are, 
according  to  the  inspired  apostle,  "  predestinated  unto  the  adoption  of 

No.  1,021. 


638  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

children  by  Jesas  Christ  to  himself,  according  to  the  good  pleasure  of  his 
will."   Eph.  i.  5.    Adoption  follows  hard  upon  the  heels  of  election,  and 
is  another  messenger  of  good  tidings.     Innumerable  blessings  come  to 
us  by  this  door.    **  Because  ye  are  sons,  God  hath  sent  forth  ^e  Spirit  of 
his  Son  into  your  hearts,  crying,  Abba,  Father.    Wherefore  thou  art  no 
more  a  servant,  but  a  son."    "  Behold  what  manner  of  loTe  the  Fath^ 
hath  bestowed  upon  us,  that  we  should  be  called  the  sons  of  God." 
'*  Beloved,  now  are  we  the  sons  of  God,  and  it  doth  not  yet  appear  what 
we  shall  be :  but  we  know  that,  when  he  shall  appear,  we  shall  be  ]ike 
him ;  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is."     Sonship  with  Ood  is  a  dignity 
unspeakable,  and  yet  it  is  reserved  for  such  poor  dust  and  ashes  as  we 
are :  what  shall  we  say  concerning  this  ?     Are  we  not  swallowed  up 
with  adoring  gratitude  ?    Unto  which  of  the  angels  hath  he  said  at  any 
time,  "  Thou  art  my  son  *'  ?  but  this  hath  been  said  to  as ;  and  we 
are  thus  favoured  above  all  creatures  that  the  Lord  God  has  made. 
Boundless  blessings  are  included  in  sonship :  it  is  no  light  thing  to  be  a 
child  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  the  Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  eartL     **  If 
a  son,  then  an  heir  of  God  through  Christ."    This  opens  up  before  us 
far-reaching  views  of  present  covenant  provision,  and  of  future  infinite 
bliss.    To  be,  indeed,  born  into  the  family  of  God  is  a  dignity  to  which 
the  descent  of  an  imperial  prince  bears  no  more  comparison  than  a 
spark  in  the  tinder  to  the  sun  in  the  heavens. 

And,  because  we  have  in  this  chapter  love  and  sonship,  we  see  im- 
mediately after,  in  the  same  verse,  calling ^  salvation^  ana  detwarana: 
•*  I  called  my  son  out  of  Egypt."  The  Lord  doth  not  leave  his  chosen 
people  for  ever  in  the  bondage  of  sin  ;  when  the  day  of  their  jnbilee 
dawns,  they  go  forth  without  price  or  reward,  with  a  high  hand  and  an 
outstretched  arm.  They  cannot  remain  for  ever  under  guilt,  nor  abide 
heirs  of  wrath,  even  as  others ;  out  of  Egypt  they  must  come  when  the 
years  are  accomplished.  They  are  his,  and  he  will  call  them  bj  his 
effectual  grace,  and  separate  them  to  himself.  Their  calling  is  some- 
thing more  than  the  common  and  universal  gospel  invitation:  it  is  a 
persuasive,  convincing,  conaucring  call.  They  only  know  it  whom  the 
Lord  has  set  apart  for  himself:  "  Whom  he  did  predestinate  them  he  also 
called."  This  call  is  like  Joseph's  invitation  to  his  venerable  father  to 
come  and  see  him  :  it  was  accompanied  by  the  waggons  in  which  the  old 
man  could  ride.  It  was  not  only  an  entreating  call,  but  an  enabling  call 
**  All  that  the  Father  giveth  me  shall  come  to  me,"  says  the  Saviour; 
and  he  speaks  to  purpose,  because  he  helps  them  to  come — ^nay,  he 
brings  them  himself,  carrying  them,  like  lost  sheep,  "  upon  his  shociders 
rejoicing."  There  is  no  violence  done  to  the  will,  but  it  is  set  free,  and 
then,  being  acted  upon  by  a  graciously  enlightened  understanding,  it 
yields  to  the  call,  and  follows  Jesus.  "  My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  I 
know  them,  and  they  follow  me."  Israel  would  never  have  comeootof 
Pharaoh's  country,  if  the  Lord  had  not  fetched  them ;  but  none  can  say 
that  he  drove  them  out — nay,  rather,  "  as  for  his  people,  he  led  them 
forth  like  sheep."  Every  step  of  their  exodus  from  bondage  under  the 
divine  call  was  the  result  of  divine  leading  and  influence.  Even  thus 
spiritually  a  peculiar  but  delightful  stress  is  put  upon  the  chosen  of 
God,  and,  therefore,  they  come  out  of  the  Egypt  of  sm.  The  grace  lo 
eat  the  paschal  lamb,  to  strike  the  blood  upon  the  lintel,  and  to  gird  np 


I 


heayen'8  nurse  children.  ^9 

the  loins,  and  leave  the  land  of  leeks,  and  garlic,  and  onions,  is  given 
only  to  the  heirs  of  the  promised  possession. 

Then  we  come  upon  the  blessing  .of  holy  rearing  and  education^  which 
we  have  in  onr  text :  '*  I  tanght  Ephraim  also  to  go,  taking  them  by 
their  arms,"  as  they  do  who  have  to  teach  little  children  to  walk, 
supporting  their  tottering  footsteps,  and  instructing  them  how  to  put 
one  foot  before  the  other,  until  they  are  able,  at  last,  to  run  alone. 
Calvin  says  it  means,  '*  I  have  led  him  on  foot.  As  a  child  who  cannot 
yet  walk  ^ith  a  firm  foot  is,  by  degrees,  accustomed  to  do  so,  and  the 
nurse,  or  the  father,  or  the  mother,  who  leads  him,  has  a  regard  for  his 
infancy ;  so,  also,  have  I  led  Israel,  as  much  as  his  feet  could  bear." 
And,  as  if  this  mercy  and  condescension  of  God,  in  thus  comparing  him- 
self to  a  woman  with  her  babe,  were  not  sufficient,  in  addition  to  this 
he  becomes  a  physician  too,  and  grants  healing;  he  says,  '^I  healed 
them."  They  had  not  only  weakness  that  needed  to  be  supported,  and 
ignorance  that  needed  to  be  tutored ;  but  they  had,  in  addition,  sick- 
ness and  infirmity  that  needed  medicine.  "  I  healed  them."  He  who 
had  carried  them  as  Shaddai— the  Lord  All-sufficient,  became  to  them 
Jehovah  Kophi — the  Lord  that  healeth  them.  Who  shall  tell  how 
much  we  all  owe  to  heavenly  pharmacy  ?  Our  diseases  are  deep-seated 
and  most  dangerous ;  how  happy  are  we  in  having  an  omnipotent 
Physician,  whose  word  alone  is  more  than  a  match  for  all  our  maladies. 
Surely  we  have  a  sickness  for  every  day  in  the  year,  but  the  Beloved 
Physician  has  a  remedy  for  every  complaint.  Glory  be  unto  him  who 
forgiveth  all  our  iniquities,  and  healeth  all  our  diseases.  Then,  as  if  all 
this  were  not  enough,  we  find  him  drawing  them  on  in  the  paths  of 
obedience  and  holiness — ^not  with  ropes  and  chains,  that  would  compel 
against  their  will,  overhauling  them  roughly — but  with  forces  suited  for 
minds  and  hearts.  ^'  I  drew  them  with  cords  of  a  man,  with  bands  of 
love."  Thus  does  the  gracious  Spirit  of  God  work  in  us  to  will  and  to 
do  of  his  own  good  pleasure.  '*  The  love  of  Christ  oonstraineth  us :" 
"As  many  as  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  they  are  the  sons  of  God  :" 
•*  The  Spirit  also  helpeth  our  infirmities." 

Thus  we  have  in  a  few  lines  unostentatiously  opened  up  before  us  a 
cabinet  of  covenant  gems,  rivalling  those  which  adorned  the  high  priest 
of  old«  Here  is  a  holy  education  for  the  nursling  that  was  taught  to 
walk ;  here  is  exercise  of  the  strength  which  the  physician  had  restored. 

As  if  this  had  not  completed  it,  there  come  unburdening  and  rest- 
ffwing :  "  I  was  to  them  as  they  that  take  off  the  yoke  on  their  jaws." 
They  had  been  like  oxen,  with  a  heavy  yoke  upon  them,  and  God  had 
come  and  taken  the  yoke  away ;  and  there  they  stood,  as  we  see  horses 
stand  when  they  are  made  to  rest,  when  the  bearing-rein  is  loosened, 
and  they  stand  at  ease.  And  this  God  has  as  surely  done  for  us  as  for 
his  ancient  people.    He  has  fulfilled  that  word  unto  us,  '*  Take  my 

?oke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me,  and  ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls." 
7e  enjoy  the  peace  of  God,  which  passeth  all  understanding :  it  keeps 
our  hearts  and  minds  by  Christ  Jesus.  Nor  is  this  all ;  for  the  gracious 
Kedeemer  takes  care  to  fill  his  people's  mouths  with  good  things; 
hence,  he  does  not  forget  the  feeding,  and  it  is  added,  *^  I  laid  ^neat  unto 
them."  The  Lord  refreshed  his  weary  people  with  "food  convenient 
for  them.*'    As  the  oxen,  after  the  yoke  was  removed,  were  fed,  so  God, 


640  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

when  he  had  removed  oar  yoke  of  gailtj  bondage,  fed  ns  with  the 
finest  of  the  wheat,  as  he  made  us  nnderstand  the  gospel  of  his  Son.   The 
doctrines  and  promises  of  his  word  are  substantial  meat  for  hungry 
souls.    '*My  soul  shall  be  satisfied  with  marrow  and  fatness,  and  mj 
mouth  shall  praise  thee  with  joyful  lips."    Certain  nnder-shepherds  are 
afraid  of  laying  too  much  doctrinal  food  before  the  Lord's  people,  bat 
it  is  a  great  mistake.    Truth  never  surfeits,  though  it  always  satisfies. 
The  Good  Shepherd  does  not  stint  his  sheep,  but  he  gives  them  so  much, 
that  they  lie  down  amid  the  exceeding  plenty  of  the  green  pastures. 
They  cannot  eat  it  all,  and  they  lie  down  in  the  midst  of  a  super- 
abundance, which  infinite  mercy  has  provided.    See,  then,  how  God's 
boundless  love  piles  mountain  upon  mountain,  as  the  old  classics  used 
to  say,  Pelion  upon  Ossa,  that  we,  up  from  the  depths  of  onr  digtress, 
may  climb  to  the  heights  of  his  blessedness,  and  enjoy  the  fulness  of 
the  glory  which  God  has  treasured  up  for  us  in  the  person  of  Christ 
«Jesus  our  Lord.     One  is  tempted,  with  such  a  preface  to  onr  text,  to 
linger  in  it,  and  to  be  like  the  man  who  made  the  porch  of  his  house 
larger  .than  the  house  itself.    You  can  but  be  fed,  and  it  matters  not 
whether  the  barley  loaves  and  fishes  are  in  my  basket,  or  whether  I 
carry  them  loosely  in  my  hand :  so  long  as  you  are  refreshed  by  them 
you  will  not  quarrel  with  my  disorderly  serving.    However,  I  restrain 
my  loitering  heart,  and  proceed  to  the  text 

Here  is  the  figure  of  a  nurse  and  a  child.  "  I  taaght  Ephraim  to 
go,  taking  them  by  their  arms.''  Let  us  look  at  this  in  reference  to  the 
children  of  Israel ;  then  let  us  view  it  in  reference  to  ourselyes. 

Take  IsraeVs  case  first.    They  were  in  Egypt,  and  God  was  about  to 
bring  them  forth,  and  make  them  a  nation,  and  give  them  a  counby  of 
their  own.    He  began  to  deal  with  them  as  little  children,  for  he 
selected  as  his  ambassador  and  as  the  mediator  between  him  and  them, 
not  a  man  of  imperious  disposition,  not  an  Elijah  with  fire  at  his  beck, 
or  a  John  the  Baptist  with  an  axe  in  his  hand,  but  *'  the  man  Moses,  who 
was  very  meek,  above  all  men  that  were  upon  the  face  of  the  eurth." 
They  were  childish,  vain,  foolish,  and  their  leader  must  be  very  genUe  and 
foil  of  pity.     It  requires  a  patient  disposition  to  deal  with  such  grown- 
up children,  for  what  you  could  bear  from  children,  who  are  children 
in  years,  you  cannot  so  well  endure  from  those  who,  though  they  have 
reached  the  age  of  maturity,  have  not  reached  the  age  of  discretion,  and 
seem  as  if  they  never  would.    Yon  can  teach  a  child  of  six  ;  but  who 
shall  be  tutor  to  a  child  of  sixty  ?     The  great  God,  the  Father  of  Israel, 
selected  as  a  tutor  for  these  grown  up  children,  the  meekest  man  that 
lived,  and,  in  so  doing,  he  dealt  tenderly  with  them,  as  a  mother  with 
her  child.    Then,  though  he  meant  them  ultimately  and  finally  to  come 
out  of  Egypt,  he  did  not  uproot  them  from  their  adopted  land  all  at 
once,  roughly  and  without  previous  loosening.    No  unexpected  conmumd 
was  given  them  that  they  were  at  once  to  sever  all  the  ties  that  con- 
nected them  with  the  people  of  Egypt.    They  were  not  forced  in  an 
unlooked-for  moment  to  leave  the  leeks,  and  garlic,  and  onions,  and 
to  go  forth  into  the  desert ;  but  a  long  series  of  miracles  was  exhibited 
before  their  eyes,  not  only  that  Pharaoh's  power  might  be  broken,  but 
that  they  might  be  encouraged  to  venture  themselvesnpon  the  providence 
of  G  od,  and  trust  themselves  with  him.    They  ought  to  have  been  strong 


heaven's  nurse  children.  641 

enough  to  have  marched  out  of  Egypt  at  once,  at  the  first  word  of  their 
leader.  Had  thej  forgotten  the  old  covenant  which  had  been  made  with 
their  fathers,  that  the  Lord  would  give  them  a  land  that  flowed  with  milk 
and  honey  ?  But  they  were  little  children  and  could  not  perform  manly 
exploits ;  they  needed  to  be  taught  courage,  and  manliness,  and  faith  in 
the  unseen  God  of  their  father  Abraham.  All  those  plagues  which 
God  wrought  in  the  fields  of  Zoan,  while  they  had  a  dark  side  to  Egypt, 
had  a  bright  side  to  Israel ;  it  was  a  '^  teaching  them  to  go ;"  a  gently 

Eersuading  them  to  trust  in  God,  and  go  forth  at  his  call.  Yet,  after 
aving  seen  all  Jehovah's  wonders,  when  at  last  they  did  take  the 
first  step,  and  found  themselves  at  Succoth,  and  by-and-by  came  to 
Pi-hahiroth  by  the  sea,  they  trembled  like  babes  who  totter  and  are  ready 
to  fall.  Was  it  not  tender  mercy  on  the  part  of  God  that  he  put  forth 
his  hand,  and  held  them  up,  and  drowned  nil  their  fears  at  once  ? 
They  had  been  alarmed,  when  they  heard  the  whip  of  their  taskmasters, 
and  the  rattling  of  the  war  chariots  behind  them ;  but  God  made,  as  it 
were  with  one  sweep,  an  end  of  every  thing  that  need  give  them 
distress.  I  do  not  find,  whatever  were  their  foolish  fears,  that  the 
children  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness  weriB  ever  again  afraid  of  the 
Egyptians  pursuing  them  and  attempting  to  drive  them  back  as  slaves. 
The  old  fear  was  slain  at  once;  they  had  been  slaves,  and  dreaded  their 
masters,  but  the  strength  of  Egypt  had  been  so  terribly  broken  at  the 
Bed  Sea,  that  Israel,  who  before  tottered,  even  began  to  dance  to  the 
music  of  the  triumphant  timbrel.  Infinite  tenderness  removed  the 
stumbling  block  out  of  their  way,  lest  their  infant  faith  should  be 
tripped  up. 

When  they  were  fairly  in  the  wilderness  they  were  still  treated  as 
children,  and  they  needed  it.  They  had  many  sensible  manifestations 
of  the  presence  of  God  with  them.  A  truly  spiritual  faith  does  not 
expect  any  manifestation  to  the  senses.  God  treats  us  to-day  as  men^ 
compared  with  the  way  in  which  he  nursed  the  Israelites.  We  have  no 
pillar  of  glory  shining  over  a  visible  tabernacle  ;  no  shekinah  above  a 
material  mercy-seat.  We  have  now  no  holy  places  whatsoever ;  and  no 
symbolic  worship : — 

•*  Where'er  we  seek  Him  He  is  found, 
And  every  place  is  hallowed  ground.** 

Our  service  of  the  spiritual  God  is  spiritual ;  we  walk  by  faith  and  not 
by  sight;  we  worship  God  in  the  spirit  and  have  no  confidence  in 
tne  flesh.  The  tribes  of  Israel,  as  being  in  their  religious  childhood, 
had  manifestations  of  different  kinds.  They  saw  not  God,  for  who 
shall  behold  the  invisible?  but  the  bright  light  shone  between  the 
wings  of  the  cherubim,  the  glory  of  the  Lord  at  times  burst  forth  from 
the  taberqacle,  and  on  an  ever  memorable  occasion  they  heard  a  voice 
speaking  out  of  the  thick  darkness  from  the  top  of  Sinai,  when  the 
Lord  came  from  Paran  with  ten  thousand  of  his  holy  ones.  We  have 
not  heard  the  voice,  neither  have  we  seen  the  glory,  nor  need  we  wish 
for  either,  since  we  have  a  sure  word  of  testimony,  and  the  abiding  of 
the  Holy  Ghost :  but  the  Lord  treated  the  tribes  in  the  wilderness  as 
children — their  faith  and  spirituality  were  so  feeble  that,  like  the  young 
church  of  Christ  in  the  upper  room,  which  needed  the  rushing  wind. 


6^42  METKOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

and  cloven  tonp;nes,  and  miracnlous  power,  they  were  favoured  with 
signs  and  wonders  to  confirm  their  faith :  "  He  taught  them  to  go,  taking 
them  by  their  arms." 

Another  part  of  this  spiritual  nursing,  which  the  Lord  condescend- 
ingly gave  to  his  people,  was  their  instruction  by  symbols.    He  did 
not  give  to  them,  as  he  gives  to  us,  the  clear  rision  of  the  glonaos 
gospel  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ,  but  as  they  were  not  capable  of 
reading  the  plain  sense,  and  they  needed  pictures  in  their  books,  he 
gave   them   many   and   most  instructive   symbols.       They  saw  the 
morning  and  the  evening  lamb.     How  full  of  instruction  must  that 
double  offering  have  been.     They  ate  the  passover ;    they   saw  the 
doors  besprinkled  with  blood  ;  here  was  a  sort  of  kinder-garten  iniant- 
school  teaching  for  them.    The  high  priest  in  his  white  garments,  or  ie 
bis  glorious  robes  of  beauty,  with  the  Urim  and  Thummim  glisteniig 
on  his  breast,  the  altar,  the  censer,  the  candlestick,  the  table  of  the 
shewbread,  the  layer — all  these  were  pictures  in  the  first  ABC  book 
for  children.    The  gentle  Father  was  teaching  them  to  go.     There 
are  some  childish  lovers  of  the  first  covenant  who  would  like  to  get  the 
child's  books  back  again :  like  big  babies  they  cry  for  the  ham-bo(As 
of  infancy,  and  would  put  aside  the  gloiy  book  which  God  has  given  to 
his  children  to  read  in  the  day  of  the  open  manifestation  of  his  Hoiy 
Spirit    We  need  not  imitate  their  example.    We  desire  not  go  baci  to 
the  rudiments,  when  the  Lord  hath  revealed  himself  in  the  person  of  the 
Only-begotten.    Yet  to  Israel  type  and  symbol  was  the  main  instmcticm, 
and  in  that  respect  the  Lord  taught  them  to  go.     Tea,  and  it  was  not 
only  instruction  by  a  few  chosen  symbols,  but  everything  was  a  sjaibol 
to  them.    They  were  always  being  instructed  and  helped.     The  bread 
they  ate  was  food  from  heaven,  and  the  water  they  drank  leaped  from  the 
living  rock ;  they  were  covered  from  the  heat  by  the  clond  ;  they  were 
lighted  at  night  in  their  encampment  by  the  nery  pillar;  eTerything 
about  them  was  fitted  for  a  people  that  needed  something  tangibH 
something  to  be  felt,  something  to  be  seen  and  perceived  of  the  senses, 
a  people  in  childhood  who  required  to  have  everything  represented  to 
the  eye  as  well  as  spoken  to  the  ear. 

The  whole  of  that  forty  years*  journey  in  the  wilderness  was  a  long 
"  teaching:  them  to  go.'*  They  were  not  a  people  able  to  have  formed  a 
well-regulated  state.  They  were  no  better  than  a  mob  of  slaves^  they 
were  not  fit  for  self-government ;  and,  therefore,  they  were  led  abont^ 
trained,  taught,  educated  by  the  space  of  forty  years,  before  tiey  were 
able  to  go,  as  they  did  at  last,  when  the  Lord  settled  them  in  Oanaan. 
And  note — and  here  I  will  not  continue  the  story  longer,  bf^ause  there 
are  ten  thousand  various  ways  in  which  we  can  illustrate  the  truth— 
how  he  treated  them  as  children  even  in  the  conquest  of  Canaan.  Before 
they  came  up  to  the  country  to  conquer  it,  a  pestilence  had  destroyed 
many  of  the  people.  The  spies  said,  '*  It  is  a  land  that  eateth  up  the 
inhabitants  thereof."  The  Lord  had  also  sent  the  hornet  before  them— 
some  terrible  and  deadly  insect  \f  hich  had  distressed  and  driven  out  the 
Canaanitcs,  and,  in  addition  to  these  two  scourges,  the  fear  of  them 
and  the  dread  of  them  had  very  much  weakened  their  adversaries,  and 
prepared  the  whole  land  to  submit  to  them.     That  marvellous  passage 


of  the  Jordan,  and  that  miraculous  falling  down  of  the  walls  of  Jericho 


us  pa8sa< 
of  Jericl) 


HEAVEN'S  KUBSB  CHILDREN.  GAS 

without  their  needing  to  strike  a  blow — were  not  these  all  the  means 
of  teaching  them  to  go  ?— were  they  not  thus  gently  led  on  till  at  last 
they  became  men  enough  to  drive  out  the  Canaanites  and  to  settle  in 
the  land,  and  sit  every  man  beneath  his  own  vine  and  figtree  ? 

We  will  now  leave  the  seed  of  Israel,  and  think  of  ourselves  a  while. 
How  very  graciously  has  the  meaning  of  our  text  been  fulfilled  iu  us. 
The  Lord  has  treated  us  as  a  nurse  treats  a  little  child. 

To  begin  with,  i?ie  first  step  the  child  takes — its  first  introduction  to 
the  art  of  locomotion — is  caused  by  the  nurse's  holding  it  up.  Do  we 
not  remember  the  first  uplifting  that  the  Lord  gave  to  some  of  us  ? 
We  were  grovelling  in  the  dust,  and  should  have  been  content  to  be 
there  still,  but,  under  a  gracious  word  that  he  sent  to  us,  through  the 
ministry,  or  by  some  other  means,  he  lifted  us  up,  and  we  began  to 
feel  that  there  was  something  better  for  us  than  to  be  always  creeping 
about  on  the  earth,  or  lying  still  in  supine  worldliness.  The  nurse's 
hand  is  first  put  out  before  the  child  thinks  of  walking,  and  the  divine 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  was  first  exerted  upon  us  (we  being  then 
passive  nnder  it. for  a  while)  before  we  felt  a  aesire  for  better  things. 
We  crawled  npon  the  earth  like  beasts  till  God  taught  us  to  stand  erect 
in  uprightness  like  grace-born  men.  We  owe  all  to  him  who  has  taught 
Qs  from  our  youth. 

The  nurse,  when  the  child  begins  to  walk,  soon  teaches  it  to  knew  its 
own  wealcness.  It  has  a  fall  or  two,  and  a  few  bruises  and  tears ;  but 
the  falls  are  necessary  to  its  learning  to  walk.  We,  also,  had  many  slips 
and  falls.  Oh,  how  often  did  we  resolve  in  the  most  admirable  manner, 
but  our  resolutions  ended  in  smoke  I  How  frequently  did  we  make 
attempts  in  oar  own  strength,  and  these  were  failures,  till  at  last  we  said, 
"  We  must  give  it  up,"  and  we  were  compelled  to  lean  wholly  upon  our 
Lord.  We  became  more  active  in  the  right  way  after  we  were  weaned 
from  our  natural  self-reliant  activities,  which  had  been  so  dear  to  us ; 
but  we  were  very  long  in  the  weaninjj.  Falls  into  sin  are  terrible 
things,  and  these  are  not  what  I  speak  of  here,  but  1  mean  those  broken 
resolutions,  and  those  aspirations  to  which  we  did  not  attain,  those  many 
disappointing  tumbles  which  we  encountered  when  we  tried  to  walk.  It 
is  a  part  of  the  nurse's  art  to  let  the  child  feel  its  weakness :  and  it  is 
a  part  of  our  heavenly  Father's  wisdom  to  let  us  know  how  feeble  we 
are.  We  are  never  wise,  till  we  discover  that  we  are  fools :  we  are 
never  strong,  till  we  confess  that  we  are  weak.  True  enough  are  the 
Apostle's  words,  "  When  I  am  weak,  then  am  I  strong." 

The  nurse  regulates  the  child's  exertions,  and  allows  it  to  take  a  step 
OT  two  at  first,  and  only  a  step  or  two.  Do  we  remember  how  tottering 
were  our  first  steps  ?  We  limped  very  sadly.  Onr  walking  was  com- 
parable to  the  seeing  of  the  man  to  whom  men  looked  like  trees. 
Our  state  of  mind  was  a  mixture  of  li^ht  and  darkness.  We  cried, 
"  Lord,  I  believe ;  help  thou  mine  unbelief."  There  were  only  one  or 
two  promises  in  God's  word  which  I  could  get  any  hold  of  when  I  first 
came  to  him.  My  soul  was  stayed  a  little  while  on  that  word,  **  Who- 
soever calleth  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall  be  saved."  Only  that 
could  I  grasp.  I  have  known  some  who  could  get  consolation  from 
nothing  but  this  sweet  word,  *'  Him  that  cometh  unto  me,  I  will  in  no 


644  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

wise  cast  out."  They  could  believe  only  a  little ;  it  hardly  amounted  to 
believing :  they  reached  as  far  as  hoping  and  trusting,  intermittaiUy 
mixed  up  with  a  world  of  doubting  and  fearing,  but  they  could  sdr 
no  further.  Very  delightful  to  the  Christian  pastor  is  it  to  see  a  young 
convert  begin  to  take  the  first  step  or  two.  We  have  seen  them  fall 
down  with  doubts  and  fears,  but  we  nave  been  so  pleased  that  they  could 
walk  even  a  little  in  the  way  of  faith,  and  believe  even  a  portion  of  the 
word  of  God.  What  a  mercy  it  is  that  the  Lord  reveals  to  us  his  own 
truth  by  slow  degrees  I  We  ought  never  to  expect  our  yoang  converts 
to  understand  the  doctrine  of  election,  and  to  be  able  to  split  hairs  in 
orthodoxy.  It  is  vain  to  overload  them  with  such  a  precious  truth  as 
union  with  Christ,  or  so  deep  a  doctrine  as  predestination.  Do  they  know 
Christ  as  the  Saviour,  and  themselves  as  sinners  ?  Well,  then,  do  not 
try  to  make  a  child  run  ;  it  will  never  walk  if  you  do.  Do  not  try  to  teach 
the  babe  gymnastics ;  fijst  let  it  totter  on  and  tremble  forward  a  httle 
way.  **  I  have  many  things  to  say  unto  you,"  said  the  Saviour,  **  but 
ye  cannot  bear  them  now."  Now,  had  certain  reputedly  wise  men  been 
there  they  would  have  said,  '^  Lord,  let  us  hear  it  all ;  make  full  proof 
of  it  all ;  bring  it  all  out :  we  can  bear  it — only  try  ns."  But  our  Lord 
knew  what  was  in  man,  and,  therefore,  he  only  little  by  little,  line  upon 
line,  precept  upon  precept,  brought  out  the  truth,  and  he  does  so  experi- 
mentally with  his  children  still.  We  do  not  know  our  own  depraved 
hearts  so  well  at  first  as  we  do  afterwards.  The  disease  and  the  remedy 
have  both  of  them  to  be  more  fully  revealed  to  us  by-and-by.  Did  wc 
know  at  the  first  all  we  shall  know  hereafter,  we  should  be  so  over- 
whelmed  with  the  abundance  of  the  revelation  that  we  should  not  be 
able  to  endure  it ;  the  Lord,  therefore,  lets  in  the  light  by  degrees.  If  a 
person  had  been  long  famished,  and  you  were  to  find  him  hungry,  and 
faint,  and  ready  to  die,  your  instincts  would  say,  '*  Put  food  before  him 
at  once,  and  let  him  have  all  he  wants."  Yet  this  would  be  a  ready 
enough  way  to  kill  him.  If  you  are  wise,  you  will  give  him  nutriment 
slowly,  as  he  is  able  to  bear  it.  If  you  have  been  long  in  the  dark,  and 
come  into  the  light  at  once,  your  eyes  smart,  and  you  cannot  bear  it,  yoa 
need  to  come  to  it  by  degrees  ;  and  thus  is  it  with  the  Lord's  children. 
By  little  and  by  little  he  introduces  them  into  the  gloir  of  his  kingdom, 
preparing  them  for  its  fulness  as  children  arc  prepared  tor  their  manhood. 
Have  you  not  seen  how  the  nurse  will  tempt  the  child  to  take  a  litUe 
longer  walk,  by  holding  out  a  pleasant  thing  to  allure  it?  And  how 
often  has  our  blessed  Lord  tempted  us  to  some  bolder  deed  of  ser- 
vice ;  to  something  that  required  more  faith  than  we  had  before,  by 
giving  us  choice  signs  of  his  presence,  and  ravishing  our  hearts  with  his 
love.  Some  of  us  know  what  it  is  to  have  seen  such  sweet  resulis 
from  our  little  faith,  that  we  could  not  but  desire  to  try  what  stronger 
faith  would  do.  God  so  rewarded  the  weak  faith  we  had,  that  we  felt 
we  must  rely  upon  him,  and  venture  still  further.  Kindly  bath  the 
Lord  conducted  us  onward  in  this  respect. 

The  nurse  does  not  let  the  child  put  too  much  weight  upon  its  litile 
legs  at  first,  for  it  might  be  to  its  lasting  injury.  It  shall  have  a  little 
trial  of  walking :  but  she  will  put  her  hands  under  its  arms,  and  hold 
it  up  that  it  shall  not  be  tried  too  long,  lest  it  be  strained  and  in- 
jured; so  does  our  heavenly  Father  try  our  faith  by  little  and  by  litUc. 


heaven's  nubse  childben.  G45 

When  we  shall  have  become  men  in  Christ  Jesus,  we  shall  be  tested  by 
stronger  trials,  for  the  Lord  loveth  to  put  stress  upon  faith  ;  he  sends 
forth  his  knights  of  the  cross  upon  desperate  battles,  knowing 
that  he  intend  to  glorify  himself  in  their  natural  weakness,  by  grant- 
ing them  strength :  but  to  the  little  babe,  he  sets  no  such  stem  tasks. 
He  tempereth  the  wind  to  the  shorn  lamb,  and  deals  tenderly  with  those 
that  are  but  tender.  ''  He  carrieth  the  lambs  in  his  bosom,  and  doth 
gently  lead  those  that  are  with  young.*'  Can  you  not  look  back,  beloved 
brethren  and  sisters,  to  your  own  experience,  and  confirm  all  I  have  said, 
only  feeling  that  you  could  say  very  much  more  ,  about  it  if  you  could 
speak  out  your  own  heart  ? 

The  Lord  has  dealt  with  us,  in  other  respects  as  children,  as,  for 
instance,  in  not  chiding  us  for  our  many  mistakes.  If  the  nurse  were 
to  scold  the  child  for  not  walking  as  she  does;  if  she  were  to  be  angry 
with  it  because  it  is  not  as  strong  as  she  is ;  the  poor  thing  might  be 
long  before  it  came  to  walk  at  all.  '  God  sometimes  does  with  his 
people  as  Apelles  did  with  Alexander  when  he  painted  him — he  did 
not  draw  the  scar  on  Alexander's  face,  but  placed  his  finger  over  it. 
Note  how  the  Holy  Spirit  describes  Sarah.  There  was  not  much  good 
in  what  Sarah  said  on  that  day  when  she  lied;  but  she  called  her  husband 
''lord,"  and  the  Holy  Spirit  lights  on  that,  and  mentions  it  to  her 
honour.  He  has  often  accepted  our  poor  service,  and  given  us  sweetly 
to  feel  that  it  was  so,  though  now  we  look  back  upon  it,  we  wonder  how 
it  could  have  been  accepted  at  all. 

Many  of  us  who  preach  the  gospel,  had  God's  blessing  on  our  early 
preachings.  Our  knowledge  was  dreadfully  scant,  and  our  ability  slender. 
We  wonder  how  God  could  have  blessea  us,  but  he  did.  If  he  were 
to  let  UB  know  how  badly  we  do  his  work  even  now,  we  should  despair, 
and  do  no  more;  but  in  his  great  mercy,  he  lets  the  light  shine  on  the 
brighter  spots,  and  lets  us  see  what  his  Spirit  is  doing ;  and  so  we  take 
courage  and  go  on,  and  learn  to  walk  after  all.  With  all  our  tremblings, 
and  tumblings,  and  fallings  down,  we  do  at  length  learn  to  stand 
upright^  and  even  to  run  in  his  ways. 

Dear  brethren  and  sisters,  do  you  not  feel  that  God  has  had  great 
patience  with  you  ?  Do  you  not  wonder  that  he  has  endured  you  ? 
Could  you  have  had  so  much  patience  with  another  as  God  has  had 
with  you  ?  Impossible.  You  can  hardly  run  alone  yet,  can  scarcely 
take  a  step  without  slipping  or  sliding,  you  need  still  to  be  carried  in 
the  everlasting  arms  like  babes,  and  yet  you  are  persuaded  that  his 
patience  will  hold  out  till  there  shall  be  no  more  need  of  it.  He  will 
Dear  us  as  on  eagle*s  wings,  that  is,  with  unwearied  perseverance  and 
strength  of  love  he  will  uphold  us  even  to  the  end. 

We  must  remind  you,  however,  before  we  leave  this,  that  there  arc 
some  respects  in  which  the  figure  before  us  does  not  come  up  to  the 
full  point.  Ood  has  been  very  gracious  to  us,  beyond  wMt  a  nurse  is  to 
a  child.  Let  us  unfold  this  feet  for  a  moment  or  two.  The  nurse,  with 
the  child,  has  not  the  disadvantages  that  God  has  with  us,  for  we  are 
full  of  the  notion  that  we  can  walk,  and  thus  there  are  two  battles  in 
our  case — the  first,  is  to  get  us  out  of  our  bad  walking,  and  the  next  is, 
to  teach  us  to  walk  rightly.  It  is  sometimes  more  difficult  to  instruct 
a  man  who  has  been  educated  wrongly,  than  it  would  have  been  if 


618  UETROPOLTTAN  TABEBNACLS  PULPIT. 

he  knew  nothing.  He  has  both  to  learn  and  to  nnleam.  So  with  ns: 
we  have  a  notion  that  we  can  do  so  much,  nntil  the  Lord  shows  ns  thil 
without  him  we  can  do  nothing.  We  are  very  strong  in  our  own 
opinion :  we  are  blown  out  with  pride  and  self-safficiencjy  and  thai 
has  to  be  taken  from  us ;  so  that  there  is  a  double  task  for  infinite 
mercy  to  perform — not  merely  to  plant  a  tree,  but  to  cut  down  the  oU 
tree  and  root  it  up — to  get  rid  of  our  former  way  of  walking,  and  then 
to  teach  us  to  walk  in  the  Spirit,  and  not  in  the  fancied  energy  of  the 
flesh. 

Moreover,  you  ney^r  found  a  babe  anxious  to  use  stilts ;  bnt  eyety 
one  of  us,  when  God*s  Spirit  has  begun  to  teach  us  to  walk,  have  been 
seeking  to  use  crutches.  *'  Cursed  is  he  that  trusteth  in  man."  And 
how  many  of  us  must  have  deserved  that  curse;  for  trusting  in  manii 
yery  very  common.  Besting  on  an  arm  of  flefi^  seems  to  be  the  heny 
ditary  disease  of  God's  people.  They  fly  first  to  this  and  then  to  thali 
but  forget  their  true  and  only  resting-place.  The  simple  walk  oi  &ith, 
trusting  and  leaning  alone  upon  the  Invisible,  how  difficult  it  is  to  faring 
ourselves  to  it !  We  would  have  some  favourite  child  to  lean  upon,  or 
husband,  or  wife,  or  friend.  Our  abilities,  or  something  or  other  that 
we  can  see  and  handle,  shall  be  the  golden  calf  which  we  set  np  and 
say,  '^  These  be  thy  gods,  0  Israel !"  Here  is  a  great  difiBculty,  thai,  to 
wean  us  from  crutches,  which  are  promoters  of  spiritual  lameness. 

I  have  never  met  with  a  child  that  had  any  fear  about  the  nuae'i 
power  to  hold  it  up.  She  puts  her  arms  about  it,  and  it  tmsis  itself 
with  her,  leaning  wholly  upon  her.  But  we  appear  to  be  afraid  of 
leaning  hard  upon  God :  we  cannot  leave  ourselves  with  him :  we  don't 
throw  ourselves  right  back  on  the  divine  bosom.  Yet  is  there  no  trne 
rest  to  ourselves  till  we  do.  As  long  as  we  are  trying  to  support  oar- 
selves  in  some  measure  or  degree,  we  have  not  ydi  come  to  the  rest  of 
faith.  I  have  known  people  who  went  in  the  sea  to  learn  to  swim,  but 
they  never  dare  take  their  feet  off  the  bottom,  and  I  do  not  see  how 
they  can  swim  while  they  also  endeavour  to  stand  on  their  feet  Stand- 
ing and  swimming  cannot  be  managed  at  the  same  time.  So  th^e  are 
souls  that  would  fain  trust  themselves  to  the  goodness  of  God,  but 
they  cannot  be  content  without  an  earthly  prop.  They  cannot  quite  cast 
themselves  upon  God  and  trust  in  the  stream  of  his  abundant  faithfuloeaB. 
This,  then,  is  another  difficulty  which  is  not  with  thenorse,  but  which 
is  with  our  God  in  reference  to  as. 

One  more  remark  let  us  make,  and  that  is,  that  we  are,  many  of  us, 
most  unwilling  to  try  to  walk.  Though  we  are  believers,  after  a  f ashicm, 
it  may  be  said  of  us  at  this  day  as  of  those  in  the  Savionr'f  time: 
"  It"  the  Son  of  Man  cometh,  shall  he  find  faith  on  the  earth?"  Why, 
entire  portions  of  the  Christian  church  are  afraid  to  trust  God  with  the 
maintenance  of  their  ministers  and  the  support  of  their  vrorship;  they 
enter  into  an  adulterous  alliance  with  the  State  sooner  than  trust  in 
God  and  rely  upon  the  faithfulness  of  his  people.  And  as  it  is  with 
large  masses  of  the  people,  so  is  it  with  separate  Christians  ;  Uiey  can- 
not walk  by  i'aith ;  they  must  have  some  way  or  other  of  clinging  to 
the  flesh.  Oh,  for  grace  to  be  willing  to  believe  in  God !  Oh,  for  power 
'  to  cut  the  moorings,  and  have  done  with  the  signs,  and  the  evidenoeiy 
and  the  marks,  and  come  to  look  upon  Christ  and  his  finished  wcAi 


heaven's  nurse  CniLDREN.  647 

upon  the  covenant,  and  upon  the  faithful  God,  who  breakoth  not  his 
promise  and  cannot  turn  away  ft'om  his  decree.  Mav  he  who  teacheth 
us  to  profit  make  us  to  walk  in  his  ways.  Our  prayer  is  like  that  oi 
quaint  old  Qaarles: — 

Great  All  in  All,  that  art  my  rest,  my  home ; 

My  way  is  tedious,  and  my  steps  are  slow  : 
Reach  forth  thy  helping  hand :  or  bid  me  come ; 
I  am  thy  child,  O  teach  thy  child  to  go  : 
Conjoin  thy  sweet  commands  to  my  desire, 
And  I  will  venture,  though  I  fall  or  tire.** 

Now,  why  is  it  that  mothers  take  so  much  pains  in  teaching  their 
children  to  walk  ?  I  suppose  the  reason  is,  because  they  are  their  own 
offspring.  And  the  reason  why  the  Lord  has  been  so  patient  with  us, 
and  will  be  so  still,  is  because  we  are  his  children,  still  his  children,  still 
his  children !  Ah  there  is  wondrous  power  in  that — still  his  children!  I 
was  sitting  at  table  once,  and  I  heard  a  ihother  expatiating  upon  her  son. 
She  said  a  very  great  deal  about  him ;  and  some  one  sitting  near  me 
said,  "  I  wish  that  good  woman  would  be  quiet."  I  said,  **  What's  the 
matter?  May  she  not  spe^k  of  her  son?"  "Why,"  he  said,  "he's 
been  transported*  He  was  as  bad  a  fellow  as  ever  liyed,  and  yet  she 
always  sees  something  wonderful  in  him."  So  I  ventured,  some  little 
time  after,  when  I  had  gained  her  acquaintance,  to  say  something  about 
this  son ;  and  I  remember  her  remark :  "  If  there  is  nobody  else  to 
speak  up  for  him  his  mother  always  will."  Just  so ;  she  loved  him  fo 
that  if  me  could  not  be  altogether  blind  to  his  faults,  yet  she  would  also 
see  all  that  was  hopeftil  in  him.  Our  blessed  God  does  not  bring  into  the 
foreground  what  we  are,  so  much  as  what  he  means  to  make  us.  "  Their 
sins  and  their  iniquities  will  I  remember  no  more  for  ever."  He  puts 
our  blackness  away ;  and  he  sees  us  as  we  shall  be  when  we  shall  bear 
the  image  of  the  heavenly,  and  shall  be  like  our  Lord.  For  Christ's 
sake,  beholding  our  shield  and  looking  upon  the  face  of  his  anointed,  he 
loves  us  and  goes  on  to  instruct  us  still.  It  seems  at  times  as  if  there 
were  a  conflict  in  the  divine  bosom,  and  he  felt  he  must  surely  give  us 
np,  but  then  his  love  rushes  to  the  rescue,  and  it  comes  to  this :  '^  How 
shall  I  make  thee  as  Admah?  how  shall  I  set  thee  as  Zeboim?  mine 
heart  is  turned  within  me,  my  repentings  are  kindled  together."  He 
returns  to  us  with  such  a  word  as  this  :  "  I  have  betrothed  thee  unto 
me  in  righteousness,  and  in  mercy,  and  in  judgment."  He  declares 
that  he  hates  putting  away :  "  Turn,  0  backsliding  children,  saith  the 
Lord,  for  I  am  married  unto  vou."  We  are  his  own  children.  Oh !  I 
have  found  it  such  a  blessed  thing,  in  my  own  experience,  to  plead 
before  God  that  I  am  his  child.  When  I  was  racked  some  months  ago 
with  pain,  to  an  extreme  degree,  so  that  I  could  no  longer  bear  it 
without  crying  out,  I  asked  all  to  go  from  the  room,  and  leave  me 
alone ;  and  then  I  had  nothing  I  could  say  to  God  but  this,  "  Thou 
art  my  Father,  and  I  am  thy  child;  and  thou,  as  a  Father,  art 
tender  and  full  of  mercy.  I  could  not  bear  to  see  my  child 
suffer  as  thou  makest  me  suffer,  and  if  I  saw  him  tormented  as 
I  am  now,  I  would  do  what  I  could  to  help  him,  and  put  my  arms 
under  him  to  sustain  him.    Wilt  thou  hide  thy  face  from  me,  my 


648  METBOPOIJTAN  TABERNACLK  PULPIT. 

Father  ?    Wilt  thou  still  lay  on  a  heavy  hand,  and  not  giye  me  a 
smile  from  thy  countenance  ?"    I  held  the  Lord  to  thai.     I  talked  to 
him  as  Luther  would  have  done,  and  pleaded  his  Fatherhood  in  right 
down  earnest.     "  Like  as  a  father  pitieth  his  children,  even  so  the  Lord 
piticth  them  that  fear  him."    If  he  be  a  Father,  let  him  show  himself  a 
Father — so  I  pleaded,  and  I  ventured  to  say,  when  I  was  quiet,  and 
they  came  back  who  watched  me :  ''I  shall  never  have  snch  pain  again 
from  this  moment,  for  God  has  heard  my  prayer."     I  bless  God  that 
ease  came  and  the  racking  pain  never  returned.    Faith  mastered  the 
pain  by  laying  hold  upon  God  in  his  own  revealed  character,  that 
character  in  which  in  our  darkest  hour  we  are  best  able  to  appreciate 
him.    I  think  that  is  why  that  prayer,  **  Our  Father  which  art  in 
heaven,"  is  given  to  us,  because,  when  we  are  lowest,  we  can  still  say, 
**  Our  Father,"  and  when  it  is  very  dark,  and  we  are  very  weak,  onr 
childlike  appeal  can  go  up,  "  Father,  help  me  I     Father  rescue  me ! " 
He  teacheth  us  still  to  go,  taking  us  by  the  arms,  because  he  is  oar 
parent  still.    If  any  one  fears  God  may  leave  him,  let  him  enqnire 
whether  a  mother  can  forget  her  sucking  child,  that  she  should  not  We 
compassion  on  the  son  of  her  womb,  for  even  if  it  be  so,  God  will  not 
forget  his  people.    He  has  graven  you  upon  the  palms  of  his  hands. 
There  is  a  relationship  between  you  and  him  so  familiar  that  it  ne?(f 
can  be  forgotten,  so  firm  that  it  can  never  be  dissolved.    Be  of  good 
confidence ;  he  will  teach  you  to  go,  till  you  shall  run  without  weariness, 
and  walk  without  fainting.    I  would  that  all  here  had  committed  them- 
selves to  this  good  Father*s  hand ;  I  pray  that  they  may  do  so.    Tiie 
Holy  Spirit  grant  it,  for  whosoever  believeth  in  the  Lora  Jesns  Cbrist 
shall  be  saved.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  Read  Before  Sermon. — HoseazL 


Some  of  our  sermon  readers  may  not  be  aware  that  Mb,  Spubgbon  iBsues  a 
monthly  magazine,  price  3d.  entitled,  The  Sword  and  the  Trowel  It  is  full  of 
interesting  matter,  and  commands  a  large  circulation.  The  volume  for  1871 
will  be  ready  a  few  days  afler  the  First  of  December.  Early  orders  for  next 
year  arc  requested.     Messrs.  Passmore  and  Alabaster  are  the  jPublishers. 


Pl^trirpltten  §>ixhrmt\t 


'^  'if, 


SLEEP  NOT. 


gl   ^nmon 


DELIVSRED  BY 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT     THS     HBTROPOLITAN     TABBRNACLR,     NEWINOTON. 


*'  Let  m  not  sleep,  as  do  others.** — 1.  Thessalonians  t.   6. 

We  do  not  usually  sleep  towards  the  things  of  this  world.  We  rise  np 
early,  and  sit  np  late,  and  eat  the  bread  of  carefnlness,  for  Mammon's 
take.  In  this  age  of  competition,  most  men  are  wide  enough  awake 
for  their  temporal  interests ;  but,  so  is  it,  partly  through  our  being 
in  this  body,  and  partly  through  our  dwelling  in  a  sinful  world,  that 
we  are  all  of  us  very  apt  to  sleep  concerning  the  interests  of  our  souls. 
We  drive  like  Jehu  for  this  present  world,  but  loiter  for  the  world  to 
come.  Nothing  so  much  concerns  us  as  eternity,  and  yet  nothing  so 
little  affects  us.  We  work  for  the  present  world,  and  we  play  with  the 
world  to  come.  Qaaint  old  Quarles  long  ago  likened  us  to  roebucks 
as  to  earth,  and  snails  as  to  heaven ;  and  then  he  oddly  enough  rebuked 
this  fault  in  rugged  verse : — 

**  Lord,  when  we  leave  the  world  and  come  to  thee, 

How  dull,  how  slug,  are  we  I 
How  backward !     How  preposterous  is  the  motion 

Of  our  ungain  devotion  ! 
Our  thoughts  are  millstones,  and  our  souls  are  lead, 

And  our  desires  are  dead : 
Our  vows  are  fairly  promis*d,  fiiintly  paid, 

Or  broken,  or  not  made. 

Is  the  road  fair,  we  loiter ;  clogged  with  mire. 

We  stick  or  else  retire  ; 
A  lamb  appears  a  lion,  and  we  fear 

Eacn  bush  we  see^s  a  bear. 
When  our  dull  souls  direct  our  thoughts  to  thee. 

As  slow  as  snails  are  we ; 
But  at  the  earth  we  dart  our  wing'd  desire. 

We  bum — we  bum  liki  fire  T' 

No.  1,022. 


650  METllOPOLITAX   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

A  piece  of  news  about  a  lire  ia  another  continent  makes  a  sensa- 
tion in  all  our  homes,  but  the  fire  that  never  ahall  be  qoenched  is 
heard  of  almost  without  emotion.  The  discovery  of  a  gold-field  will 
affect  half  the  markets  in  the  world,  and  send  a  thrill  through  tte 
public  pulse ;  but  when  we  speak  of  that  blessed  city  where  the  streeti 
are  of  gold,  how  coolly  men  take  it  all,  regarding  it  as  though  it  were 
a  pretty  fiction,  and  us  if  only  the  things  which  are  seen  were  worthj 
of  their  notice. 

We  sleep  when  heavenly  things  and  eternal  things  are  bef(»«  lu. 
Alas !  that  it  should  be  so.  Even  those  choice  spirits  which  have 
been  awakened  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  not  only  awakened  into  life; 
but  aroused  into  ardour,  nave  to  complain  that  their  fervour  vcfj 
frequently  is  chilleil.  I  was  recommended  to  try  a  pillow  of  hops  to 
obtain  sleep  during  my  late  illness,  but  I  find  now  that  I  want  a  wakiog 
pillow  rather  than  a  sleeping  pillow ;  and  I  am  of  the  same  mind 
as  that  ancient  saint  who  preferi*ed  a  roaring  devil  to  a  sleepy  deriL 
How  earnest,  how  diligent,  how  watchful,  how  heayenly  ought  we 
to  be,  but  iiow  much  are  we  the  reverse  of  all  this.  When  m 
this  respect  we  would  do  good,  evil  is  present  with  us.  We  would 
have  our  hearts  like  a  furnace  for  Christ,  and,  behold,  the  coals 
refuse  to  burn.  We  would  be  living  pillars  of  light  and  fire,  bat 
we  rather  resemble  smoke  and  mist.  Alas !  alas !  alas  I  that  when 
we  would  mount  highest,  our  winirs  are  clipped,  and  when  we  woold 
serve  God  best,  the  evil  heart  of  unbelief  mars  the  labour.  I  knew 
it  would  be  seasonable — I  hoped  it  might  be  profitable  if  I  sptke  a 
little  to  you  to-night,  and  to  myself  in  so  doing,  concerning  the  need 
that  there  is,  that  we  shake  ourselves  from  slumber,  and  leave  the 
slugj;:ard*s  couch. 

I  intend  to  take  the  text  in  reference  first  to  those  who  are  ham  a§<m 
from  the  dead,  and  secondly,  in  reference  to  ihc$B  who  are  siiB  m  Uib 
terrible  slumber  of  their  sin ;  and  I  shall  gather  my  illustrations  to-night 
from  no  remote  region,  but  from  the  self-same  Word  of  God,  from 
which  I  take  the  text.  The  text  says,  '^  Let  us  not  sleep,  as  do  others." 
We  will  mention  some  "others,"  whose  histories  are  recorded  in 
Scripture,  who  have  slept  to  their  own  injury,  and  I  pray  you  let 
them  be  warnings  to  you. 

I.  First,  to  those  of  you  who  are  the  people  of  ood,  let  me  say, 
"  Let  us  not  sleep,  as  do  others." 

1.  First,  let  us  not  sleep  as  those  disciples  did  who  wmi  with  their  Lord 
to  the  garden,  and  fell  a  slumbering  while  he  was  agonising.  Let  ns 
not  be  as  the  eight  who  slept  at  a  distance,  nor  as  the  highly -favoured 
three,  who  were  admitted  into  the  more  secret  chamber  of  our  Lord's 
woes,  and  were  allowed  to  tread  the  precincts  of  the  most  holy  place 
where  he  poured  out  his  soul,  and  sweat  as  it  were  great  drops  of  biood. 
He  found  them  sleepincr,  and  though  he  awakened  them,  they  slq^ 
again  and  again.  "  What,  could  ye  not  watch  with  me  one  hour?"  was 
his  gentle  expostulation.  They  were  slumbering  for  sorrow.  Though 
our  Lord  might  in  our  case  make  an  excuse  for  us  as  he  did  for  thent — 
'*  The  spirit  truly  is  willing,  but  the  flesh  is  weak," — ^let  us  endeavour 
by  his  grace  not  to  need  such  an  apology,  by  avoiding  their  feulL 
''Let  us  not  sleep,  as  do  others."    But,  beloved  fellow  OhpsiianSy  are 


BLEEP  NOT.  651 

)t  the  most  of  US  sleeping  as  the  apostles  did  ?  Behold  oar  Master's 
al  for  the  salvation  of  the  sons  of  men  !  Throughout  all  his  life,  he 
emed  to  have  no  rest.  From  the  moment  when  his  ministry  began 
3  was  ever  toiling,  labouring,  denying  himself.  It  was  his  meat  and 
s  drink  to  do  the  will  of  him  that  sent  him.  Truly  he  might  have 
ken  for  his  life's  motto, — "  Wist  ye  not  that  I  must  be  about  my 
ather's  business  ?"  So  intent  was  he  on  saving  souls,  that  lie  counted 
)t  his  life  dear  unto  him.  He  would  lay  it  down,  and  that  amidst 
rcumstances  of  the  greatest  pain  and  ignominy ;  anything  and  every- 
iing  would  he  do  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost.  Zeal  for 
s  chosen  church,  which  was  God's  house,  had  eaten  him  up:  for  his 
K)ple's  sakes  he  could  bear  all  the  reproaches  of  them  that  reproached 
od,  and  though  that  reproach  broke  his  heart,  yet  still  he  persevered 
id  ceased  not  till  salvation's  work  was  done.  He  was  incessant  in  toil 
id  suffering,  but,  what  are  we  ? 

There  is  our  Lord,  our  great  Exemplar,  before  us  now.    Behold  him 

Oethsemane  !  imagination  readily  sees  him  amid  the  olives.  I  might 
y,  that  his  whole  life  was  pictured  in  that  agony  in  the  garden,  for 

a  certain  sense  it  was  all  an  agony.  It  was  all  a  sweating,  not  such 
i  distils  from  those  who  purchase  the  staff  of  life  by  the  sweat  of  their 
oe,  but  such  as  he  must  feel  who  purchased  life  itself  with  the  agony 

his  heart.  The  Saviour,  as  I  see  him  throughout  the  whole  of  his 
inistry,  appears  to  me  on  his  knees  pleading,  and  before  his  God 
ionising — laying  out  his  life  for  the  sons  of  men.  But,  brethren,  do 
speak  harshly  when  I  say  that  the  disciples  asleep  are  a  fit  emblem 
'  our  usual  life  ?  As  compared  or  rather  contrasted  with  our  Master, 
fear  it  is  so.  Where  is  our  zeal  for  God  ?  Where  is  our  compassion 
r  men  ?  Do  we  ever  feel  the  weight  of  souls  as  we  ouejht  to  feel  it? 
o  we  ever  melt  in  the  presence  of  the  terrors  of  God  which  we  know 
•  be  coming  upon  others  ?  Have  we  realised  the  passing  away  of  an 
imorLal  spirit  to  the  judgment  bar  of  God  ?  Have  we  felt  pangs  and 
roes  of  sympathy  when  we  have  remembered  that  multitudes  of 
ir  fellow  creatures  have  received,  as  their  eternal  sentence,  the  words 
-**  Depart  ye  cursed  into  everlasting  fire  in  hell,  prepared  for  the  devil 
id  his  angels?"  Why,  if  these  thoughts  really  possessed  us,  we 
lould  scarce  sleep ;  if  they  became  as  real  to  us  as  they  were  to  him, 
e  should  wrestle  with  God  for  souls  as  he  did,  and  become  willing  to 
y  down  our  lives,  if  by  any  means  we  might  save  some.  I  see  by  the 
e  of  faith,  at  this  moment,  Jesus  pleading  at  the  mercy-seat.  *^  For 
ion's  sake,"  he  saith,  "  I  will  not  hold  my  peace,  and  for  Jerusalem's 
ke  I  will  not  rest ;"  and  yet,  we  around  him  lie  asleep,  without  self- 
jnying  activity,  and  almost  without  prayer,  missing  opportunities,  or, 
hen  opportunities  for  doing  good  have  been  seized,  using  them  with 
it  a  Slothful  hand,  and  doing  the  work  of  the  Lord,  if  not  deceitfully, 
it  most  sluggishly.  Bicthren,  "let  us  not  sleep,  as  do  others."  If  it 
i  true  that  the  Christian  Church  is  to  a  great  extent  asleep,  the  more 
ason  why  we  should  be  awake  ;  and,  if  it  be  true,  as  I  fear  it  is,  that 
3  have  ourselves  slumbered  and  slept,  the  more  reason  now  that  we 
ould  arise  and  trim  our  lamps,  and  go  forth  to  meet  the  Bridegroom. 
it  us  from  this  moment  begin  to  serve  our  Master  and  his  church 
are  nearly  after  the  example  which  he  himself  has  set  us  in  his 


652.  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT, 

consecrated  life  and  blessed  death.    Let  ns  not  deep  theiii  as  did  the 
disciples  at  Gethsemane. 

**  O  thou,  who  in  the  gardenia  shade, 
Didst  wake  thy  weary  ones  again. 
Who  slumbered  at  that  fearful  hour, 
Forgetful  of  thy  pain ; 

Bend  o*er  us  now,  as  over  them, 

And  set  our  sleep-bound  spirits  free  ; 
N(»r  leave  us  slumbering  in  the  watch 

Our  souls  should  keep  with  thee  !** 

2.  A  second  pictnre  we  select  from  that  portion  of  the  inspired  page 
which  tells  us  of  Samson.  Let  as  not  sleep,  as  that  ancient  Hebrev 
hero  did,  who,  while  he  slept,  lost  his  locks,  lost  hia  strength,  by- 
and-by  lost  his  liberty,  lost  his  eyes,  and  ultimately  lost  his  life.  I 
have  spoken  under  the  first  head  of  our  slumbering  in  respect  to  others; 
but,  here,  I  come  to  ourselves.  In  our  slumbering  with  respect  to 
ourselves,  Samson  is  the  sad  picture  of  many  professors.  We  are  about 
to  sketch  a  portrait  of  one  whom  we  knew  in  years  gone  by.  He  was 
"  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  his  might."  Years  ago,  the 
man  we  picture— and  it  is  no  fancy  portrait,  for  we  have  seen  many 
such — when  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  him,  did  mighty  thingB, 
and  we  looked  on  and  wondered,  yea,  we  envied  him,  and  we  said, 
'^  Would  God  we  had  an  hour  of  such  strength  as  has  fallen  npon  him." 
He  was  the  leader  among  the  weak,  and  often  infused  courage  into 
faint  hearts ;  but  where  is  he  now  ?  All  our  Israel  knew  him,  for  his 
name  was  a  tower  of  strength ;  and  our  enemies  knew  him  too,  for  he 
was  a  valiant  man  in  battle.  "\Vhere  is  this  hero  now  ?  We  hear  little 
of  him  now  in  the  fields  of  service  where  once  he  glorified  his  God 
and  smote  the  enemies  of  Israel ;  we  do  not  meet  him  now  at  the  prayer- 
meeting,  or  in  the  Sunday-school,  or  at  the  evangelist  station.  We 
hear  nothing  of  his  seeking  for  souls.  Surely,  he  has  gone  to  sleefk 
He  thinks  that  he  has  much  spiritual  goods  laid  up  for  many  yean, 
and  he  is  now  taking  his  rest.  He  has  had  his  share,  he  says,  of  labonr, 
and  the  time  has  come  now  for  him  to  take  a  little  ease.  It  is  our  loss 
«nd  his  peril  that  he  has  allowed  himself  to  fall  into  such  a  drowsy 
condition.    0  that  we  could  bestir  him  ! 

•*  Break  his  bonds  of  sleep  asunder — 
House  him  with  a  peal  of  thunder.** 

Alas !  carnal  security  is  a  Delilah  always.  It  gives  us  many  a  dainty 
kiss,  and  lulls  us  into  tranquil  slumbers  which  we  imagine  to  be  God's 
own  peace,  whereas  the  peace  of  fascination  and  of  satanic  enchant- 
ment is  upon  us.  Yes,  we  have  seen  the  good  man :  we  coald  not 
doubt  that  he  had  been  both  good  and  great:  yet  we  hare  seen 
him  lying  asleep.  And,  perhaps,  some  of  us  who  hare  never  been  so 
distinguished  or  done  so  much,  though,  nevertheless,  in  our  own  small 
way  we  have  done  something  for  God,  and  yet  we  too  lie  in  Delilah's  lap. 
Blessed  be  his  name  who  has  not  sufiTered  ns  to  lead  quite  a  nseless 
life  ;  but  possibly  we  are  degenerating  and  getting  now  to  take  things 
more  easily  than  we  did.  In  our  fancied  wisdom,  we  half  rebuke  what 
wo  call  our  "juvenile  zeal."    AVe  are  prudent  now  and  wise;  would 


SLEEP  NOT.  658 

God  we  were  not  prttdenfc  and  not  wise,  and  were  as  foolish  as  we  used 
to  be  when  we  loved  our  Ood  with  zeal  so  great,  that  nothing  was  hard 
and  nothing  was  difficult,  if  we  were  called  upon  to  do  it  for  his  name's 
sake.  Now,  what  do  I  see  in  Samson  while  he  lies  asleep  in  Delilah's 
lap.  I  see  peril  of  the  deadliest  sort.  The  Philistines  are  not  asleep. 
When  the  good  man  slumbers  and  ceases  to  watch,  Satan  does  not 
slnmber,  and  temptations  do  not  cease  to  waylay  him.  There  are  the 
Philistines  looking  on,  while  you  see  the  razor  softly  stealing  over  the 
champion's  head.  Those  locks,  bushy  and  black  as  a  raven,  fall  thickly 
on  the  ground ;  one  by  one  the  razor  shears  them  all  away  till  the 
Nazarite  has  lost  the  hair  of  his  consecration.  I  am  terribly  fearful 
lest  this  should  happen  to  ourselves.  Our  strength  lies  in  our  faith. 
That  is  our  Samsonian  lock.  Take  that  away,  and  we  are  as  weak  as 
other  men,  ay,  and  weaker  still;  for  Samson  was  weaker  than  the 
weakest  when  his  hair  was  gone,  though  aforetime  stronger  than  the 
strongest.  Bj  degrees,  it  may  be,  Satan  is  stealing  away  all  our  spiritual 
strength.  Oh !  if  it  be  my  case,  I  shall  come  up  into  this  pulpit  and  I 
shall  preach  to  you,  and  shake  myself,  as  I  have  done  aforetime,  and 
perhaps  expect  to  see  sinners  saved,  but  there  will  be  none.  And,  pos- 
sibly, some  of  you  also,  when  you  awake  a  little,  will  go  forth  to  preach 
in  the  streets  or  to  seek  after  men's  souls  as  you  have  done  before, 
but,  alas,  you  will  find  the  Philistines  will  bind  you,  and  that  your 
strength  has  passed  away  while  you  slept ;  your  glory  has  gone — gone 
amidst  the  deluding  dreams  which  lulled  you — gone  not  to  come  back 
except  with  bitterest  grief,  with  eyes,  perhaps,  put  out  for  ever.  Many 
backsliders  will  die  thanking  God,  if  ever  their  strength  returns  to  them, 
and  perhaps  it  never  may  till  their  dying  hour.  Oh,  brethren  !  warned  by 
what  has  happened,  not  to  Samson  only,  but  to  many  of  the  Lord's 
greatest  champions,  '*  Let  us  not  sleep,  as  do  others." 

3.  Now  we  change  the  picture  again.  It  is  the  same  subject  under 
other  forms.  You  remember  our  Saviour's  parable  concerning  the  tares 
and  the  wheat.  There  was  an  enclosure  which  was  reserved  for  wheat  only, 
but,  while  men  slept,  the  enemy  came  and  sowed  tares  among  the  good 
corn.  Now,  you  who  are  members  of  the  Church  of  Christ  need  not 
that  I  should  enter  into  a  full  explanation  of  the  parable;  neither  is 
this  the  time,  but  it  will  suffice  to  say  that  when  false  doctrines  and 
unholy  practices  have  crept  into  a  church,  the  secret  cause  of  the 
mischief  has  usually  been  that  the  church  itself  was  asleep.  Those  who 
ought  to  have  been  watchmen,  and  to  have  guarded  the  field,  slept,  and 
80  the  enemy  had  ample  time  to  enter  and  scatter  tares  among  the  wheat. 

Now,  my  last  illustration  spoke  to  you  of  your  own  dangers,  this  ought 
to  appeal  to  you  with  equal  force,  because  it  concerns  dangers  incident  to 
that  which  is  dearest  to  you,  I  hope,  of  anything  upon  earth,  namely, 
the  church  of  the  living  God.  An  unwatchful  church  will  soon  become 
an  unholy  church.  A  church  which  does  not  carefully  guard  the  truth 
as  it  is  in  Jesus,  will  become  an  unsound  church,  and,  consequently,  a 
degenerate  church.  It  will  grieve  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  cause  him  to 
remove  his  power  from  the  ministry  and  his  presence  from  the  ordi- 
nances. It  will  open  the  door  for  Satan,  and  he  is  quite  sure  to  avail 
himself  of  every  opportunity  of  doing  mischief.  I  believe  that  the 
ouly  way  after  all  in  any  church,  to  purge  out  heresy  in  it,  is  by  having 


654  METROPOLITAH  TABIRKAOLB  PULPIT. 

more  of  the  inner  life  ;  bj  this  fire  in  Zion  shall  the  chaff  be  bnraed 
up.  When  the  constitution  of  a  man  is  thonmghly  aoand,  it  throws  out 
many  of  those  diseases  which  otherwise  would  hare  lingered  in  his  mton; 
and  good  physicians  sometimes  do  not  attempt  to  touch  the  local  duetM, 
but  they  do  their  best  to  strengthen  the  general  oonstitatioiiy  and  when 
that  is  right,  then  the  cure  is  wrought.  So,  here  and  there,  there  may 
be  a  defalcation  in  the  one  point — ^that  of  doctrine,  or  in  the  other^ 
as  to  an  affair  of  practice;  and  so  it  may  be  neceaaarj  to  deal  with  the 
disordered  limb  of  doctrine,  or  you  may  have  to  cut  out  the  canoer  of 
an  evil  custom;  but,  as  a  rule,  the  main  cure  of  a  church  comes  by 
strengthening  its  inner  life.  When  we  lire  near  to  Jesna,  when  we 
drink  from  the  fountain-head  of  eternal  truth  and  poritj,  when  we 
become  personally  true  and  pure,  then  our  watchfulness  is,  under  God, 
our  safeguard,  and  heresy,  false  doctrine,  and  unclean  prefession  are 
kept  far  away.  Sleeping  guards  invite  the  enemy.  He  who  leares  his 
door  unlocked  asks  the  thief  to  enter.  Watchfulness  is  always  profit- 
able, and  slothfnlness  is  always  dangerous. 

Members  of  this  church,  I  speak  to  you  in  particular,  and  forget 
for  the  moment  that  any  others  are  present.  We  have  enjoyed  Uiese 
many  years  the  abiding  dew  of  God's  Spirit,  shall  we  lose  it  ?  God 
has  been  in  our  midst,  and  thousands  of  souls,  ay,  tens  of  tiionsandi 
of  souls  have  been  brought  to  Jesus,  and  Ood  has  nerer  taken  awaj 
his  hand,  but  it  has  been  stretched  out  still;  shall  we  by  sinfiil 
slumber  sin  away  this  blessing  ?  I  am  jealous  over  yon  with  a  holj 
jealousy.  Trembling  has  taken  hold  on  me,  lest  ye  lose  your  fint 
love.  *'  Hold  fast,"  0  church,  '*  that  which  thou  hast  received,  that 
no  mnn  take  thy  crown."  Our  sins  will  grieve  the  Spirit ;  our  sleepi- 
ness will  vex  the  Holy  One  of  Israel.  Unless  we  wake  up  to 
more  earnest  praycrfulness  and  to  closer  fellowship  with  Christ, 
it  may  be  we  shall  hear  the  sound  such  as  Josephus  tells  as 
was  observed  at  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  when  there  was  heard 
the  rustling  of  wings  and  the  voice  that  said  **  Let  us  go  hence." 
0  Lord,  though  our  sins  deserve  that  thou  shouldst  forsake  us,  yet 
turn  not  away  from  us,  for  thy  mercy  sake !  Tarry,  Jehovah,  for 
the  sake  of  the  precious  blood  !  Tarry  with  us  stiU  !  Depart  not 
from  us.  We  deserve  that  thou  shouldst  withdraw,  but,  oh  !  forsake 
not  the  people  whom  thou  hast  chosen  I  By  all  the  love  thou  host 
manifested  towards  us,  continue  thy  lovingkindness  to  thine  un- 
worthy servants  still.  Is  not  that  your  prayer,  you  that  love  the 
Church  of  God  ?  I  know  it  is,  not  for  this  chur^  only,  but  for  all 
others  where  the  power  and  presence  of  God  have  been  felt.  Pray 
continually  for  the  church,  but  remember  this  is  the  practical  exhor- 
tation arising  out  of  it  all — "  Let  us  not  sleep,  as  do  others,"  lest  in  our 
case  too,  the  enemy  come  and  mar  the  harvest  of  our  Master  by  sowing 
tares  among  the  wheat. 

4.  Only  one  other  picture,  and  a  very  solemn  one,  still  addressing 
myself  to  God's  people.  We  are  told  that  while  the  bridegroom  tarried, 
the  virf/i/is  who  had  gone  out  to  meet  him  slumbered  and  slept 
0  virgin  hearts  !  **  Let  us  not  sleep,  as  do  others."  When  fiie 
cry  was  heard  — "  Behold,  the  bridegroom  cometh,"  they  ware  all 
slumbering,  wise  and  foolish  alike.    O  ye  wise  virgins  who  have  oil  in 


BLBHP  NOT.  655 

your  yessels  with  your  lamps,  '^  sleep  not,  as  do  others,"  lest  the 
midnight  cry  come  npon  yon  unawares.  The  Lord  Jesus  may  come  in  the 
night.  He  may  come  in  the  heavens  with  exceeding  great  power  and 
glory,  before  the  rising  of  another  sun  ;  or,  he  may  tarry  awhile,  and 
yet  though  it  should  seem  to  us  to  be  long,  he  will  come  quickly,  for  one 
day  is  with  the  Lord  as  a  thousand  years,  and  a  thousand  years  as  one 
day.  Suppose,  howeyer,  he  were  to  come  to-night ;  if  now,  instead  of 
gomg  along  to  your  homes  and  seeing  once  more  the  streets  busy  with 
traffic,  the  sign  of  the  Son  of  Man  should  be  revealed  in  the  air, 
because  the  king  had  come  in  his  glory,  and  his  holy  angels  with  him, 
would  you  be  ready  ?  I  jwess  home  the  question.  The  Lord  may 
suddenly  come  ;  are  you  ready  ?  Are  you  ready  ?  Ton  who  profess  to 
be  his  saints — are  your  loins  gu*t  up,  and  your  lamps  trimmed  ?  Could 
you  go  in  with  him  to  the  supper,  as  gueste  who  have  long  expected  him, 
and  say,  "  Welcome,  Welcome  Son  of  God  ?"  Have  you  not  much  to 
set  in  order  ?  are  there  not  still  many  things  undone  ?  Would  you  not 
be  afraid  to  hear  the  midnight  cry  ?  Happy  are  those  souls  who  live 
habitually  with  Jesus,  who  have  given  themselves  up  completely  to  the 
power  of  his  indwelling  Spirit — who  follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  he 
goeth.  "  They  shall  walk  with  him  in  white  for  they  are  worthy." 
Wise  are  they  who  live  habitually  beneath  the  influence  of  the 
Second  Advent,  looking  for  and  hasting  unto  the  coming  of  the  Son 
of  God.  We  would  have  our  window  opened  towards  Jerusalem ; 
we  would  sit  as  upon  our  watch-tower  whole  nights ;  we  would  be 
ready  girt  to  go  out  of  this  Egypt  at  a  moment's  warning.  We 
would  be  of  that  host  of  Ood  who  shall  go  out  harnessed,  in  the 
time  appointed,  when  the  signal  is  given.  God  grant  us  grace  to  be 
found  in  that  number  in  the  day  of  his  appearing;  but,  "Let  us  not 
Bleep,  as  do  others."  I  might  say,  let  us  not  sleep  as  we  have  done 
ourselves.    God  forgive  us  and  arouse  us  from  this  good  hour. 

I  feel  as  if  I  did  not  want  to  go  on  to  the  second  part  of  my  subject 
at  all,  but  were  quite  content  to  stand  here  and  speak  to  you  who  love 
the  Lord.  Brethren  and  sisters,  we  must  have  an  awakening  among  us. 
I  feel  within  my  soul  that  I  must  be  awakened  myself,  and  my  own  neces- 
sities are,  I  believe,  a  very  accurate  gauge  of  what  is  wanted  by  the  most 
of  you.  Shall  our  season  of  triumph,  our  march  of  victory,  come  to 
an  end  ?  Will  you  turn  back  after  all  that  God  has  done  for  you  ? 
Will  you  limit  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  ?  Will  you  cease  from  the 
importunities  of  prayer?     Will  you  pause  in  the  labours  of  zeal?   Will 

?^ou  bring  dishonour  upon  Christ  and  upon  his  cross  ?  By  the 
iving  God  who  sleepeth  not,  neither  is  weary  in  his  deeds  of  love,  I 
beseech  you,  slumber  not,  and  be  not  weary  nor  faint  in  your  mind. 
<*  Be  ye  steadfast,  immovable,  always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the 
Lord." 

IL  But  I  must  pass  on  to  the  second  part  of  our  subject.  I  have 
now  to  speak  to  those  op  tou  who  are  not  conveetkd  ;  and  if  I  felt 
as  I  ought  to  feel,  it  would  be  sorrowful  work  even  to  remember  that 
any  of  you  are  yet  unsaved.  I  like  to  see  these  little  children  here. 
I  pray  God  they  may  grow  up  to  fear  and  love  him,  and  that  their 
young  hearts  may  be  given  to  our  dear  Lord  and  Master  while  they  are 
yet  boys  and  girls.    But  I  overlook  them  just  now,  and  speak  to  some 


650  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACJLB  PULPIT, 

of  jon  who  hare  had  many  years  of  intelligent  hearing  of  the  word,  and 
are  still  unsaved.  Pitiable  objects!  Yon  do  not  think  so;  bail 
repeat  the  word,  Pitiable  objects!  The  tears  which  flood  my  eyei 
almost  prevent  my  seeing  you.  You  fancy  you  are  very  merry  and 
happy,  but  yon  are  to  be  pitied,  for  ''  the  wrath  of  Qod  abideth  on 
you."  '*He  that  belie veth  not  is  condemned  already,  because  be 
hath  not  believed  on  the  Son  of  God."  You  will  soon  be  where  no 
pity  can  help  you,  and  where  the  Lord  himself  will  not  help  you.  May 
Ood  give  you  ears  to  hear  the  words  of  affectionate  warning  which  I 
address  to  you  now !    "  Let  us  not  sleep,  as  do  others." 

I  beg  you  not  to  sleep,  as  did  Jonah.  He  was  in  the  Tessel,  yoa 
remember,  when  it  was  tossed  with  the  tempest,  and  all  the  rest  in  the 
vessel  were  praying,  but  Jonah  was  asleep.  Every  man  called  upon 
his  God  except  the  man  who  had  caused  the  storm.  He  was  the  most 
in  danger,  but  he  was  the  most  careless.  The  ship-master  and  mate, 
and  crew,  all  prayed,  every  man  to  his  god,  but  Jonah  carelesslv  slept 
on.     Now,  do  you  not  some  of  you  here  live  in  houses  where  they  all 

Sray  but  you  ?  You  have  a  godly  mother,  but  are  yourself  godless, 
ohn,  you  have  a  Christian  father,  and  brothers  and  sisters,  too^ 
whom  Christ  has  looked  upon  in  love,  and  they  pray  for  you  con- 
tinually. But  the  strange  thing  is,  that  your  soul  is  the  only  one  in 
the  house  which  remains  unblest,  and  yet  you  are  the  only  one  who 
feels  no  anxiety  or  fear  about  the  matter.  There  are  many  of 
us  in  this  house  who  can  honestly  say  that  we  would  give  anything  we 
have,  if  we  could  save  your  souls.  We  do  not  know  what  we  wonld 
not  do,  but  we  know  we  would  do  all  in  our  power,  if  we  could  bat 
reach  your  consciences  and  your  hearts.  I  stand  often  in  this  pulpit 
almost  wishing  that  I  had  never  been  bom,  because  of  the  burden  and 
distress  it  brings  upon  my  soul  to  think  of  some  of  you  who  will  die 
and  be  lost  for  ever.  Lost,  though  you  love  to  listen  to  the  preacher ! 
Lost,  though  you  sometimes  resolve  to  be  saved !  We  are  praying 
for  you  daily,  but  you, —  you  are  asleep!  What  do  yon,  while 
we  are  preaching  but  criticise  our  words,  ns  if  we  discoursed  to  you  ass 
piece  of  display,  and  did  not  mean  to  plead  as  for  life  and  death  with 
you,  that  you  would  escape  from  the  wrath  to  come.  Observations  will 
be  made  by  the  frivolous  among  you  during  the  most  solemn  word8» 
about  some-one*s  dress  or  personal  appearance.  Yain^  minds  will  be 
gadding  upon  the  mountains  of  folly,  while  those,  who  are  not,  by  far, 
so  immediately  concerned,  are  troubled  and  have  deep  searchings  of 
heart  about  those  very  souls.  I  believe  God  is  going  to  send  a  re?ival 
into  this  place  ;  I  have  that  conviction  growing  upon  me,  but  it  may 
be  that  though  the  gracious  wave  may  sweep  over  the  congregation, 
it  will  miss  you.  It  has  missed  you  up  to  this  hour.  Around  yoa  all 
the  floor  is  wet,  but  you,  like  Gideon's  fleece,  are  dry,  and  you  sleep 
though  the  blessing  comes  nob  upon  you, — sleep  though  sleep  involves 
a  certain  and  approaching  curse.  0  slumbering  Jonah,  in  the  name 
of  the  Most  Hicfh,  I  would  say  to  thee,  '*  Awake  thou  that  steepest,  and 
call  upon  thy  God.  Peradventurc,  he  shall  deliver  thee,  and  this  great 
tempest  shall  yet  be  stayed."  Yea,  I  wonld  put  it  above  a  perad- 
vcnture,  for  they  that  seek  the  Lord  shall  And  him,  if  they  seek  him  with 
full  purpose  of  heart. 


vJ 


SLEEP  NOT.  657 

Let  ns  change  the  illnstration  now,  and  take  another.  Yon  remember 
Solomon's  sluggard.  What  did  he  ?  It  was  morning,  and  the  sun  was 
up ;  aj,  the  dawning  of  the  day  had  passed  some  hours,  and  he  had 
not  yet  gone  forth  to  labour.  There  was  a  knock  at  his  door,  and  he 
opened  his  eyes  a  little  ;  he  listened  and  he  said,  **  Leave  ine  alone." 
"  But  will  you  never  get  up  ?"  **  Yes,  I  will  be  up  soon ;  but  I  want  a 
little  more  sleep — only  a  little."  Then  came  another  knock,  for  his 
master  would  have  him  in  the  field  at  work  ;  but  he  turned  over  again, 
and  he  grumbled  within  himself,  and  said,  '*  A  little  more  slumber."  He 
slept  hour  after  hour.  Yes,  but  he  did  not  mean  to  sleep  hours;  all  he 
intended  was  to  sleep  five  minutes ;  but  minutes  fly  rapidly  to  men 
who  dream.  If  at  the  first  onset  be  had  known  that  if  he  fell  asleep  he 
would  slumber  till  noon,  he  would  have  been  shocked  at  such  abomi- 
nable laziness.  But  what  harm  could  it  be  just  to  turn  over  once  more  ? 
Who  would  deny  him  another  wink  or  two?  Surely  there  can  be  no 
fault  found  with  one  more  delicious  doze  ?  Now,  there  are  in  this  con- 
gregation persons  who  have  said  to  themselves  many  times,  ''That  appeal 
is  right.  My  conscience  gives  assent  to  that  gospel  demand,  it  shall  bo 
attended  to  very  soon.  I  must,  however,  enjoy  a  little  pleasure  first — 
not  much.  I  ao  not  mean  to  risk  my  soul  another  twelve  months, 
but  we  will  stay  till  next  Sunday  ;  then  I  shall  have  got  over  certain 
engagements  which  now  stand  in  my  way."  Well,  sirs,  you  know, 
some  of  you,  that  it  has  been  Sabbath  after  Sabbath,  and  then  it 
has  grown  to  be  year  after  year  ;  and  still  you  are  saying  a  little  more 
sleep  and  a  little  more  slumber.  I  met  one  the  other  day  :  I  do'  not  see 
him  here  to-night,  but  I  generally  see  him  on  the  Sabbath.  I  think 
he  beard  the  first  sermon  I  preached  in  London  ;  that  is  many  years 
ago  now.  And  that  man  loves  me :  I  know  he  does  ;  and  I  can  say  I 
love  him ;  but  if  he  dies  as  he  is,  he  is  a  lost  man.  He  knows  it.  He 
has  told  me  so,  and  he  has  said,  "  Pray  forme."  But,  oh  I  what  is  the 
benefit  of  my  praying  for  him  if  he  never  prays  for  himself?  It  is 
grievous  to  know  that  many  of  you  are  in  the  same  dreadful  way  of 
procrastinating  and  putting  off.  You  would  do  anything  to  help  the 
church,  too;  and  if  you  knew  that  I  needed  anything  you  would  be 
among  the  first  to  do  it  for  me,  such  is  your  kindness.  You  are  kind 
to  your  minister,  but  you  are  cruel  to  your  souls.  You  have  held  your 
80ul  over  hell's*  mouth  for  these  twenty  years  by  your  continual  delays 
and  indecisions.  Yet  you  never  meant  it.  No,  you  thought  long  ago  that 
you  would  have  given  your  hearts  to  Christ.  One  of  these  days  I  shall  have 
to  bury  you,  and  it  will  be  with  no  hope  of  your  future  happiness,  for  it  has 
always  been, ''  A  little  more  sleep,  and  a  little  more  slumoer,  and  a  little 
more  folding  of  the  hands,"  till  your  "  poverty  shall  come  upon  you  as  one 
that  travelleth,  and  your  want  like  an  armed  man."  Alas  !  it  shall  be 
eternal  poverty,  and  the  armed  man  shall  be  the  arch-destroyer  from 
whom  none  can  escape !  0  young  man  and  young  woman,  do  not 
procrastinate.  Delay  is  the  devil's  great  net,  and  it  is  filled  with  ex- 
ceeding great  fishes ;  yet  doth  not  the  net  break.  Oh  that  you  could 
break  through  it.  May  God  help  you  to  do  it,  for  to  you  I  would  say, 
"  Let  us  not,"  in  this  respect,  "  sleep,  as  do  othei-s." 

Again,  the  picture  changes.  Do  you  remember  the  story  in  the 
Acts  of  the  Apostles  of  the  young  man  who  sat  in  the  third  loft  while 


658  METBOPOLITAK  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Paul  was  preaching  ?  It  could  not  have  been  a  dull  sermon,  I  sboidd 
think;  but  Paul  preached  till  midnight.  That  was  rather  long.  Yoa 
do  not  allow  me  such  liberal  time.  And  when  Paul  preached  on,  Eutychoi 
went  to  sleep,  until  he  fell  from  the  third  loft,  and  was  taken  up  dead. 
It  is  true  that  Paul  prayed,  and  he  was  restored  to  life  by  miracle; 
but  I  have  known  many  a  Eutychus  fall  dead  under  the  word,  bathe 
was  never  known  to  live  again.  I  do  not  mean  that  I  haye  known 
many  go  to  sleep  in  the  house  of  God,  and  fall  from  the  third  loft;  but 
this,  that  they  have  heard  the  word,  and  heard  the  word,  till  they  ha?e 
been  preached  into  sleep  of  the  deepest  kind,  and  at  last  preached  into 
hell.  If  we  by  our  preaching  do  not  wake  you,  we  rock  your  eradtes, 
and  make  you  more  insensible  every  time  we  warn  yoa.  The  most 
startling  preaching  in  a  certain  time  ceases  to  arouse  the  hearers.  Ton 
know  the  great  boiler  factories  over  here  in  Southwark.  I  am  told  that 
when  a  man  goes  inside  the  boiler  to  hold  the  hammer,  when  they  are 
fixing  rivets,  the  sound  of  the  copper  deafens  him  so  that  he  cannot  beir 
it,  it  is  so  horrible;  but,  after  he  has  been  a  certain  number  of  months  in 
that  employment,  he  hardly  notices  the  hammering :  he  does  not  careabont 
it.  It  is  just  so  under  the  word.  People  go  to  sleep  under  that  which 
once  was  like  a  thunderbolt  to  them.  As  the  blacksmith's  dog  will  lie 
under  the  anvil,  where  the  sparks  fly  into  his  face,  and  yet  go  to  sleep, 
so  will  many  sinners  sleep  while  the  sparks  of  damnation  fly  into  their 
faces.  Horrible  that  it  should  be  so.  It  would  need  an  earthquake  and 
a  hurricane  to  move  some  of  you  stolid  ones.  I  wish  they  would 
come  if  they  would  stir  you;  but  even  such  terrors  would  be  of  no 
avail,  only  the  trumpet  which  will  arouse  the  dead  will  ever  awaken 
you.  Oh,  dear  hearers,  remember  that  to  perish  under  the  gospel 
ministry  is  to  perish  with  a  vengeance.  If  I  must  be  l©st,  let  it 
be  as  a  Zulu  Kaffir,  or  as  a  Red  Indian,  who  has  never  listened 
to  the  truth ;  but  it  is  dreadful  to  go  down  to  the  pit  with  this 
as  an  aggravation :  "  You  knew  your  duty,  but  you  did  it  not ;  you 
heard  the  warning,  but  you  would  not  receive  it ;  the  medicine  was 
put  to  your  lip,  but  you  preferred  to  be  diseased;  the  bread  was 
placed  before  jou,  and  the  living  water,  bat  you  would  not  take  them. 
Your  blood  be  on  your  own  heads."  Oh,  may  this  never  be  said  of  any 
of  us  !  May  we  never  sleep  under  the  w^ord  as  do  others,  lest  we  die  in  our 
sins ;  and,  as  I  told  you  the  other  Sunday  night,  I  think  that  is  one  of 
the  most  dreadful  words  in  the  Bible  where  Christ  said  twice,  one  time 
after  another — '*  If  ye  believe  not  that  I  am  he,  ye  shall  die  m  your 
sins,''  To  die  on  a  dunghill,  or  in  a  ditch,  or  on  the  rack,  or  on  the 
gallows,  is  nothing  compared  with  this — to  die  in  your  sins  I  to  die  in 
your  sins  !  And  yet  this  will  be  your  lot  if  yon  continue  mach  longer  to 
sleep,  as  do  others. 

Another  picture  ;  not  to  detain  you  too  long.  Do  you  remember  in 
David's  life  when  he  went  with  one  of  his  mighty  men  at  night  into 
SauTs  camp,  and  found  the  king  and  his  guards  all  asleep  ?  There  were 
certain  men  of  war  who  ought  to  have  watched  at  Saul's  bed  head  te  take 
care  of  their  master  who  lay  in  the  trench,  but  no  one  was  awake  at  all; 
and  David  and  his  friend  went  all  among  the  sleepers,  treading  gently  and 
softly  lest  they  should  wake  one  of  them ;  till,  by-and-by,  they  came  to 
the  centre  of  the  circle  where  lay  the  king,  with  a  crose  of  water  at  hii 


SLBEP  NOT.  659 

bolster,  and  his  spear  stnck  in  the  groand.  Little  did  he  know  as  he  slept 
so  calmly  thero  that  Abishai  was  saying  to  David  :  "  Let  me  strike  him ; 
it  shall  be  bnt  this  once."  How  easily  that  strong  hand  with  that  sharp 
javelin  would  have  pinned  the  king  to  the  ground.  One  only  stroke, 
and  it  would  be  done,  and  David's  enemy  would  pursue  him  no  more 
for  ever.  Methinks  I  see  you,  0  ye  sleeping  sinners,  lying  in  the  same 
imminent  peril.  At  this  moment  the  evil  one  is  saying :  '*  Let  me  smite 
him ;  I  will  smite  him  but  this  once ;  let  me  prevent  his  hearing  the 
gospel  this  night ;  let  me  thrust  the  javelin  of  unbelief  into  his  soul 
but  this  once ;  and  then  the  harvest  will  be  past,  the  summer  will  be 
ended,  and  he  will  not  be  saved."  Slumbering  sinner,  I  would  fain  shout 
as  the  thunder  of  God,  if  thereby  I  could  arouse  you.  Man,  the  knife 
is  at  your  throat,  and  can  you  sleep  ?  The  spear  is  ready  to  smite  you, 
and  will  you  still  doat  and  dream?  I  think  I  see  the  angel  of  justice 
who  has  long  been  pursuing  the  sinner  who  is  rejecting  Christ,  and  he 
cries:  "Let  me  smite  him  I  he  has  had  time  enough;  let  me  smite 
him  !**  Or,  as  Christ  puts  it  in  the  parable,  there  has  come  one  into  the 
vineyard  who  has  looked  at  you,  the  barren  tree,  and  seen  no  fruit ;  and 
he  has  come  these  three  years,  and  now  he  is  saying  :  "  Cut  it  down  ! 
why  cumbereth  it  the  ground?'*  0  mercy,  stay  the  axel  0  God,  bid 
the  enemy  put  by  the  spear,  and  let  the  sleeper  wake,  not  in  hell,  bub 
still  on  mercy's  plains,  where  there  is  a  Christ  to  forgive  him  and  a 
Spirit  to  sanctify  him  !  Imploringly,  I,  your  brother,  beseech  you  to- 
night to  turn  unto  the  living  God.  Even  now  in  this  your  day,  attend 
to  the  things  which  make  for  your  peace : — 

•*  To-dav,  a  pardoning  God 

Will  hear  the  suppliant  pray  ; 
To-day,  a  Saviour's  cleansing  blood 
Will  wash  thy  guilt  away. 

But,  grace  so  dearly  bought 

If  yet  thou  wilt  despise, 
Thy  fearful  doom  with  vengeance  fraught, 

Will  fill  thee  with  surprise." 

The  last  picture  is  this  (may  it  never  be  seen  in  you) — there  went 
once  into  a  tent,  which  he  thought  to  be  friendly,  a  mighty  man  who 
had  fought  a  battle  and  lost  the  day.  Hot  of  foot  and  full  of  fear, 
Sisera  came  into  the  tent  of  Jael  to  ask  for  water,  and  she  gave  him 
milk ;  she  brought  forth  butter  in  a  lordly  dish.  He  drank,  and  then, 
all  weary,  he  threw  himself  along  in  the  tent.  He  is  a  photograph  of 
many  ungodly  men  who  have  gone  where  they  thought  they  bad  friends; 
for  sinners  think  sinners  their  friends,  and  think  sin  their  friend,  and 
they  have  asked  for  pleasure,  and  they  have  had  it ;  and,  now,  after 
having  had  their  fill,  and  eaten  butter  in  a  lordly  dish,  they  are  to- 
night in  contentment,  sleeping  in  supposed  security.  They  have  gone 
into  the  house  of  the  evil  one  to  find  pleasure,  and  they  are  going  there 
again  to-night,  and  they  will  continue  there,  and  try  to  find  rest  in  the 
hoQse  of  their  enemies.  Sometimes  it  is  the  house  of  the  strange 
woman,  often  the  settle  of  the  drunkard,  or  the  chair  of  the  scorner, 
where  men  think  to  rest  in  peace.  Oh,  hark  thee,  man,  and  beware ! 
Fly  the  ways    of  the  destroyer:     fly   the    haunt  of  the    strange 


660  METBOPOLTTAH  TABEBVAGLE  PULPIT. 

woman,    fly  as  for  thy  very  life   every  den  of   sin;    for,    lo!  diB 

Cometh  stealthily,  the  tent  pin  is  in  her  left  hand,  and  in  her  right 

ihand  the  workman's  hammer.      Many  mighty  has    she  slain  afore- 

^time,  for  she  hunts  for  the  precious  life,  and  her  chambers  lead  down 

tto  death.     If  thou  sleepest  on  but  another  night,  or  even  another 

!hour,   the  destroyer  may  have  done  the  deed,  and   thou   mayst  be 

fastened  to  the  earth  for  ever,   the  victim    of   thine  own  delasioM. 

.  I  may  be  in  error,   but  I  think  I  speak  to  some  man  to-night  who 

must  now  immediately  change   his  ways,  or  else  the  jaws  of  hell 

will  close  upon  him.    I  do  not  desire  to  speak  my  own  words,  or  my 

own  thouirhts,  but  to  speak  as  the  divine  wind  blows  through  my  seal; 

and  I  think   I  am  warning  some  one  to-night  of  whom,  if  he  tura 

lUot,  it  will  soon  be  written,  as  of  another  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs, 

"  He  goeth  after  her  straightway,  as  an  ox  goeth  to  the  slaughter,  or 

I  as  a  fool  to  the   correction  of  the  stocks;  till  a  dart  strike  through 

his  liver  ;  as  a  bird  hasteth  to  the  snare,  and  knoweth  not  that  it  is 

for  his  life."     In  the  name  of  the  Ever  Blessed  and  Most  Merciful, 

"  turn  thee !  sinner,  turn  thee  !     Why  wilt  thou  die  ?"     Thy  course 

is  destruction,  and  is  near  its  end.     Awake  I     Why   deepest   thou? 

Sleep  to  others  is  dangerous  ;  to  iJiM  it  is  damnable.    Awake,  arise, 

or    be  for  ever   ruined.      May  God's  grace  bestir  thee!      Some  of 

you   to-night  are  like  Lot  and  his  daughters  in  the  burning  city. 

You   must  flee ;  you   must  flee  at  once  out  of  Sodom,  or  you  will 

perish  in  it.      Behold,  we  would  put  our  hand  upon  yon  to-night, 

and   press   you   to    flee,  the    Lord    being   merciful  unto  you.  .His 

servants  and  his  Spirit  constrain  you  to  make   haste.   Linger  not; 

look  not  back  ;  hesitate  not.     To  your  knees  !  to  your  knees  !  "  Seek 

ye  the  Lord  while  he  may  be  fonnd ;  call  ye  upon  him  while  he  is  near." 

To  the  cross  I  to  the  cross  !    There  is  your  shelter,  the  mountain  where 

the  only  refuge  can  be  found  from  the  vengeance  of  God.     Behold  the 

wounds  of  Jesus,  God's  beloved  Son  given  for  the  guilty,  slaughtered 

for  the  sinful — 

"  There  is  life  in  a  look  at  the  crucified  One ; 
There  is  life  at  this  moment  for  thee  !" — 

and  for  all  who  look.  But  it  may  be  that  if  this  night  ye  look  not  to  Jesus,. 
his  cross  may  never  appear  before  your  eyes  again,  for  they  will  be  sealed 
in  death.  Ere  long,  Jael's  tent- pin  shall  have  passed  through  Sisera's, 
skull ;  the  sin  shall  have  destroyed  the  sinner :  the  sin  that  is  unto 
death  shall  have  shut  up  the  spirit  in  despair.  Oh,  may  God,  who  ifl 
mighty  to  save,  turn  you  to  himself  at  this  moment. 

'*  Sound  the  trumpet  in  Zion  :  sound  an  alarm  in  my  holy  monntaio," 
seems  to  ring  in  my  ears  ;  and  I  would  fain  sound  that  alarm  to  God's 
saints,  and  to  sinners  too.  May  he  call  many  by  his  grace,  and  awaken 
us  all ;  and  his  shall  be  the  glory  for  ever  and  ever !    Amen. 


PoRTiox  OF  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — 1  Tbessaloniansv. 


^jir«plitan  ^nhmuk  iuljit. 


PRAISES  AND  YOWS  ACCEPTED  IN  ZION. 


^  ^m\m\ 


DELIVEBED  BY 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT     THE     METROPOLITAN     TABERNAOLE,     NBWINOTON.    ^ 


"  Praise  waiteth  for  thee,  O  God,  in  Sion  :   and  unto  thee  shall  the  vow  be  per- 
formed.  O  thou  that  hearest  prayer,  unto  thee  shall  all  flesh  come.'*-7Psa1m  Ixv.  1,  2. 

Upon  Zion  there  was  erected  an  altar  dedicated  to  God  for  the  offering 
of  sacrifices.  Except  when  prophets  were  commanded  by  God  to  break 
through  the  rule,  burnt  offering  was  only  to  be  offered  there.  The 
worship  of  God  upon  the  high  places  was  contrary  to  the  divine 
command :  "  Take  need  to  thyself  that  thou  offer  not  thy  burnt  offerings 
in  every  place  that  thou  see?t :  but  in  the  place  which  the  Lord  shall 
choose  in  one  of  thy  tribes,  there  thou  shah  offer  thy  burnt  offerings, 
and  there  thou  shalt  do  all  that  I  command  thee.'*  Hence  the  tribes 
on  the  other  side  of  Jordan,  when  they  erected  a  memorial  altar,  dis- 
claimed all  intention  of  using  it  for  the  purpose  of  sacrifice,  and  said 
most  plainly,  "  God  forbid  that  we  should  rebel  against  the  Lord,  and 
torn  this  aay  from  following  the  Lord,  to  build  an  altar  for  burnt 
offerings,  for  meat  offerings,  or  for  sacrifices,  beside  the  altar  of  the 
Lord  our  God  that  is  before  his  tabernacle." 

In  fulfilment  of  this  ancient  type,  we  also  "  have  an  altar  whereof  they 
have  no  right  to  eat  that  serve  the  tabernacle."  Into  our  spiritual 
worship,  no  observers  of  materialistic  ritualism  may  intrude;  they  have 
no  right  to  eat  at  our  spiritual  altar,  and  there  is  no  other  at  which 
they  can  eat  and  live  for  ever.  There  is  but  one  altar— Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord.  All  other  altars  are  impostures  and  idolatrous  inventions. 
Whether  of  stone,  or  wood,  or  brass,  they  are  the  toys  with  which  those 
amuse  themselves  who  have  returned  to  the  beggarly  elements  of  Ju- 
daism, or  else  the  apparatus  with  which  clerical  jugglers  dupe  the  sons 
and  daughters  of  men.  Holy  places  made  with  hands  are  now  abolished ; 
they  were  once  the  figures  of  the  true,  but  now  that  the  substance  has 
come,  the  type  is  done  away  with.  The  all-glorious  person  of  the  Re- 
deemer, God  and  Man,  is  the  great  centre  of  Zion's  temple,  and  the 
only  real  altar  of  sacrifice.  He  is  the  church's  head,  tne  church's 
No.  1,028. 


662  METIIOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

heart,  the  charch*8  albar,  priest,  and  all  in  all.  ''  To  him  diaU  the 
jjathering  of  the  people  be."  Around  him  we  all  congregate  CFen  as 
the  tribes  around  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord  in  the  wilderness. 

AVlien  the  church  is  feathered  together,  we  may  liken  it  to  the 
assemblies  upon  Blount  Zion,  whither  the  trihes  go  up,  even  the  tribes 
of  tlie  Lord,  unto  the  testimony  of  Israel.  There  the  song  went  np^not 
so  much  from  each  separate  worshipper  as  from  all  combined;  there 
the  praise  as  it  rose  to  heaven  was  not  only  the  praise  of  each  one, 
but  the  praise  of  all.  So  where  Christ  is  the  centre,  where  his  one 
sacrifice  is  the  altar  whereon  all  offerings  are  laid;  and  where  the 
church  unites  around  that  common  centre,  and  rejoices  in  that  one 
sacrifice,  there  is  the  true  Zion.  If  we  this  evening — ^gathering  in 
Clirist's  name,  around  his  one  finished  sacrifice,  present  our  prayers  and 
praises  entirely  to  the  Lord  through  Jesus  Christ,  we  are  "  come  unto 
Mount  Zion,  and  unto  the  city  of  the  liviug  God,  the  heavenly  Jcro- 
salem,  and  to  an  innumerable  company  of  angels,  to  the  general  assembly 
and  church  of  the  firstborn,  whose  names  arc  written  in  heaven."  Thii 
is  Zion,  even  this  house  in  the  far-off  islands  of  the  Gentiles,  and  we 
can  say  indeed  and  of  a  truth,  "  Praise  waiteth  for  thee,  0  God,  in 
Zion  ;  nnd  unto  thee  shall  the  vow  be  jKjrformed." 

We  shall,  with  devout  attention,  notice  two  things:  the  first  a 
our  holy  worshij),  which  we  desire  to  render ;  and  then  the  encourage- 
ment, the  stimidalivc  encouragement,  which  God  provides  for  us:  "0  thou 
that  liearest  prayer,  unto  thee  shall  all  flesh  come." 

I.  First,  let  ns  consider  the  holy  offering  of  worship  which  we 
DESIRE  to  riiESEXT  TO  GoD.  It  is  twofold  :  there  is  praise,  and  there 
is  also  a  vow,  a  praise  that  waiteth,  and  a  vow  of  which  performance  is 
promised. 

Let  us  think,  first  of  all,  of  the  praise.  This  is  the  chief  ingredient 
of  the  adoration  of  heaven;  and  what  is  thought  to  be  worthy  of  the 
world  of  f^lory,  ought  to  be  the  main  |)ortion  of  the  worship  of  earth. 
Although  wc  tihall  never  cease  to  pray  as  long  as  we  live  here  beloir, 
and  are  surrounded  by  so  many  wants,  yet  we  should  never  so  pray  as 
to  forget  to  praise.  "  Thy  kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be  done  on  earth, 
as  it  is  heaven,*'  must  never  be  lefc  out  because  we  are  pressed  with 
want,  nnd  therefore  hasten  to  cry,  **  Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread.** 
It  will  be  a  sad  hour  when  the  worship  of  the  church  shall  be  only  a 
solemn  wail.  Notes  of  exultauD  thanksgiving  should  ever  ascend  from 
her  solemn  gatherinfrs.  "Praise  the  Lord,  0  Jerusalem;  praise  thy 
God,  0  Zion.'*  **  Praise  ye  the  Lord.  Sing  unto  the  Lord  a  new  song, 
and  his  j)raise  in  the  congrc<^ation  of  saints.  Let  Israel  rejoice  in  him 
that  made  him  :  let  the  children  of  Zion  be  joyful  in  their  King."  Lefc 
it  abide  as  a  peri^etual  ordinance,  while  sun  and  moon  endure,  "  Praise 
waitelh  for  thee,  0  God,  in  Zion."  Never  think  little  of  praise,  since 
holy  angels  and  saints  made  perfect  count  it  their  life-long  joy,  and 
even  the  Lord  himself  saith,  *'  Whoso  offereth  praise,  glorifieth  me.*' 
The  tendency,  I  fear,  among  us  has  been  to  undervalue  praise  as  a  part 
of  public  worship,  whereas  it  should  be  second  to  notning.  We  fre- 
(luently  hear  of  prayer-meetings,  and  but  seldom  of  praise-meetings.  We 
acknowledge  the  duty  of  prayer  by  setting  apart  certain  times  for  it; 
we  do  not  always  so  acknowledge  the  duty  of  praise.     I  hear  of  "  &milj 


PBAHUBB  AND  VOWB  AOCSPTED  IN  ZIOV.  663 

prayer;"  do  I  always  hear  of  "  family  praise  ?"  I  know  you  cultivate 
private  prayer :  are  you  as  diligent  also  in  private  thanksgiving  and 
secret  aaoration  of  the  Lord  ?  In  everything  we  are  to  give  thanks  j; 
it  is  as  much  an  apostolic  precept  as  that  other,  **  In  everything,  by 
prayer  and  supplication,  malce  your  requests  known  unto  God."  I  have\ 
often  said  to  you,  dear  brethren,  that  prayer  and  praise  are  like  the 
breathing  in  and  out  of  the  air,  and  make  up  that  spiritnal  respiration 
by  which  the  inner  life  is  instrumentally  supported.  We  take  in  an  in- 
spiration of  heavenly  air  as  we  pray :  we  breathe  it  out  again  in  praise 
unto  God,  from  whom  it  came ;  if,  then,  we  would  be  healthy  in  spirit, 
let  US  be  abundant  in  thanksgiving.  Prayer,  like  the  root  of  a  tree, 
seeks  for  and  finds  nutriment ;  praise,  like  the  fruit,  renders  a  revenue 
to  the  owner  of  the  vineyard.  Prayer  is  for  ourselves,  praise  is  for  God ; 
let  us  never  be  so  selfish  as  to  abound  in  the  one  and  fail  in  the  other. 
Praise  is  a  slender  return  for  the  boundless  favours  we  enjoy ;  let  us 
not  be  slack  in  rendering  it  in  our  best  music,  the  music  of  a  devout 
soul.  "Praise  the  Lord ;  for  the  Lord  is  good:  sing  praises  unto  his 
name ;  for  it  is  pleasant." 

Let  us  notice  the  praise  which  is  mentioned  in  our  text,  which  is  to 
be  so  large  a  matter  of  concern  to  the  Zion  of  God  whenever  the  saints 
are  met  together. 

Ton  will  observe,  first,  that  it  is  praise  exclusively  rendered  to  Ood. 
**  Praise  waiteth  for  thee,  0  God,  in  Zion."    "  Praise  for  thee,  and  all  the 
praise  for  thee,"  and  no  praise  for  man  or  for  any  other  who  may  be 
thought  to  be,  or  may  pretend  to  be,  worthy  of  praise.    Have  I  not 
sometimes  gone  into  places  called  houses  of  God  where  the  praise 
has  waited  for  a  woman — for  the  Virgin,  where  praise  has  waited  for 
the  saints,  where  incense  has  smoked  to  heaven,  and  songs  and  prayers 
have    been    sent  up  to  deceased  mar^rs  and  confessors  who  are 
supposed  to  have  power  with  God  ?    In  Kome  it  is  so,  but  in  Zion  it  is 
not  so.     Praise  waiteth  for  thee,  0  Mary,  in  Babylon;  but  praise 
waiteth  for  thee,  0  God,  in  Zion.    Unto  God,  and  unto  God  alone,  the 
praise  of  his  true  church  must  ascend.     If  Protestants  are  free  from 
this  deadly  error,  I  fear  they  are  guilty  of  another,  for  in  our  worship 
Bve  too  often  minister  unto  our  own  selves.    We  do  so  when  we  make 
ihe  tune  and  manner  of  the  song  to  be  more  important  than  the  matter 
Df  it.     I  am  afraid  that  where  organs,  choirs,  and  singing  men  and 
singing  women  are  left  to  do  the  praise  of  the  congregation,  men's 
minrls  are  more  occupied  with  the  due  performance  of  the  music,  than 
tvith  the  Lord,  who  alone  is  to  be  praised.      God's  house  is  meant  to 
3e  sacred  unto  himself,  but  too  often  it  is  made  an  opera-house,  and 
ZJhristinns  form  an  audience,  not  an  adoring  assembly.    The  same  thing 
nay,  unless  great  care  be  taken,  happen  amid  the  simplest*  worship, 
5ven  th(»u<j;h  everything  which  does  not  savour  of  gospel  plainness  is 
jxcluded,  for  in  that  case  we  may  drowsily  drawl  out  the  words  and 
lotes,  with  no  heart  whatever.    To  sing  with  the  soul,  this  only  is 
;o  offer  acceptable  song  1      We  come  not  together  to  amuse  ourselves, 
o  display  our  powers  of  melody,  or  our  aptness  in  creating  harmony; 
ve  come  to  pay  our  adoration  at  the  footstool  of  the  Great  King,  to 
vhom  alone  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever.    True  praise  is  for  God — for 
)od  alone. 


()G4  HETItOFOLITAN  TABEEKACLE  PULPIT. 

Brethren,  yon  must  take  heed  lest  the  minister,  who  would,  aboTe 
all)  disclaim  a  share  of  praise,  should  be  set  up  as  a  demi-god  among  joa. 
Refute  practically  the  old  slander  that  presbyter  is  only  priest  writ  large 
Look  higher  than  the  pulpit,  or  you  will  be  disappointed.  Look  far 
above  an  arm  of  flesh,  or  it  will  utterly  fail  you.  We  may  say  of  the  bea 
preacher  upon  the  earth,  "Give  God  the  praise,  for  we  know  thattbis 
man  is  a  sinner."  If  we  thouprht  that  yon  paid  superstitions  rever^ioe 
to  us,  we  would,  like  Paul  and  Silas  at  Lystra,  rend  onr  clothes,  and 
cry,  "  Sirs,  why  do  ye  these  things  ?  We  also  are  men  of  like  passions 
with  you,  and  preach  unto  yon  that  ye  should  turn  from  these  Yanities 
unto  the  living  God,  which  made  heaven,  and  earth,  and  the  sea.  and 
all  things  that  are  therein."  It  is  not  to  any  man,  to  any  priest,  to 
any  order  of  men,  to  any  being  in  heaven  or  earth  beside  God,  that  ve 
should  bum  the  incense  of  worship.  We  would  as  soon  worship  cats 
with  the  Egyptians,  as  popes  with  the  Romanists :  we  see  no  dilfer^ce 
between  the  people  whose  gods  grew  in  their  gardens  and  the  sect  whose 
deity  is  made  by  their  baker.  Such  vile  idolatry  is  to  be  loathed.  To 
God  alone  shall  all  the  praise  of  Zion  ascend. 

It  is  to  be  feared  that  some  of  our  praise  ascends  nowhere  at  all,  bnt 
it  is  as  though  it  were  scattered  to  the  winds.  We  do  not  always  r^ise 
God,  Now,  **  he  that  comcth  to  God  must  believe  that  he  is,  and  that  he 
is  the  rewnrder  of  them  that  diligently  seek  him;"  this  is  as  true  of 
praise  as  of  prayer.  **  God  is  a  Spirit,''  and  they  that  praise  him  must 
praise  him  "  in  spirit  and  in  truth,"  for  **  the  Father  seeketh  such"  to 
praise  him,  and  only  such ;  and,  if  we  do  not  lift  onr  eyes  and  our  hearts 
to  him,  we  are  but  misusing  words  and  wasting  time.  Our  praise  is 
not  as  it  should  be,  if  it  be  not  reverently  and  earnestly  directed  to  the 
Lord  of  Hosts.  Vain  is  it  to  shoot  arrows  without  a  target:  we  most 
aim  at  God's  glory  in  our  holy  songs,  and  that  exclusively. 

Note,  next,  that  it  should  be  continual,  "  Praise  taaiieth  for  thee,  0 
God,  in  Zion."  Some  translators  conceive  that  the  main  idea  is  that  of 
continuance.  It  remains  ;  it  abides ;  for  Zion  does  not  break  np  wheu 
the  assembly  is  gone.  We  do  not  leave  the  holiness  in  the  material 
house,  for  it  never  was  in  the  stone  and  the  timbery  bnt  only  in  the 
living  assembly  of  the  faithful. 

"  Jesus,  where'er  thy  people  meet, 
There  they  behold  thy  mercy-seat ; 
Where'er  they  seek  thee,  thou  art  found. 
And  every  place  is  hallow'd  ground. 

For  thou  within  no  walls  confined, 
Inhabitest  the  humble  mind ; 
SucV  ever  bring  thee  where  they  come, 
And  going,  take  thee  to  their  home." 

The  people  of  God,  as  they  never  cease  to  be  a  church,  should  maintain 
the  Lord's  praise  perpetually  as  a  community.  Their  assemblies  should 
begin  with  praise  and  end  with  praise,  and  ever  be  conducted  in  a  spirit  of 
praise.  There  should  be  in  all  our  solemn  assemblies  a  spiritual  incense- 
altar,  always  smoking  with  "  the  pure  incense  of  sweet  spices,  mingled 
according  to  the  art  of  the  apothecary"  :  the  thanksgiving  which  is  midfi 
up  of  humility,  gratitude,  love,  consecration,  and  holy  joy  in  the  Lord. 


ij 


PRAISES  AND  VOWS  ACCEPTED  IN  ZION.  6fi5 

It  should  be  for  the  Lord  alone,  and  it  should  never  go  out  day  nor 
night.  **  His  mercy  endnreth  for  ever :"  let  our  praises  endure  for  ever. 
He  makes  the  outgoings  of  the  morning  to  rejoice,  let  us  celebrate  tlie 
rising  of  the  sun  with  holy  psalm  and  hymn.  He  makes  the  closing 
in  of  the  evening  to  be  glad,  let  him  have  our  vesper  praise.  "  One 
genenition  shall  praise  thy  works  to  another,  and  shall  declare  thy  mighty 
acts."  Could  his  mercy  cease,  there  might  be  some  excuse  for  staying 
our  praises :  but,  even  should  it  seem  to  be  so,  men  who  love  the  Lord 
would  say  with  Job,  "  Shall  we  receive  good  at  the  hand  of  tlie  Lord, 
and  shall  we  not  also  receive  evil  ?  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath 
taken  away ;  and  blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord."  Let  our  praise 
abide,  continue,  remain,  and  be  perpetual.  It  was  a  good  idea  of 
Bishop  Farrar,  that,  in  his  own  house,  he  would  keep  up  continual 
praise  to  God  ;  and  as,  with  a  large  family  and  household,  he  numbered 
just  twenty- four,  he  set  apart  each  one  for  an  hour  in  the  day  to  be 
engaged  specially  in  prayer  and  praise,  that  he  might  girdle  the  day 
with  a  circle  of  worship.  We  could  not  do  that.  To  attempt  it 
might  on  our  part  be  superstition;  but  to  fall  asleep  blessing  God, 
to  rise  in  the  night  to  meditate  on  him,  and  when  we  wake  in  the  morn- 
ing to  feel  our  hearts  leap  in  the  prospect  of  his  presence  during  the  day, 
this  is  attainable,  and  we  ought  to  reach  it.  It  is  much  to  be  desired 
that  all  day  long,  in  every  avocation,  and  every  recreation,  the  soul  should 
roontaneously  pour  forth  praise,  even  as  birds  sing,  and  flowers  perfume 
the  air,  and  sunbeams  cheer  the  earth.  We  would  be  incarnate  psalmody, 
praise  enshrined  in  flesh  and  blood.  From  this  delightful  duty  we 
would  desire  no  cessation,  and  ask  no  pause.  "  Praise  waits  for  thee, 
O  God,  in  Zion;"  thy  praise  may  come  and  go,  from  the  outside  world, 
where  all  things  ebb  and  flow,  for  it  lies  beneath  the  moon,  and  there 
is  no  stability  in  it;  but  amidst  thy  people,  who  dwell  in  thee,  and 
who  possess  eternal  life — in  them  thy  praise  perpetually  abides. 

A  third  point,  however,  is  clear  upon  the  surface  of  the  words. 
"  Praise  waiteth  for  thee  " — as  though  praise  must  ahvays  he  humble. 
The  servants  "wait  '*  in  the  king's  palace.   There  the  messengers  stand 
girt  for  any  mission ;    the  servitors  wait,  prepared  to  obey ;  and  the 
courtiers  surround  the  throne,  all  eager  to  receive  the  royal  smile  and  to 
fulfil  the  high  command.    Our  praises  ought  to  stand,  like  ranks  of  mes- 
sengers, waiting  to  hear  what  God's  will  is;  for  this  is  to  praise  him, 
Furthermore,  true  praise  lies  in  the  actual  doing  of  the  divine  will, 
even  this, — to  pause  in  sacred  reverence  until  God  the  Lord  shall  speak, 
whatever  that  will  may  be ;  it  is  true  praise  to  wait  subserviently  on 
him*    Praises  may  be  looked  upon  as  servants  who  delight  to  obey 
their  master's  bidding.    There  is  such  a  thing  as  an  unholy  familiarity 
with  God;  this  age  is  not  so  likely  to  fall  into  it  as  some  ages  have  been, 
for  there  is  little  familiarity  with  God  of  any  sort  now ;  public  worship 
becomes  more  formal,  and  stately,  and  distant.   The  intense  nearness  to 
God  which  Luther  enjoyed — how  seldom  do  we  meet  with  it  I   But,  how- 
ever near  we  come  to  God,  still  he  is  Qod,  and  we  are  his  creatures.    He  is, 
it  is  true,  "  our  Father,"  but  be  it  ever  remembered  that  he  is  "  our 
Father  which  art  in  heaven."    **  Our  Father'^ — therefore  near  and  in- 
timate :  "  our  Father  m  heavm^'*  therefore  we  humbly,  solemnly  bow 
in  his  presence.    There  is  a  familiarity  that  runs  into  piesumption : 


666  ICETBOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  FULPIT. 

there  is  another  familiarity,  which  is  so  Rweetl?  tempered  with  humiHty 
that  it  doth  not  intrude.  **  Praise  waiteth  for  thee  "  with  a  serrant'g 
liverv  on,  a  servant's  ear  to  hear,  and  a  servant's  heart  to  obey.  Praifie 
bows  at  thy  foot-stool,  feeling  that  it  is  still  an  unprofitable  servant 

Hnt,  pcrhai)s,  you  are  aware,  dear  friends,  that  there  are  other 
translations  of  this  verse.  *'  Praise  waiteth  for  thee,"  may  be  read, 
"  Prais^e  is  silent  unto  thee " — "  is  pilent  before  thee."  One  of  the 
oldest  Latin  commentators  reads  it,  *^  Praise  and  silence  belong  aato 
thee;"  and  Dr.  (iill  tells  us,  that  in  the  Kin^  of  Spain's  Bible,  itraos, 
**  The  praise  of  ancrels  is  only  sil-nce  before  thee,  O  Jehovah,"  so  that 
when  we  do  our  best  our  highest  praise  is  hut  silence  before  God,  and 
we  must  praise  him  wifh  conjession  of  shortcomings.  Oh,  Uiat  we  too, 
as  our  poet  puts  it,  might, 

^  Loud  OS  his  thunders  speak  his  pmise. 
And  sound  it  lufty  as  his  throne!'* 

But  wc  cannot  do  that,  and  when  our  notes  are  most  uplifted,  and  oar 
hearts  roost  joyous,  we  have  not  spoken  all  his  praise.  Goni}>ared  to  what 
his  nature  and  glory  deserve,  our  most  earnest  praise  has  been  little 
more  than  silence.  Oh,  brethren,  have  you  not  often  felt  it  to  be  so  ? 
Those  who  arc  satisfied  with  formal  worship,  think  that  they  have 
done  well  when  the  mnsic  has  been  correctly  sung;  bat  those  who 
worship  God  in  spirit,  feel  that  they  cannot  magnify  him  enough. 
They  blush  over  the  hymns  they  sing,  and  retire  from  the  assembly  of 
the  saints  mourning  that  they  have  fallen  far  short  of  his  gloiy.  0 
for  an  enlarged  mind,  rightly  to  conceive  the  divine  majesty;  next 
for  the  gift  of  utterance  to  clothe  the  thought  in  fitting  language: 
and  then  for  a  voice  like  many  waters,  to  sound  forth  the  noble  strain. 
Ahis  !  as  yet,  we  arc  humbled  at  our  failures  to  praise  the  Lord  as  ve 
would. 

**  Words  arc  but  nir,  and  tongues  but  clay, 
And  his  compassions  are  divine ; 

How,  then,  shall  we  proclaim  to  men  God*8  glory?  "When  wehaTc 
done  our  best,  our  praise  is  but  silence  before  the  merit  of  his  good- 
ness, and  the  grandeur  of  his  greatness. 

Yet  it  may  be  well  to  observe  here,  that  the  praise  which  God  accepts, 
presents  itself  tuuler  a  variety  of  fonns.  There  is  praise  for  God  in 
Zion,  and  it  is  often  spoken ;  but  there  is  often  praise  for  God  in  Zion, 
and  it  is  tilencc.  There  are  some  who  cannot  sing  vocally,  but  perhaps, 
before  (iod,  they  sinjr  best.  There  are  some,  I  know,  who  sing  very 
harshly  and  inharmoniously — that  is  to  say,  to  our  cars ;  and  yet  God 
may  accept  them  rather  than  the  noise  of  stringed  instruments  care- 
fully touched.  There  is  a  story  told  of  Rowland  Hill's  being  much 
troubled  by  a  good  old  lady  who  would  sit  near  him  and  sing 
with  a  most  horrible  voice,  and  very  loudly — as  those  people  generally  4) 
who  sing  badly — and  he  at  last  begged  her  not  to  sing  so  loudly.  Bat 
wht-n  she  said,  "  It  comes  from  my  lieart,"  the  honest  man  of  God 
retracted  his  rebuke,  and  said,  **  Sing  away,  I  should  be  sorry  to  stop 
you."  When  praise  comes  from  the  heart,  who  would  wish  to  restrain 
it.     Even  the  shouts  of  the  old  Methodists,  their  "hallelujahs"  and 


PRAIfiBB  AND  VOWB  ACCEPTED   IN  ZION.  66V 

"  glorys,"  when  uttered  in  fervour,  were  not  to  be  forbidden  ;  lor  if 
these  fihonld  hold  their  peace,  even  the  stones  would  cry  out.  Bat 
there  are  times  when  those  who  sing,  and  sing  well,  have  too  much 
praise  in  their  soul  for  it  to  enclose  itself  in  worJs.  Like  some  strong 
liquors  which  cannot  use  a  little  vent,  but  foam  nnd  swell  until  they  burst 
each  hoop  that  binds  the  barrel;  so,  sometimes,  we  want  a  larger 
channel  for  our  sool  than  that  of  month  and  tongue,  and  we  long  to 
have  all  our  nerves  and  sinews  made  into  harpstrings,  and  all 
the  pores  of  our  body  made  mouths  of  thankfulness.  Oh,  that  we 
coula  praise  with  our  whole  nature,  not  one  single  hair  of  our  heads, 
or  drop  of  blood  in  our  veins,  keeping  back  from  adoring  the  Most 
High !  When  this  desire  for  praise  is  most  vehement,  we  fall  back 
upon  silence,  and  quiver  with  the  adoration  which  we  cannot  speak. 
Silence  becomes  our  praise. 

"  A  sacred  reverence  checks  our  songs. 
And  praise  sits  silent  on  our  tongues.** 

It  would  be  well,  perhaps,  in  our  public  service,  if  we  had  more  often 
the  sweet  relief  of  silence.  I  am  pei*8uaded  that  silence,  ay,  frequent 
silence,  is  most  beneficial;  and  the  occasional  unanimous  silence  of  all 
the  saints  when  they  bow  before  God  would,  perhaps,  better  express, 
and  more  fully  promote,  devout  feeling  than  any  hymns  which  have 
been  composed  or  songs  that  could  be  sung.  To  mnkc  silence  a 
part  of  worship  habitually  might  be  affectation  and  formalism,  but 
to  introduce  it  occasionally,  and  even  frequently  into  the  service, 
would  be  advantageous  and  profitable.    Let  us,  then,  by  our  silence, 

8 raise  God,  and  let  us  always  confess  that  our  praise,  compared  with 
fod's  deserving,  is  but  silence. 

I  would  add  that  there  is  in  the  text  the  idea  that  praise  waits  for 
God  expectantly.  When  we  praise  God,  we  expect  to  see  more  of 
him  by  and  by,  and  therefore  wait  for  him.  We  bless  the  King,  but  we 
desire  to  draw  nearer  to  him.  We  magnify  him  for  what  we  have 
seen,  and  we  expect  to  see  more.  We  praise  him  in  his  outer  courts, 
for  we  shall  soun  be  with  him  in  the  heavenly  mansions.  We  glorify 
him  for  the  revelation  of  himself  in  Jesus,  for  we  expect  to  be  like 
Christ,  and  to  be  with  him  where  he  is.  When  I  cannot  praise.  God 
for  what  I  am,  I  will  praise  him  for  what  I  shall  be.  Wi:en  I  feel 
dull  and  dead  about  the  present,  I  will  take  the  words  of  our  delightful 
hymn  and  say, 

"  And  a  new  song  is  in  my  mouth. 
To  long-loved  music  set ; 
Glory  to  thee  for  nil  the  grace 
I  have  not  tasted  yet." 

My  praise  shall  not  only  be  the  psalmody  of  the  past,  which  is  but 
discharging  a  debt  of  gratitude,  but  my  faith  shall  anticipate  the  future, 
and  wait  upon  God  to  frilfil  his  purposes  ;  and  I  will  begin  to  pay  my 
praise  even  before  the  mercy  comes. 

Dear  brethren  and  sisters,  let  us  for  a  moment  present  our  praise  to 
God,  each  one  of  us  on  his  own  account.  We  have  our  common  mercies. 
We  call  them  common,  but,  oh,  how  priceless  they  are.  Health  to  be 
able  to  come  here  and  not  to  be  stretched  on  a  bed  of  sickness,  1  count 


6Gd  METROPOLITAN  TABERNAOLE  PULPIT. 

this  better  than  bags  of  gold.  To  have  our  reason,  and  not  to  be  con- 
^ncd  in  yonder  asylum ;  to  have  our  children  still  about  us  and  desr 
relatives  spared  still  to  us — to  have  bread  to  eat  and  raiment  to  put  on 
—  to  have  been  kept  from  defiling  our  character  —  to  have  been 
preserved  to-day  from  the  snares  of  the  enemy  1  These  are  godlike 
mercies,  and  for  all  these  our  praises  shall  wait  upon  GU)d. 

But  oh !  take  up  the  thoughts  suggested  by  the  psalm  itself  in  the 
next  verse,  and  you  will  doubly  praise  God.  **  Iniquities  prevail  againtt 
me.  As  for  our  transgressions,  thou  shalt  purge  them  away."  Infinite 
love  has  made  us  clean  every  whit ! — though  we  were  black  and  filthy. 
We  arc  washed — washed  in  priceless  blood.  Praise  him  for  this!  Go 
on  with  the  passage,  '^  Blessed  is  the  man  whom  thou  choosest  and 
causest  to  approach  unto  thee."  Is  not  the  blessing  of  access  to  God 
an  exceeding  choice  one  ?  Is  it  a  light  thing  to  feel  that>  though  once  far 
off,  we  are  made  nigh  through  the  blood  of  Christ;  and  this  because  of 
electing  love !  **  Blessed  is  the  man  whom  thou  choosest."  Ye  subjects 
of  eternal  choice,  can  you  be  silent  ?  Has  God  favoured  you  above 
others,  and  can  your  lips  refuse  to  sing  ?  No,  you  will  magnify  the 
Lord  exceedingly,  because  he  hath  chosen  Jacob  unto  himself,  and 
Israel  for  his  peculiar  treasure.  Let  us  read  on,  and  praise  God  that 
we  have  an  abiding  place  among  his  people — "That  he  may  dwell 
in  thy  courts." — Blessed  be  God  we  are  not  to  be  cast  forth  and 
driven  out  after  a  while,  but  we  have  an  entailed  inheritance  amongst 
the  sons  of  God.  We  praise  him  that  we  have  the  satisfaction  of 
dwelling  in  his  house  as  children.  "We  shall  be  satisfied  with  the 
goodness  of  thy  house,  even  of  thy  holy  temple."  But  I  close  the 
psalm,  and  simply  say  to  you,  there  are  ten  thousand  reasons  for 
taking  down  the  harp  from  the  willows ;  and  I  know  no  reason  for 
permitting  it  to  hang  there  idle.  There  are  ten  thousand  times  ten 
thousand  reasons  for  speaking  well  of  "  him  who  loved  us,  and  gave 
himself  for  us."  "  The  Lord  hath  done  great  things  for  us  whereof  we 
are  glad."  I  remember  hearing  in  a  prayer-meeting  this  delightW 
verse  mutilated  in  prayer,  "  The  Lord  hath  done  great  things  for  ns, 
whereof  ive  desire  to  be  glad."  Oh,  brethren,  I  dislike  mauling,  and 
mangling,  and  adding  to  a  text  of  Scripture.  If  we  are  to  have  tbe 
Scriptures  revised,  let  it  be  by  scholars,  and  not  by  every  ignoramus. 
**  Desire  to  be  glad,"  indeed  ?  This  is  fine  gratitude  to  God  when  he 
hath  done  great  things  for  us."  If  these  great  things  haye  been  done, 
our  souls  must  be  glad,  and  cannot  help  it;  they  must  overflow  with 
gi'atitude  to  God  for  all  his  goodness. 

2.  So  much  on  the  first  part  of  our  holy  sacrifice.  Attentively  let  us 
consider  the  second,  namely,  the  vow,  "  Unto  thee  shall  the  vow  be 
performed." 

We  are  not  given  to  vow-making  in  these  days.  Time  was  when  it 
was  far  oftener  done.  It  may  be  that  had  we  been  better  men  we  should 
have  made  more  vows ;  it  may  possibly  be  that  had  we  been  more  fool- 
ish men  we  should  have  done  the  same.  The  practice  was  so  abused 
by  superstition,  that  devotion  has  grown  half-ashamed  of  \L  But  we 
have,  at  any  rate,  most  of  us  bound  ourselves  with  occassional  vows. 
I  do  confess  to-day  a  vow  I  have  not  kept  as  I  should  desire;  Uie  vow 
made  on  my  first  conversion.     I  surrendered  myself  body,  soul,  md 


PRAISES  AND  TOWS  AOCEPTED  IN  ZION.  G69 

spirit,  to  him  that  bought  me  with  a  price,  and  the  vow  was  not  made 
by  way  of  excess  of  devotion  or  supererogation,  it  was  but  my  reason- 
able service.  You  have  done  that.  Do  you  remember  the  love  of  your 
espousals,  the  time  when  Jesus  was  very  precious,  and  you  had  just 
entered  into  the  marriage  bond  with  him  ?  You  gave  yourselves  up  to 
him,  to  be  his  for  ever  and  for  ever.  0  brethren  and  sisters,  it  is  a  part 
of  worship  to  perform  that  vow.  Renew  it  to-night,  make  another 
surrender  of  yourselves  to  him  whose  you  are  and  whom  you  serve. 
Say  to-night,  as  I  will,  with  you,  "  Bind  the  sacrifice  with  cords,  even 
with  cords  to  the  horns  of  the  altar."  Oh,  for  another  thong  to  strap 
the  victim  to  the  altar-horn  !  Does  the  flesh  struggle  ?  Then  let  it  be 
more  fastly  bound,  never  to  escape  from  the  altar  of  God. 

Beloved,  many  of  us  did,  iu  effect,  make  a  most  solemn  vow  at  the 
time  of  our  baptism.  We  were  buried  with  Christ  in  baptism  unto 
death,  and,  unless  we  were  greatly  dissembling,  we  avowed  that  we 
were  dead  in  Christ  and  buried  with  him ;  wherein,  also,  we  professed 
that  we  were  risen  with  him.  Now,  shall  the  world  live  in  those  who 
are  dead  to  it,  and  shall  Christ's  life  be  absent  from  those  who  are 
risen  with  him?  We  gave  ourselves  up  there  and  then,  in  that  solenm 
act  of  mystic  burial.  Recall  that  scene,  I  pray  you;  and  as  you  do  it 
blush,  and  ask  God  that  your  vow  may  yet  be  performed.  As  Doddridge 
well  expresses  it : — 

"  Baptised  into  your  Saviour*s  death, 
Your  souls  to  sin  must  die ; 
With  ChriHt  your  Lord  ye  live  anew, 
With  Christ  ascend  on  high.** 

Some  such  vow  we  made,  too,  when  we  united  ourselves  to  the  church  of 
Ood,  There  was  an  understood  compact  between  us  and  the  church,  that 
we  would  serve  it,  that  we  would  seek  to  honour  Christ  by  holy  living,  in- 
crease the  church  by  propagating  the  faith,  seek  its  unity,  its  comfort,  by 
our  own  love  and  sympathy  with  the  members.  We  haa  no  right  to  join 
with  the  church  if  we  dia  not  mean  to  give  ourselves  up  to  it,  under 
Christ,  to  aid  in  its  prosperity  and  increase.  There  was  a  stipulation 
made,  and  a  covenant  understood,  when  we  entered  into  communion 
and  league  with  our  brethren  in  Christ.  How  about  that  ?  Can  we 
say  that,  as  unto  God  and  in  his  sight,  the  vow  has  been  performed  ? 
Yes,  we  have  been  true  to  our  covenant  in  a  measure,  brethren.  Oh, 
that  it  were  more  fully  so  !  Some  of  us  made  another  vow,  when  we 
gave  ourselves,  as  I  trust,  under  divine  call,  altogether  to  the  work 
of  the  Christian  ministry ;  and  though  we  have  taken  no  orders,  and 
received  no  earthly  ordination,  for  we  are  no  believers  in  man-made 
priests,  yet  tacitly  it  is  understood  that  the  man  who  becomes  a  minister 
of  the  church  of  God  is  to  give  his  whole  time  to  his  work — that 
body,  soul,  and  spirit  should  be  thrown  into  the  cause  of  Christ.  Oh, 
that  this  vow  were  more  fully  performed  by  pastors  of  the  church  I  You, 
my  brethren,  elders  and  deacons,  when  you  accepted  office,  you  knew 
what  the  church  meant.  She  expected  holiness  and  zeal  of  you.  The 
Holy  Ghost  made  you  overseers  that  you  might  feed  the  flock  of  God. 
Yonr  office  proves  your  obligation.  You  are  practically  under  a  vow. 
Has  that  vow  been  performed  ?  Have  you  performed  it  in  Zion 
nnto  the  Lord  ? 


670  MBTROPOLITAN  TABUIlNACLB  PULPIT. 

Besides  that,  it  has  been  the  habit  of  godly  men  to  make  vawi 
occasionally,  in  times  of  pain,  and  Itsses,  and  affliction.  Did  not 
the  psalm  we  just  now  sang  put  it  so? — 

"  Among  the  saints  that  fill  thine  house, 
My  offerings  .«hall  be  paid  ; 
There  shall  my  zeal  jwrform  the  vowa 
My  soul  in  anguish  mmle. 

Now  I  am  thine,  for  ever  thine, 

Nor  shall  my  purpose  move  ! 
Thy  hand  hath  loosed  my  bands  of  pain. 

And  bound  me  with  thy  love. 

Here  in  thy  courts  I  leave  my  vow, 

And  thy  rich  grace  record ; 
Witness,  ye  saints*,  who  hear  me  now, 

If  I  forsake  the  Lord.'* 

You  said,  "  If  I  am  ever  raised  up,  and  mj  life  is  prolon^d,  it  shall 
be  better  spent."  You  said,  also,  "  If  I  am  delivered  out  of  this  great 
trouble,  I  hope  to  consecrate  my  substance  more  to  God."  Another  time 
you  said,  "  If  the  Lord  will  return  to  me  the  light  of  his  countenance, 
and  bring  me  out  of  this  depressed  state  of  mind,  I  will  praise 
him  more  than  ever  before."  Have  jou  remembered  all  this  ?  Com- 
ing here  myself  so  lately  from  a  sick  bed,  I  at  this  time  preach  to 
myself.  I  only  wish  I  had  a  better  hearer  ;  I  would  preach  to  myself 
in  this  respect,  and  say,  "  I  charge  thee,  my  heart,  to  perform 
thy  vow."  Some  of  us,  dear  friends,  have  made  vows  in  time  of 
joy,  the  season  of  the  birth  of  the  first-bom  child,  the  recovery  of 
the  wife  from  sickness,  the  merciful  restoration  that  we  have 
ourselves  received,  times  of  increasing  goods,  or  seasons  when  the 
splendour  of  God*s  face  has  been  unveiled  before  our  wondering  eye. 
Have  we  not  made  vows,  like  Jacob  when  he  woke  up  from  his 
wondrous  dream,  and  took  the  stone  which  had  been  his  pillow,  and 
poured  oil  on  its  top,  and  made  a  vow  unto  the  Most  High  ?  We 
nave  all  had  our  Bethels.  Let  us  remember  that  God  has  heard 
US,  and  let  us  perform  unto  him  our  vow  which  our  soul  made  in 
her  time  of  joy.  But  I  will  not  try  to  open  the  secret  pages  of  your 
private  note- books.  You  have  had  tender  passages,  which  you 
would  not  desire  me  to  read  aloud :  the  tears  start  at  their  memoiy. 
If  your  life  were  written,  you  would  say,  "Let  these  not  be  told; 
they  were  only  between  God  and  my  soul" — some  chaste  and  blessed 
love  passages  between  you  and  Christ,  which  must  not  be  revealed  to 
men.  Have  you  forgotten  how  then  you  said,  *'I  am  my  beloved's, 
and  he  is  mine,"  and  what  you  promised  when  you  saw  all  his 
goodness  made  to  pass  before  you.  I  have  now  to  stir  up  your  pure 
minds  by  way  of  remembrance,  and  bid  you  present  unto  the  Lord 
to-night  the  double  offering  of  your  heart's  praise  and  of  your  per- 
formed vow.  **  0  magnify  the  Lord  with  me,  and  let  us  exalt* his  name 
together." 

II.  And  now,  time  will  fail  me,  but  I  must  have  a  few  words  upon 
THE  BLESSED  ENCOURAGEMENT  afforded  US  in  the  text  for  the  presentation 
of  these  offerings  unto  God.  Here  it  is, — "  0  thou  that  hearest  prayer, 
unto  thee  shall  all  flesh  come  ?  " 


PRAISES  AND  VOWS  ACCEPTED  IN   ZION.  G71 

Observe,  here,  that  Ood  hears  prayer.  It  is,  in  some  aspects,  the 
lowest  form  of  worship,  and  yet  he  accepts  it.  It  is  not  the  worship 
of  heaven,  and  it  is,  in  a  measnre,  selfish.  Praise  is  superior  worship, 
for  it  is  elevating ;  it  is  the  utterance  of  a  soul  that  has  received  good 
from  God,  and  is  retaming  its  love  to  him  in  acknowledgment. 
Praise  has  a  sublime  aspect.  Now,  observe,  if  prayer  is  heard,  then 
praise  will  be  heard  too.  If  the  lower  form,  on  weaker  wing  as  it 
were,  reaches  the  throne  of  the  majesty  on  higli,  how  much  more 
shall  the  seraphic  wing  of  praise  bear  itself  into  the  divine  presence. 
Prayer  is  heard  of  God :  therefore  our  praises  and  vows  will  be. 
And  this  is  a  very  great  encouragement,  because  it  seems  terrible  to 
pray  when  you  are  not  heard,  and  discouraging  to  praise  God  if  he 
will  not  accept  it.  What  would  be  the  use  of  it  ?  But  if  prayer 
and  yet  more  praise  be  most  surely  heard,  ah,  brethren,  then  let  us 
continue  and  abide  in  thanksgiving.  **  AVhoso  ofifereth  praise  glori-- 
fieth  me,  saith  the  Lord." 

Observe  too  according  to  the  text,  that  all  prayer,  if  it  be  true  prayer, 
is  heard  of  God,  for  so  it  is  put — "  Unto  thee  shall  all  flesh  come." 
Oh,  how  glad  I  am  at  that  word.  My  poor  prayer — shall  God  reject 
it  ?  Yes,  I  might  have  feared  so  if  he  had  said,  ''  Unto  thee  shall  all 
spirits  come."  Behold,  my  brethren,  he  takes  the  grosser  part  as  it 
were,  and  looks  at  prayer  in  his  infinite  compassion,  perceiving  it  to  be 
what  it  is — a  feeble  thing — a  cry  coming  from  poor  fallen  flesh,  and  yet  he 
puts  it,  "Unto  thee  shall  all  flesh  come.  My  broken  prayer,  my 
groaning  prayer  shall  get  to  thee,  though  it  seems  to  me  a  thing 
of  flesh,  it  is  nevertheless  wrought  in  me  by  thy  Spirit.  And, 
O  my  God,  my  song,  though  my  voice  be  hoarse  and  oftentimes  my 
notes  most  feeble,  shall  reach  thee.  Though  I  groan  because  it  is  so 
imperfect,  yet  even  that  shall  come  to  thee.  Prayer,  if  true,  shall  be 
received  of  God,  notwithstanding  all  its  faultiness,  through  Jesus 
Christ.    Then  so  it  will  be  with  our  praises  and  our  vows. 

Again,  prayer  is  always  and  habitually  received  of  God.  "  0  thou  that 
hearest  prayer."  Not  that  didst  hear  it  or  on  a  certain  occasion  may 
have  heard  it,  but  thou  that  et'^  hearest  prayer.  If  he  always  hears  prayer, 
then  he  always  hears  praise.  Is  not  this  delightful  to  think  of  my  praise, 
though  it  be  but  that  of  a  child  or  a  poorunworthy  sinner— God  does 
hear  it,  does  accept  it,  in  spite  of  its  imperfections,  and  does  accept 
it  always?  Oh,  I  will  have  another  hymn  to-morrow,  I  will  sing  a  new 
song  to-morrow.  I  will  forget  my  pain,  I  will  forget  for  a  moment  all  my 
care,  and  if  1  cannot  sing  aloud  by  reason  of  those  that  are  with  me,  yet 
will  I  set  the  bells  of  my  heart  ringing,  I  will  make  my  whole  soul  full  of 
praise.  If  I  cannot  let  it  out  of  my  mouth,  I  will  praise  him  in  my  soul, 
because  he  always  hears  me.  You  know  it  is  hard  to  do  things  for  one 
who  never  accepts  what  you  do.  Many  a  wife  has  said,  "  Oh  I  it  is 
hard.  My  husband  never  seems  pleased.  I  have  done  all  I  can,  but 
he  takes  no  notice  of  little  deeds  of  kindness."  But  how  easy  it  is 
to  serve  a  person  who,  when  you  have  done  any  little  thing,  says, 
**  How  kind  it  was  of  you"  and  thinks  much  of  it.  Ah,  poor  child 
of  God,  the  Lord  thinks  much  of  thy  nraises,  much  of  thy  vows,  much 
of  thy  prayers.  Therefore,  be  not  slack  to  praise  and  magnify  him 
unceasingly,  , 


672  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Aiil  this  all  the  more,  because  we  have  not  qnite  done  with  that 
word,  *'  Unto  thee  shall  all  flesh  come."  All  flesh  shall  come  bceaase 
the  Lord  hears  prayer.  Then  all  my  praises  will  be  heard  and  all 
the  praises  of  all  sorts  of  men,  if  sincere,  shall  come  unto  God.  The 
great  ones  of  the  earth  shall  present  praise,  and  the  poorest  of  the 
poor  also,  for  thou  shalt  not  reject  them. 

And,  Lord,  wilt  thou  put  it  so ;  "  Unto  thee  shall  all  flesh  come," 
and  wilt  thou  say,  "but  not  such  a  one?"  Wilt  thou  exclude  me? 
Brethren,  fear  not  that  God  will  reject  you.  1  remind  you  of 
what  I  told  you  the  other  night  concerning  a  good  earnest  belicTing 
woman,  who  in  prayer  said,  "  Lord,  I  am  content  to  be  the  second  thou 
shalt  fursakc,  but  I  cannot  be  the  first."  The  Lord  says  all  flesh  shall 
come  to  him,  and  it  is  implied  that  he  will  receive  them  when  they  come 
— all  sorts  of  men,  all  classes  and  conditions  of  men.  Then  he  cannot 
reject  me  if  I  go,  nor  my  prayers  if  I  pray,  nor  my  praise  if  I  praise  him, 
nor  my  vows  if  I  perform  them.  Come  then,  let  us  praise  the  Lord,  ietns 
worship  and  bow  down,  let  us  kneel  before  the  Lord  our  maker,  for  we 
are  the  people  of  his  pasture  and  the  sheep  of  his  hand. 

I  have  done  when  I  have  said  this.  Dear  brethren  and  sisters,  there 
may  be  difficulties  in  your  way ;  iniquities  may  hinder  yon,  or  infirmi- 
ties ;  but  there  is  the  promise,  "  thou  shalt  purge  them  away." 
Infirmities  may  check  you,  but  note  the  word  of  divine  help,  "  Blessed  is 
the  man  whom  thou  causest  to  approach  unto  thee."  He  will  come  to 
your  aid,  and  lead  you  to  himself.  Infirmities,  therefore,  are  overcome 
by  divine  grace.  Perhaps  your  emptiness  hinders  yon  :  **  He  shall  be 
satisfied  with  the  goodness  of  thy  house."  It  is  not  your  goodness  tbafc 
is  to  satisfy  either  God  or  you,  but  God's  goodness  is  to  satisfy.  Come, 
then,  with  thine  iniquity,  come  with  thine  infirmity ;  come  with  thy 
emptiness.  Come,  dear  brethren,  if  yon  have  never  come  to  God  before. 
Come  and  confess  your  sin  to  God,  and  ask  for  mercy  ;  you  can  do  no 
less  than  ask.  Come  and  trust  his  mercy,  which  endures  for  ever ;  it 
has  no  limit.  Think  not  hardly  of  him,  but  come  and  lay  yourself 
down  at  his  feet.  If  you  |  crish,  perish  there.  Come  and  tell  year 
grief;  pour  out  your  hearts  before  him.  Bottom  upwards  turn  the 
vessel  of  your  nature,  and  drain  out  the  lasc  dreg,  and  pray  to  be  filled 
with  the  fulness  of  his  grace.  Come  unto  Jesus ;  he  invites  you,  he 
enables  you.  A  cry  from  that  pew  will  reach  the  sacred  ear.  "  Ton 
have  not  prayed  before,"  you  say.  Everything  must  hare  a  beginning. 
Oh  that  that*  beginning  might  come  now.  It  is  not  becaose  yon  pnj 
well  that  you  are  to  come,  but  because  the  Lord  hears  prayer  graciously, 
therefore,  all  flesh  shall  come.  You  are  welcome;  none  can  say 
you  nay.  Come !  'tis  mercy's  welcome  hour.  May  the  Lord's  bands 
of  love  be  cast  about  you  ;  may  you  be  drawn  now  to  him.  C^me  by 
way  of  the  cross ;  come  resting  in  the  precious  atoning  sacrifiice,  believing 
in  Jesus ;  and  he  has  said,  *'  Him  that  cometh  unto  me,  I  will  in  no  wise 
cast  out."    The  grace  of  our  Lord  be  with  you.     Amen. 


Portion  of  ScniFruiiK  read  beforr  Sermon — Psalm  Izr. 


^cti[0paliian;  i^abfmade  |«Ij}it. 


"THE  THRONE  OF  GRACE." 


g  pennon 

Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  November  19th,  1871,  by 

C.  H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


"  The  throne  of  grace." — Hehrews  iv.  16. 

These  words  are  found  embedded  in  that  gracious  verse,  "  Let  ns 
therefore  come  boldly  onto  the  throne  of  grace,  that  we  may  obtain 
mercy,  and  find  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need;"  they  are  a  gem  in  a 
golden  setting.  True  prayer  is  an  approach  of  the  soul  by  the  Spirit 
of  God  to  the  throne  of  God.  It  is  not  the  utteranc'e  of  words,  it  is  nob 
alone  the  feeling  of  desires,  but  it  is  the  advance  of  the  desires  to  God, 
the  spiritual  approach  of  our  nature  towards  the  Lord  our  God.  True 
prayer,  is  not  a  mere  mental  exercise,  nor  a  vocal  performance,  but  it 
is  deeper  far  than  that — it  is  spiritual  commerce  with  the  Creator  of 
heaven  and  earth.  God  is  a  Spirit  unseen  of  mortal  eye,  and  only  to 
be  perceived  by  the  inner  man ;  our  spirit  within  us,  begotten  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  at  our  regeneration,  discerns  the  Great  Spirit,  communes 
with  him,  prefers  to  him  its  requests,  and  receives  irom  him  answers  of 
peace.  It  is  a  spiritual  business  from  beginning  to  end ;  and  its  aim 
and  object  end  not  with  man,  but  reach  to  God  himself. 
^  In  order  to  such  prayer,  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  himself  ia 
needed.  If  prayer  were  of  the  lips  alone,  we  should  only  need  breath  in 
our  nostrils  to  pray  :  if  prayer  were  of  the  desires  alone,  many  excellent 
desires  are  easily  felt,  even  oy  natural  men  :  but  when  it  is  the  spiritual 
desire,  and  the  spiritual  fellowship  of  the  human  spirit  with  the  Great 
Spirit,  then  the  Holy  Ghost  himself  must  be  present  all  through  it,  to 
help  infirmity,  and  give  life  and  power,  or  else  true  prayer  will  never  bo 
presented,  bat  the  thing  offered  to  God  will  wear  the  name  and  have 
the  form,  but  the  inner  life  of  prayer  will  be  far  from  it. 

Moreover,  it  is  clear  fropi  the  connection  of  our  text,  that  the  inter- 
position of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  essential  to  acceptable  prayer.    As 
Erayer  will  not  be  truly  prayer  without  the  Spirit  of  God,  so  it  will  nob 
e  prevailing  prayer  without  the  Son  of  God.    He,  the  Great  High .' 
Priest,  must  go  within  the  veil  for  us ;  nay,  through  his  crucified  person 
tiie  veil  must  be  entirely  taken  away;  for,  until  then,  we  are  shut  out 
Na  1,024. 


674  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

from  the  living  God.  The  man  who,  despite  the  teaching  of  Scriptnie, 
tries  to  pray  without  a  Saviour  insults  the  Deity;  and  he  who  imagines 
that  his  own  natural  desires,  coming  up  before  God,  unsprinkled  witii 
tlic  precious  blood,  will  be  an  acceptable  sacrifice  before  God,  makes  a 
mistake;  he  has  not  brought  an  offering  that  God  can  accept,  any  more 
than  if  lie  had  struck  off  a  dog's  neck,  or  offered  an  nnclean  sacrifice. 
Wrought  in  us  by  the  Spirit,  presented  for  us  by  the  Christ  of  God, 
prayer  becomes  power  before  the  Most  High,  but  not  else. 

In  order,  dear  friends,  that  I  may  stir  you  up  to  prayer  this  morning, 
and  tliat  your  souls  may  be  led  to  come  near  to  the  Throne  of  Grace, 
I  puipose  to  take  these  few  words  and  handle  them  as  God  shall  give 
mc  ability.  You  have  begun  to  pray;  God  has  begun  to  answer. 
This  week  has  been  a  veiy  memorable  one  in  the  history  of  this  church. 
Larger  numbers  than  ever  before  at  one  time  have  come  forward  to 
confess  Christ, — as  plain  an  answer  to  the  supplications  of  God's  peo- 
ple, as  though  the  hand  of  the  Most  High  had  been  seen  stretched  out 
of  heaven  handing  down  to  us  the  blessings  for  which  we  asked.  Now, 
let  us  continue  in  prayer,  yea,  let  us  gather  strength  in  intercession,  and 
the  more  we  succeed,  the  more  earnest  let  us  be  to  succeed  yet  more 
and  more.  Let  us  not  be  straitened  in  our  own  bowels,  since  we  are 
not  straitened  in  our  God.  This  is  a  good  day,  and  a  time  of  glad 
tidings,  and  seeing  that  we  have  the  King's  ear,  I  am  most  anxious  that 
we  should  speak  to  him  for  thousands  of  others ;  that  they  also,  in 
answer  to  our  pleadings,  may  be  brought  nigh  to  Christ. 

In  trying  to  speak  i>f  the  text  this  morning,  I  shall  take  it  thus: 
First,  h€i'e  is  a  throne  ;  then,  secondly,  here  is  grace  ;  then  we  will  put 
the  two  together,  and  we  shall  see  grace  on  a  throne  ;  and  patting 
them  together  in  another  order,  we  shall  see  sovereignty  manifesting 
itself^  and  resplendent  in  grace, 

I.  Our  text  speaks  of  a  throne, — "  The  Throne  of  Grace."  God  is 
to  be  viewed  in  prayer  as  our  Father;  that  is  the  aspect  which  is 
dearest  to  us;  but  still  we  are  not  to  regard  him  as  though  he  were 
such  as  we  are;  for  our  Saviour  has  qualified  the  expression  "Our 
Father,"  with  the  words  "  who  art  in  heaven;"  and  close  at  the  heels 
of  that  condescending  name,  in  order  to  remind  us  that  our  Father  is 
still  infinitely  greater  than  ourselves,  he  has  bidden  us  say,  "  Hallowed 
be  thy  name;  thy  kingdom  corac;"  so  that  our  Father  is  still  to  be 
regarded  as  a  King,  and  in  prayer  we  come,  not  only  to  our  Father's 
feet,  but  we  come  also  to  the  throne  of  the  Great  Monarch  of  the 
universe.    The  mercy-seat  is  a  throne,  and  we  must  not  forget  this. 

If  prayer  should  always  be  regarded  by  us  as  an  entrance  into  the  courts 
of  the  royalty  of  heaven ;  if  we  are  to  behave  ourselves  as  courtiers  should 
in  the  presence  of  an  illustrious  majestj^,  then  we  are  not  at  a  loss  to 
know  the  right  spirit  in  which  to  pray.  If  m  prayerwe  come  to  atbrone,it 
is  clear  that  our  spirit  should,  in  the  first  place,  be  one  of  lowlg  reverence. 
It  is  expected  that  the  subject  in  approaching  tothe  king  should  pay  hifli 
homage  and  honour.  The  pride  that  will  not  own  the  king,  the  treason 
which  rebels  against  the  sovereign  will  should,  if  it  be  wise,  avoid  any  near 
approach  to  the  throne.  Let  pride  bite  the  curb  at  a  distance,  let  treason 
lurk  in  corners,  for  only  lowly  reverence  may  come  before  the  kinghim-j 
self  when  he  sits  clothed  in  his  robes  of  maiesty.   In  oar  case,  the  king 


THE  THRONE  OF  GRACE.  C75 

1)ttfore  whom  we  come  is  the  highest  of  all  monarehs,  the  King  of 
kings,  the  Lord  of  lords.  Emperors  are  but  the  shadows  of  his  imperial 
power.  They  call  themselves  kings  by  right  divine,  bat  what  divine  rifrht 
nave  they?  Common  sense  laughs  their  pretensions  to  scorn.  Tlio 
Lord  alone  hath  divine  right,  ana  to  him  only  doth  the  kingdom  belong. 
He  is  the  blessed  and  only  potentate.  They  are  but  nominal  kines,  to 
be  set  up  and  put  down  at  the  will  of  men,  or  the  decree  of  providence, 
but  he  is  Lord  alone,  the  Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth. 

^  He  sits  on  no  precarious  throne, 
Nor  borrows  leave  to  be." 

My  heart,  be  sure  that  thou  prostrate  thyself  in  such  a  presence.  If 
he  be  so  great,  place  thy  mouth  in  the  dust  before  him,  for  he  is  the  most 
powerful  of  all  kings ;  his  throne  hath  sway  in  all  worlds ;  heaven  obeys 
him  cheerfully,  hell  trembles  at  his  frown,  and  earth  is  constrained  to 
yield  him  homage  willingly  or  unwillingly.  His  power  can  make  or  can 
destroy.  To  create  or  to  crush,  either  is  easy  enough  to  him.  My  soul 
be  thou  sure  that  when  thou  drawest  nigh  to  the  Omnipotent,  who 
is  as  a  consuming  fire,  thou  put  thy  shoes  from  off  thy  feet,  and 
worship  him  with  lowliest  humility. 

Besides,  he  is  the  most  Holy  of  all  kings.  His  throne  is  a  great 
white  throne,  unspotted,  and  clear  as  crystal.  "  The  heavens  are  not 
pure  in  his  sight,  and  he  charged  his  angels  with  folly."  And  thou, 
a  sinful  creature,  with  what  lowliness  shouldst  thou  draw  nigh  to  him. 
Familiarity  there  may  be,  but  let  it  not  be  unhallowed.  Boldness  there 
should  be,  but  let  it  not  be  impertinent.  Still  thou  art  on  earth  and 
he  in  heaven ;  still  thou  art  a  worm  of  the  dust,  a  creature  crushed  before 
the  moth,  and  he  the  Everlasting:  before  the  mountains  were  brought 
forth  he  was  God,  and  if  all  created  things  should  pass  away  again,  yet 
still  were  he  the  same.  My  brethren,  I  am  afraid  we  do  not  bow  as  we 
should  before  the  Eternal  Majesty ;  but,  henceforth,  let  us  ask  the  Spirit 
of  God  to  put  us  in  a  right  frame,  that  every  one  of  our  prayers  may  be  a 
reverential  approach  to  the  Infinite  Majesty  above. 

A  throne,  and  therefore,  in  the  second  place,  to  be  approached  with 
devout  joyfidness.  If  I  find  myself  favoured  by  divine  grace  to  stand 
amongst  those  favoured  ones  who  frequent  his  courts,  shall  I  not  feel 
glad  ?  I  might  have  been  in  his  prison,  but  I  am  before  his  throne  :  I 
might  have  been  driven  from  his  presence  for  ever,  but  I  am  permitted* 
to  come  near  to  him,  even  into  his  royal  palace,  into  his  secret  chamber 
of  gracious  audience,  shall  I  not  then  be  thankful  ?  Shall  not  my  thank- 
fulness ascend  into  joy,  and  shall  I  not  feel  that  I  am  honoured,  that  I 
am  made  the  recipient  of  great  favours  when  I  am  permitted  to  pray  ? 
Wherefore  is  thy  countenance  sad,  0  suppliant,  when  thou  standest 
before  the  throne  of  grace?  If  thou  wert  before  the  throne  of  justice 
to  be  condemned  for  thine  iniquities,  thy  hands  might  well  be  on  thy 
loins;  but  now  thou  art  favoured  to  come  before  the  King  in  his  silken 
robes  of  love,  let  thy  face  shine  with  sacred  delight.  If  thy  sorrows  be 
heavy,  tell  them  unto  him,  for  he  can  assuage  them ;  if  thy  sins  be 
multiplied,  confess  them,  for  he  can  forgive  them.  0  ye  courtiers  in  the 
halls  of  such  a  monarch,  be  ye  exceeding  glad,  and  mingle  praises  with 
jour  prayers. 


67  G  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

It  is  a  throne,  and  therefore,  in  the  third  place,  wheneyer  it  is  ap- 
proached, it  should  be  with  complete  suhmisaion.  We  do  not  pray  to  God 
to  instruct  him  as  to  what  he  ought  to  do,  neither  for  a  moment  mast 
we  presume  to  dictate  the  line  of  the  divine  procedure.  We  are  per- 
mitted to  say  unto  God,  "  Thus  and  thus  would  we  have  it^"  but  we 
must  evermore  add,  ^^  But,  seeing  that  we  are  ignorant  and  may  be 
mistaken — seeing  that  we  ai-e  still  in  the  flesh,  and,  therefore,  may  be 
actuated  by  carnal  motives — not  as  we  will,  but  as  thou  wilt."  Who 
shall  dictate  to  the  throne  ?  No  loyal  child  of  God  will  for  a  moment 
imagine  that  he  is  to  occupy  the  place  of  the  King,  but  he  bows  before 
him  who  has  a  right  to  be  Lord  of  all ;  and  though  he  utters  his  desire 
earnestly,  vehemently,  importunately,  and  pleads  and  pleads  again,  yet 
it  is  evermore  with  this  needful  reservation :  **  Thy  will  be  done,  my 
Lord ;  and,  if  I  ask  anything  that  is  not  in  accordance  therewith,  my 
inmost  will  is  that  thou  wouldst  be  good  enough  to  deny  thy  servant ;  I 
will  take  it  as  a  true  answer  if  thou  refuse  me,  if  I  ask  that  which 
seemeth  not  good  in  thy  sight."  If  we  constantly  remembered  this,  I 
think  we  should  be  less  inclined  to  push  certain  suits  before  the  throne, 
for  we  should  feel,  "  I  am  here  in  seeking  my  own  ease,  my  own  comfort, 
my  own  advantage,  and,  peradventure,  I  may  be  asking  for  that  which 
would  dishonour  God ;  therefore  will  I  speak  with  the  deepest  submis- 
sion to  the  divine  decrees." 

But,  brethren,  in  the  fourth  place,  if  it  be  a  throne,  it  ought  to  be 
approached  with  enlarged  expectations.    Well  doth  our  hymn  put  it  : 

"  Thou  art  comiDg  to  a  king : 
Large  petitions  with  thee  bring." 

We  do  not  come,  as  it  were,  in  prayer,  only  to  God's  almonry  where*  he 

dispenses  his  favours  to  the  poor,  nor  do  we  come  to  the  back-door  of 

the  house  of  mercy  to  receive  the  broken  scraps,  though  that  were  more 

than  we  deserve ;  to  eat  the  crumbs  that  fall  from  the  Master's  table  is 

more  than  we  could  claim ;  but,  when  we  pray,  we  are  standing  in  the 

palace,  on  the  glittering  floor  of  the  great  King's  own  reception  room, 

and  thus  we  are  placed  upon  a  vantage  ground.    In  prayer  we  stand 

where  angels  bow  with  veiled  faces ;  there,  even  there,  the  cherubim 

and  seraphim  adore,  before  that  selfsame  throne  to  which  our  prayers 

ascend.    And  shall  we  come  there  with  stunted  requests,  and  narrow  and 

contracted  faith.?     Nay,  it  becomes  not  a  King  to  be  giving  away  pence 

and  groats,  he  distributes  pieces  of  broad  gold ;  he  scatters  not  as  poor 

men  must,  scraps  of  bread  and  broken  meat,  but  he  makes  a  feast  of  iat 

things,  of  fat  things  full  of  marrow,  of  wines  on  the  lees  well  refined. 

When  Alexander's  soldier  was  told  to  ask  what  he  would,  he  did  not 

ask  stintedly  after  the  nature  of  his  own  merits,  but  he  made  such  a 

heavy  demand,  that  the  royal  treasurer  refused  to  pay  it,  and  put  the 

case  to  Alexander,  and  Alexander  in  right  kingly  sort  repliei  "  He 

knows  how  great  Alexander  is,  and  he  has  asked  as  from  a  king  ;  let 

him  have  what  he  requests."      T^ke  heed  of  imagining  that  God's 

thoughts  are  as  thy  thoughts,  and  his  ways  as  thy  ways.     Do  not  bring 

before  God  stinted  petitions  and  narrow  desires,  and  say,  **  Lord,  do 

according  to  these,"  but,  remember,  as  high  as  the  heavens  axe  above  the 

earth,  so  high  are  his  ways  above  your  ways,  and  his  thoughts  above  your 


THE  THRONE  OF  GRACE.  677 

thoughts,  and  ask,  therefore,  after  a  God-like  sort,  ask  for  great  things, 
for  yon  are  before  a  great  throne.  Oh  that  we  always  felt  this  when 
"we  came  before  the  throne  of  gi*ace,  for  then  he  would  do  for  us  ex- 
ceeding abundantly  above  what  we  ask  or  even  think. 

And,  beloved,  I  may  add,  in  the  fifth  place,  that  the  right  spirit  in  which 
to  approach  the  throne  of  grace,  is  that  of  unstaggering  confidence.  Who 
shall  doubt  the  King  ?  Who  dares  impugn  the  Imperial  word  ?  It  was 
well  said  that  if  integrity  were  banished  from  the  hearts  of  all  mankind 
besides,  it  ought  still  to  dwell  in  the  hearts  of  kings.  Shame  on  a  king 
if  he  can  lie.  The  veriest  beggar  in  the  streets  is  dishonoured  by  a 
broken  promise,  but  what  shall  we  say  of  a  king  if  his  word  cannot  be 
depended  upon?  Oh,  shame  upon  us,  if  we  are  unbelieving  before  the 
throne  of  the  King  of  heaven  and  earth.  With  our  God  before  us  in 
all  his  glory,  sitting  on  the  throne  of  grace,  will  our  hearts  dare  to  say 
we  mistrust  him  ?  Shall  we  imagine  either  that  he  cannot,  or  will  not, 
keep  his  promise?  Banished  be  such  blasphemous  thoughts,  and  if 
they  must  come,  let  them  come  upon  us  when  we  are  somewhere  in  the 
outskirts  of  his  dominions,  if  such  a  place  there  be,  but  not  in  prayer, 
when  we  are  in  his  immediate  presence,  and  behold  him  in  all  the  glory 
of  his  throne  of  grace.  There,  surely,  is  the  place  for  the  child  to 
trust  its  Father,  for  the  loyal  subject  to  trust  his  monarch ;  and,  there- 
fore, far  from  it  be  all  wavering  or  suspicion.  Unstaggering  faith 
should  be  predominant  before  the  mercy-seat. 

Only  one  other  remark  upon  this  point,  and  that  is,  that  if  prayer 
be  a  coming  before  the  throne  of  God,  it  ought  always  to  be  conducted 
with  the  deepest  sincerity,  and  in  the  spirit  which  makes  everything 
real.  If  you  are  disloyal  enough  to  despise  the  King,  at  least,  for 
ycrur  own  sake,  do  not  mock  him  to  his  face,  and  when  he  is  upon  his 
throne.  If  anywhere  you  dare  repeat  holy  words  without  heart,  let  it 
not  be  in  Jehovah's  palace.  If  a  person  should  ask  for  audience  with 
royalty,  and  then  should  say,  "  I  scarce  know  why  I  have  come,  I  do  not 
know  that  I  have  anything  very  particular  to  ask  ;  I  have  no  very  urgent 
suit  to  press ;"  would  he  not  be  guilty  both  of  folly  and  baseness?  As 
for  our  great  King,  when  we  venture  into  his  presence,  let  us  have  an 
errand  there.  As  I  said  the  other  Sabbath,  let  us  beware  of  playing  at 
praying.  It  is  insolence  towards  God.  If  I  am  called  upon  to  pray  in 
public,  I  must  not  dare  to  use  words  that  are  intended  to  please  the 
ears  of  my  fellow-Avorshippers,  but  I  must  realise  that  1  am  speaking 
to  God  himself,  and  that  I  have  business  to  transact  with  the  great 
Lord.  And,  in  my  private  prayer,  if,  when  I  rise  from  my  bed  in  the 
morning,  I  bow  my  Knee  and  repeat  certain  words,  or  when  I  retire  to 
rest  at  night  go  through  the  same  regular  form,  I  rather  sin  than  do 
anything  that  is  good,  unless  my  very  souJ  doth  speak  unto  the  Most 
High.  Dost  thou  think  that  the  King  of  heaven  is  delighted  to  hear 
thee  pronounce  words  with  a  frivolous  tongue,  and  a  thoughtless  mind  ? 
Thou  knowest  him  net.  He  is  a  Spirit,  and  they  that  worship  him 
must  worship  him  in  spirit  and  in  truth.  If  thou  hast  any  empty  forms 
to  prate,  go  and  pour  them  out  into  the  ears  of  fools  like  thyself,  but 
not  before  the  Lord  of  Hosts.  If  thou  hast  certain  words  to  utter,  to 
which  thou  dost  attach  a  superstitious  reverence,  go  and  say  them  in  the 
bedizened  courts  of  the  harlot  Rome,  but  not  before  the  glorious  Lord 


678  METROPOLITAN  TABBENACLE  PULPIT. 

of  Zion.  The  spiritnal  God  seeks  spiritaal  worshippers,  and  such  he 
will  accept,  and  only  such ;  but  the  sacrifice  of  the  wicked  is  an  abomi- 
nation unto  the  Lord,  and  only  a  sincere  prayer  is  his  delight 

Beloved,  the  gathering  up  of  all  our  remarks  is  juat  this, — sprayer 
is  no  trifle.  It  is  an  eminent  and  elevated  act.  It  is  a  high  and  won- 
drous privilege.  Under  the  old  Persian  Empire  a  few  of  the  nobility 
were  permitted  at  any  time  to  come  in  unto  the  king,  and  this  was 
thought  to  be  the  highest  privilege  possessed  by  mortals.  Ton  and  I, 
the  people  of  God,  have  a  permit,  a  passport  to  come  before  the  throne 
of  heaven  at  any  time  we  will,  and  we  are  encouraged  to  come  there  with 
great  boldness ;  but  still  let  ns  not  forget  that  it  is  no  mean  thing  to  be 
a  courtier  in  the  courts  of  heaven  and  earth,  to  worship  him  who  made 
ns  and  sustains  us  in  being.  Truly,  when  we  attempt  to  pray,  we  may 
hear  the  voice  saying,  out  of  the  excellent  glory,  **  Bow  the  knee." 
From  all  the  spirits  that  behold  the  face  of  our  Fatner  who  is  in  heaven, 
even  now,  I  hear  a  voice  which  saith,  **  Oh,  come  let  us  worship  and  bow 
down,  let  us  kneel  before  the  Lord  our  Maker ;  for  he  is  our  God,  and 
we  are  the  people  of  his  pasture  and  the  sheep  of  his  hand.  O  wordiip 
the  Lord  in  the  beauty  of  holiness ;  fear  before  him  all  the  earth." 

II.  Lest  the  glow  and  brilliance  of  the  word  "  throne"  should  be  too 
much  for  mortal  visiou,  our  text  now  presents  us  with  the  soft,  gentle 
radiance  of  that  delightful  word — **  grace."  We  are  called  to  the  Sirone 
ofgrace^  not  to  the  throne  of  law.  Rocky  Sinai  once  was  the  throne 
of  law,  when  God  came  to  Paran  with  ten  thousand  of  his  holy  ones. 
Who  desired  to  draw  near  to  that  throne  ?  Even  Israel  might  not 
Bounds  were  set  about  the  mount,  and  if  but  a  beast  touched  the  mount, 
it  was  stoned  or  thrust  through  with  a  dart.  0  ye  self-righteous  ones 
who  hope  that  you  can  obey  the  law,  and  think  that  you  can  be  sayed 
by  it,  look  to  the  flames  that  Moses  saw,  and  shrink,  and  tremble,  and 
despair.  To  that  throne  we  do  not  come  now,  for  through  Jesus  the 
case  is  changed.  To  a  conscience  purged  by  the  precious  blood  there  is 
no  anger  upon  the  divine  throne,  though  to  our  troubled  minds— 

**  Once  *twas  a  seat  of  burning  wrath, 
And  shot  devouring  flame ; 
Our  God  appeared  consuming  fire, 
And  jealous  was  his  name." 

And,  blessed  be  God,  we  are  not  this  morning  to  speak  of  the  throne  of 
ultimate  justice.  Before  that  we  shall  all  come,  and  as  many  of  us  as 
have  believed  will  find  it  to  be  a  throne  of  grace  as  well  as  of  jnstioe; 
for,  he  who  sits  upon  that  throne  shall  pronounce  no  sentence  of  con- 
demnation against  the  man  who  is  justified  by  faith.  But  I  hare 
not  to  call  you  this  morning  to  the  place  from  whence  the  resurrection- 
trumpet  shall  ring  out  so  shrill  and  clear.  Not  yet  do  we  see  the 
angels  with  their  vengeful  swords  come  forth  to  smite  the  foes  of  God ; 
not  yet  are  the  great  doors  of  the  pit  opened  to  swallow  up  the  enemies 
who  would  not  have  the  Son  of  God  to  reign  over  them.  We  are  still 
on  praying  ground  and  pleading  terms  with  God,  and  the  throne  to 
which  we  are  bidden  to  come,  and  of  which  we  speak  at  this  time,  is  the 
throne  of  grace.  It  is  a  throne  set  up  on  purpose  for  the  dispensation 
of  grace ;  a  throne  from  which  every  utterance  is  an  utterance  of  grace; 


THE  THRONE  OF  GRACE.  679 

the  sceptre  that  is  stretched  out  from  it  is  the  silver  sceptre  of  grace; 
the  decrees  proclaimed  from  it  are  purposes  of  grace ;  the  gifts  that  are 
scattered  adown  its  golden  steps  are  gifts  of  grace ;  and  he  that  sits  upon 
the  throne  is  grace  itself.  It  is  the  throne  of  grace  to  which  we  approach 
when  we  pray ;  and  let  us  for  a  moment  or  two  think  this  over,  by 
way  of  consolatory  encouragement  to  those  who  are  beginning  to  pray ; 
indeed,  to  all  of  us  who  are  praying  men  and  women. 

If  in  prayer  I  come  before  a  throne  of  grace,  then  the  faults  of  my 
prayer  ivill  he  overlooked.  In  beginning  to  pray,  dear  friends,  you  feel 
as  if  you  did  not  pray.  The  groanings  of  your  spirit,  when  you  rise 
from  your  knees  are  such  that  you  think  there  is  nothing  in  them.  What 
a  blotted,  blurred,  smeared  prayer  it  is.  Never  mind  ;  you  are  not  come 
to  the  throne  of  justice,  else  when  God  perceived  the  fault  in  the  prayer 
he  would  spurn  it, — your  broken  words,  your  gaspings,  and  stammerings 
are  before  a  throne  of  grace.  When  any  one  of  us  has  presented  his  best 
prayer  before  God,  if  he  saw  it  as  God  sees  it,  there  is  no  doubt  he 
would  make  great  lamentation  over  it ;  for  there  is  enough  sin  in  the 
best  prayer  that  was  ever  prayed  to  secure  its  being  cast  away  from 
God.  But  it  is  not  a  throne  of  justice  I  say  again,  and  here  is  the 
hope  for  our  lame,  limping  supplications.  Our  condescending  King  does 
not  maintain  a  stately  etiquette  in  his  court  like  that  which  has  been 
observed  by  princes  among  men,  where  a  little  mistake  or  a  flaw  would 
secure  the  petitioner's  being  dismissed  with  disgrace.  Oh,  no ;  the 
faulty  cries  of  his  children  are  not  severely  criticised  by  him.  The 
Lord  High  Chamberlain  of  the  palace  above,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
takes  care  to  alter  and  amend  every  prayer  before  he  presents  it,  and 
he  makes  the  prayer  perfect  with  his  perfection,  and  prevalent  with  his 
own  merits.  God  looks  upon  the  prayer,  as  presented  through  Christ, 
and  forgives  all  its  own  inherent  faultiness.  How  this  ought  to  encourage 
any  of  us  who  feel  ourselves  to  be  feeble,  wandering,  and  unskilful  in 
prayer.  If  you  cannot  plead  with  God  as  sometimes  you  did  in  years 
gone  by,  if  you  feel  as  if  somehow  or  other  you  had  grown  rusty  in  the 
work  of  supplication,  never  give  over,  but  come  still,  yea  and  come 
oftener,  for  it  is  not  a  throne  of  severe  criticism,  it  is  a  throne  of  grace 
to  which  you  come. 

Then,  further,  inasmuch  as  it  is  a  throne  of  grace,  the  faults  of  the 
petitioner  himself  shall  not  prevent  the  success  of  his  prayer.  Oh,  what 
faults  there  are  in  us!  To  come  before  a  throne  how  unfit  we 
are — we,  that  are  all  defiled  with  sin  within  and  without !  Dare  any 
of  you  think  of  praying  were  it  not  that  God's  throne  is  a  throne  of 
grace  ?  If  you  could,  I  confess  I  could  not.  An  absolute  God,  in- 
finitely holy  and  just,  could  not  in  consistency  with  his  divine  nature 
answer  any  prayer  from  such  a  sinner  as  I  am,  were  it  not  that  he  has 
arranged  a  plan  by  which  my  prayer  comes  up  no  longer  to  a  throne 
of  absolute  justice,  but  to  a  throne  which  is  also  the  mercy-seat, 
the  propitiation,  the  place  where  Go'd  meets  sinners,  through  Jesus 
Christ.  Ah,  I  could  not  say  to  you,  "  Pray,"  not  even  to  you  saints, 
unless  it  were  a  throne  of  grace,  much  less  could  I  talk  of  prayer  to 
you  sinners ;  but  now  I  will  say  this  to  every  sinner  here,  tnough  he 
should  think  himself  to  be  the  worst  sinner  that  ever  lived,  cry  unto 
the  Lord  and  seek  him  while  he  may  be  found.    A  throne  of  grace  is  a 


680  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

place  fitted  for  you :  po  to  your  knees ;  bj  simple  faith  go  to  yoar 
Saviour,  for  lie,  lie  it  is  who"  is  the  throne  of  grace.  It  is  in  him-thit 
God  is  able  to  dispense  crace  unto  the  most  guilty  of  mankind.  Blessed 
be  (lod,  neither  the  faults  of  the  prayer  nor  yet  of  the  suppliant  ahall 
shut  out  our  petitions  from  the  God  who  delights  in  broken  and  contrite 
hearts. 

II'  it  be. a  throne  of  grace,  then  ths  desires  of  the  pleader  wiU  bt 
inter in'ftnl  If  I  cannot  find  words  in  which  to  ntter  my  desires,  God 
in  his  grace  will  read  my  desires  without  the  words.  He  takes  th^ 
meaning  of  his  saints,  the  meaning  of  their  groans.  A  throne  that  was^ 
not  gracious  would  not  trouble  itself  to  make  out  onr  petitions;  bnt 
Gocl,  the  infinitely  gracious  One,  will  dive  into  the  soul  of  onr  desires, 
and  he  will  read  there  what  we  caimot  speak  with  the  tongue.  Haie 
yon  never  seen  the  parent,  when  his  child  is  trying  to  say  something 
to  him,  and  he  knows  very  well  what  it  is  the  little  one  has  got  to 
say,  help  him  over  the  words  and  utter  the  syllables  for  him,  and  if  the 
little  one  has  half-furi^otten  what  he  would  say,  yon  have  seen  the  father 
Bunirest  the  word:  and  so  the  ever-blessed  Spirit,  from  the  throne  of  graoe, 
will  help  us  and  teach  us  words,  nay,  write  in  our  hearts  the  desires  them- 
selves. We  have  in  Scripture  instances  whereGod  puts  words  into  sinners* 
mouths.  *'  Take  with  you  words,"  saith  he,  **  and  say  nnto  him,  Receive 
ns  graciously  and  love  us  freely."  He  will  put  the  desires,  and  put  the 
expression  of  those  desires  into  your  spirit  by  his  grace ;  he  will  direct 
your  desires  to  the  things  which  you  ought  to  seek  for;  he  will  teach 
you  your  wants,  though  as  yet  you  know  them  not;  he  will  suggest 
to  you  his  promises  that  yon  may  be  able  to  plead  them;  he  wUl,in 
fact,  be  Alpha  and  Omega  to  your  prayer,  just  as  he  is  toyonr  salyaUon; 
for  as  salvation  is  from  first  to  last  of  grace,  so  the  sinner's  approach  to 
the  throne  of  grace  i?  of  grace  from  first  to  last.  What  comfort  is  this. 
"Will  we  not,  my  dear  friends,  with  the  greater  boldness  draw  near  to 
this  throne,  as  we  suck  out  the  sweet  meaning  of  this  precious  word, 
*'  the  throne  of  grace  *  ? 

If  it  be  a  throne  of  grace,  then  all  Ihe  irafils  of  Ihose  who  come  toU 
trill  ho  suppiieiL  The  King  from  oft*  such  a  throne  will  not  say,  **  Thou 
must  bring  to  me  gifts,  thou  must  ofter  to  me  sacrifices."  It  is  not  a 
throne  for  receiving  tribute ;  it  is  a  throne  for  dispensing  gifts.  Come, 
then,  ye  who  are  poor  as  poverty  itself;  come  ye  that  have  no  merits 
and  are  destitute  of  virtues,  come  ye  that  are  reduced  to  a  beggarly  bank- 
ruptcy by  Adam's  foil  and  by  your  own  trangressions ;  this  is  not  the 
throne  of  majesty  which  supports  itself  by  the  taxation  of  its  subjects, 
but  a  throne  which  glorifies  itself  by  streaming  forth  like  a  fountain 
with  floods  of  good  things.  Gome  ye,  now,  and  receive  the  wine  and 
milk  which  are  freely  given,  yea,  come  buy  wine  and  milk  without 
money  and  without  price.  All  the  petitioner's  wants  shall  be  supplied, 
because  it  is  a  throne  of  grace. 

And  so,  all  the  petitioncfs  miseries  shall  he  compassionated.  Sap- 
pose  I  come  to  the  throne  of  grace  with  the  burden  of  my  sins;  there  is 
one  on  the  throne  who  felt  the  burden  of  sin  in  ages  long  gone  by,  and 
has  not  forgotten  its  weight.  Suppose  I  come  loaded  with  sorrow; 
there  is  One  there  who  knows  all  the  sorrows  to  which  hnmanity  can 
be  subiccted.    Am  I  depressed  and  distressed?     Do  I  fear  that  God 


THE  THRONE  OF  GRACE.  681 

himself  has  forsaken  me  ?  Tliere  is  One  upon  the  throne  who  said, 
"My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?"  It  is  a  throne  from 
which  grace  delights  to  look  upon  the  miseries  of  mankind  with  tender 
€ye,  to  consider  them  and  to  relieve  them.  Come,  then;  come,  then; 
•come,  then,  ye  that  are  not  only  poor,  but  wretched,  whose  miseries 
make  you  long  for  death,  and  yet  dread  it.  Ye  captive  ones,  come  in 
your  chains;  ye  slaves,  come  with  the  irons  upon  your  souls;  ye  who 
sit  in  darkness,  come  forth  all  blindfold  as  you  are.  The  throne  of 
grace  will  look  on  you  if  you  cannot  look  on  it,  and  will  give  to  you, 
though  yon  have  nothing  to  give  in  return,  and  will  deliver  you,  though 
jou  cannot  raise  a  finger  to  deliver  yourself. 

"  The  throne  of  grace."  The  word  grows  as  I  turn  it  over  in  my 
mind,  and  to  me  it  is  a  most  delightful  reflection  that  if  I  come  to  the 
throne  of  God  in  prayer,  I  may  feel  a  thousand  defects,  but  yet  there  is 
hope.  I  usually  feel  more  dissatisfied  with  my  prayers  than  with  any- 
tiung  else  I  do.  I  do  not  believe  that  it  is  an  easy  thing  to  pray  m 
rablic  so  as  to  conduct  the  devotions  of  a  large  congregation  aright. 
ne  sometimes  hear  persons  conunended  for  preaching  well,  but  if  any 
shall  be  enabled  to  pray  well,  there  will  be  an  equal  gift  and  a  higher 
grace  in  it.  But,  brethren,  suppose  in  our  prayers  there  should  be  de- 
^ts  of  knowledge  :  it  is  a  throne  of  grace,  and  our  Father  knoweth 
tbat  we  have  need  of  these  things.  •  Suppose  there  should  be  defects 
of  faith  :  he  sees  our  little  faith  and  still  doth  not  reject  it,  small  as  it 
is.  He  doth  not  in  every  case  measure  out  his  gifts  by  the  degree  of 
omr  faith,  but  by  the  sincerity  andtrueness  of  faith.  And  if  there  should 
be  grave  defects  in  our  spirit  even,  and  failures  in  the  fervency  or  in  the 
hmnility  of  the  prayer,  still,  though  these  should  not  be  there  and  are 
much  to  be  deplored;  grace  overlooks  all  this,  forgives  all  this,  and 
still  its  merciful  hand  is  stretched  out  to  enrich  us  according  to  our 
needs.  Surely  this  ought  to  induce  many  to  pray  who  have  not  prayed, 
and  should  make  us  who  have  been  long  accustomed  to  use  the  conse- 
crated art  of  prayer,  to  draw  near  with  greater  boldness  than  ever  to  the 
dirone  of  grace. 

III.  But,  now  regarding  our  text  as  a  whole,  it  conveys  to  us  the 
idea  of  grace  enthroned.  It  is  a  throne,  and  who  sits  on  it  ?  It  is 
grace  personified  that  is  here  installed  in  dignity.  And,  truly,  to-day 
grace  is  on  a  throne.  In  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  grace  is  the  most 
predominant  attribute  of  God.  How  comes  it  to  be  so  exalted  ?  We 
^ply*  well,  grace  has  a  throne  by  conquest.  Grace  came  down  to  earth 
in  the  form  of  the  Well-beloved,  and  it  met  with  sin.  Long  and  sharp 
'woa  the  struggle,  and  grace  appeared  to  be  trampled  under  foot  of  sin ; 
but  grace  at  last  seized  sin,  threw  it  on  its  own  shoulders,  and,  though 
aU  but  crushed  beneath  the  burden,  grace  carried  sin  up  to  the  cross 
and  nailed  it  there,  slew  it  there,  put  it  to  death  for  ever,  and  triumphed 
gloriously.  For  this  cause  at  this  hour  grace  sits  on  a  throne,  because 
it  has  conquered  human  sin,  has  bcTue  the  penalty  of  human  guilt, 
and  overthrown  all  its  enemies. 

Grace,  moreover,  sits  on  the  throne  because  it  has  established  itself 
there  by  right.    There  is  no  injustice  in  the  grace  of  God.    God  is  as 

Est  when  he  forgives  a  believer  as  when  he  casts  a  sinner  into  hell.    I 
lieve  in  my  own  soul  that  there  is  as  much  and  as  pure  a  justice  in 


682  METBOFOLITAN  TABBKNAGLB  PULPIT. 

the  acceptance  of  a  soul  that  belieyes  in  Ohrist  as  there  will  be  in  ibe 
rejection  of  those  souls  who  die  impenitent,  and  are  banished  (raa 
Jehovah's  presence.  The  sacrifice  of  Christ  has  enabled  God  to  be 
just,  and  yet  the  justifier  of  him  that  belieyeth.  He  who  knows  thfl 
word  **  substitution,"  and  can  spell  its  meaning  aright,  will  see  thsl 
there  is  nothing  due  to  punitive  justice  from  any  bmieyer,  seeing  that 
Jesus  Christ  has  paid  all  the  believer's  debts,  and  now  Ck>d  would  be 
unjust  if  he  did  not  save  those  for  whom  Christ  yicariondy  snffSered, 
for  whom  his  righteousness  was  provided,  and  to  whom  it  is  imputed. 
Orace  is  on  the  throne  by  conquest,  and  sits  there  by  right. 

Grace  is  enthroned  this  day,  brethren,  because  Christ  has  finished  his 
work  and  gone  into  the  heavens.  It  is  enthroned  in  power.  When  m 
speak  of  its  throne,  we  mean  that  it  has  unlimited  might.  Orace  sits 
not  on  the  footstool  of  God;  grace  stands  not  in  the  courts  of  God,  but 
it  sits  on  the  throne ;  it  is  the  regnant  attribute ;  it  is  the  king  to-di^. 
This  is  the  dispensation  of  grace,  the  year  of  grace:  grace  reigni 
through  righteousness  unto  eternal  life.  We  live  in  the  era  of  reigaing 
grace,  for  seeing  he  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  the  sons  of  men, 
Jesus  is  able  also  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost  that  come  unto  God  by 
him.  Sinner,  if  yon  were  to  meet  grace  in  the  by-way,  like  a  travelkr 
on  his  journey,  1  would  bid  you  make  its  acanaintance  and  ask  its 
influence  ;  if  yon  should  meet  grace  as  a  merchant  on  the  exchange^ 
with  treasure  in  his  hand,  I  would  bid  you  court  its  friendship^  it  will 
enrich  you  in  the  hour  of  poverty;  if  you  should  see  grace  as  one  of 
the  peers  of  heaven,  highly  exalted,  I  would  bid  yon  seek  to  get  its  ear; 
but,  oh,  when  grace  sits  on  the  throne,  I  beseech  yon  close  in  with  it  at 
once.  It  can  be  no  higher,  it  can  be  no  greater,  for  it  is  written  **  God 
is  love,"  which  is  an  alias  for  grace.  Oh,  come  and  bow  before  it; 
come  and  adore  the  infinite  mercy  and  grace  of  God.  Donbt  not^  halt 
not,  hesitate  not  Grace  is  reigning;  grace  is  God  ;  God  is  love.  Oh 
that  you,  seeing  grace  is  thus  enthroned,  would  come  and  receiyeit.  Isay, 
then,  that  grace  is  enthroned  by  conquest,  by  right,  and  by  power,  and, 
I  will  add,  it  is  enthroned  in  glory,  for  God  glorifies  his  grace.  It  is  one 
of  his  objects  now  to  make  his  grace  illustrious.  He  delights  to  na^ 
don  penitents,  and  so  to  show  his  pardoning  srace;  he  delights  to  mk 
upon  wanderers  and  restore  them,  to  show  his  reclaiming  grace;  be 
delights  to  look  upon  the  broken-hearted  and  comfort  them,  that  he 
may  show  his  consoling  grace.  There  is  grace  to  be  had  of  various 
kinds,  or  rather  the  same  grace  acting  in  different  ways,  and  Ood  delights 
to  make  his  grace  glorious.  There  is  a  rainbow  round  about  the  thnme 
like  unto  an  emerald,  the  emerald  of  his  compassion  and  his  love.  0 
happy  souls  that  can  believe  this,  and  believing  it  can  come  at  once  and 
glorify  grace  by  becoming  instances  of  its  power. 

IV.  Lastly,  our  text,  if  rightly  read,  has  in  it  soyersignty  hesplo- 
DENT  IN  GLORY,— THE  GLORY  OF  GRACE.  The  mcrcy  Seat  is  a  throne; 
though  grace  is  there,  it  is  still  a  throne.  Grace  does  not  displace 
sovereignty.  Now,  the  attribute  of  sovereignty  is  very  high  and  terrible ; 
its  light  is  like  unto  a  jasper  stone,  most  precious,  and  like  onto  a 
sapphire  stone,  or,  as  Ezekiel  calls  it,  "  the  terrible  crystaL"  Thui 
saith  the  King,  the  Lord  of  hosts, "  I  will  have  mercy  on  whom  I  will 
have   mercy,   and   I  will   have  compassion    on  whom  I   will  have 


THK  THRONE  OP  GRACE.  683 

•compassion."  "Who  art  thou,  0  man,  that  repliest  against  God? 
Shall  the  thing  formed  say  to  him  that  formed  it,  Why  hast  thou 
made  me  thus  ?  "  "Hath  not  the  potter  power  over  the  clay  to  make 
of  the  same  lump  one  vessel  unto  honour  and  another  unto  dishonour?" 
These  are  great  and  terrible  words,  and  are  not  to  be  answered,  lie  is 
■a  King,  and  he  will  do  as  he  wills.  None  shall  stay  his  hand,  or  say 
unto  him,  What  doest  thou  ?  Bnt,  ah  !  lest  any  of  you  should  be 
downcast  by  the  thought  of  his  sovereignty,  I  invite  you  to  the  text. 
It  is  a  throne, — there  is  sovereignty ;  but  to  every  soul  that  knows  how 
to  pray,  to  every  soul  that  by  faith  comes  to  Jesus,  the  true  mercy  seat, 
^ivme  sovereignty  wears  no  dark  and  terrible  aspect,  but  is  full  of  love. 
It  is  a  throne  of  grace;  from  which  I  gather  that  the  sovereignty  of  God 
to  a  believer,  to  a  pleader,  to  one  who  comes  to  God  in  Christ,  is  always 
exercised  in  pure  grace.  To  you,  to  you  who  come  to  God  in  prayer, 
the  sovereignty  always  runs  thus  :  "  I  will  have  mercy  on  that  sinner  ; 
though  he  deserves  it  not,  though  in  him  there  is  no  merit,  yet  because 
I  can  do  as  I  will  with  my  own,  I  will  bless  him,  I  will  make  him  my 
child,  I  will  accept  him ;  he  shall  be  mine  in  the  day  when  I  make  up 
my  jewels."  On  the  mercy  seat  God  never  executed  sovereignty  other- 
wise than  in  a  way  of  grace.  He  reigns,  but  in  this  case  grace  reigns 
through  righteousness  unto  eternal  life  by  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

There  are  these  two  or  three  things  to  be  thought  of,  and  I  have  done. 
On  the  throne  of  grace  sovereignty  has  placed  itself  under  bonds  of  love. 
I  must  speak  with  words  choice  and  picked  here,  and  I  must  hesitate 
and  pause  to  get  right  sentences,  lest  I  err  while  endeavouring  to  speak 
the  truth  in  plainness.  God  will  do  as  he  wills ;  but,  on  the  mercy- 
4seat,  he  is  under  bonds — bonds  of  his  own  making,  for  he  has  entered 
into  covenant  with  Christ,  and  so  into  covenant  with  his  chosen. 
Though  God  is  and  ever  must  be  a  sovereign,  he  never  will  break  his 
covenant,  nor  alter  the  word  that  is  gone  out  of  his  mouth.  He  cannot 
be  false  to  a  covenant  of  his  own  making.  When  I  come  to  God  in 
Christ,  to  God  on  the  mercy-seat,  I  need  not  imagine  that  by  any  act 
of  sovereignty  God  will  set  aside  his  covenant.  That  cannot  be  :  it  is 
impossible. 

Moreover,  on  the  throne  of  grace,  God  is  again  bound  to  us  by  his 
promises.  The  covenant  contains  in  it  many  gracious  promises,  exceed-* 
uig  great  and  precious.  "  Ask  and  it  shall  be  given  you ;  seek  and  ye 
shall  find;  knock  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you."  Until  God  had 
said  that  word  or  a  word  to  that  effect,  it  was  at  his  own  option  to  hear 
prayer  or  not>  but  it  is  not  so  now ;  for  now,  if  it  be  true  prayer  offered 
through  Jesus  Christ,  his  truth  binds  him  to  hear  it.  A  man  may  be 
perfectly  free,  but  the  moment  he  makes  a  promise,  he  is  not  free  to 
break  it ;  and  the  everlasting  God  wants  not  to  break  his  promise.  Ho 
delights  to  fulfil  it.  He  hath  declared  that  all  his  promises  ai-e  yea  and 
amen  in  Christ  Jesus;  but,  for  our  consolation  when  we  survey  God 
under  the  high  and  terrible  aspect  of  a  sovereign,  we  have  this  to  reflect 
on,  that  he  is  under  covenant  bonds  of  promise  to  be  faithful  to  the 
souls  that  seek  him.    His  throne  must  be  a  throne  of  grace  to  his 

people. 

And,  once  more,  and  sweetest  thought  of  all,  every  covenant  promise 
has  b^n   endorsed  and  sealed  with  blood,  and  far  be  it  from  the 


gg4  METROPOLITAN  TABBBNACLB  PULPIT. 

everlasting  God  to  pour  scorn  npon  the  blood  of  his  dear  Son.  When  » 
king  has  given  a  charter  to  a  city,  he  maj  before  have  been  absolute, 
and  there  may  have  been  nothing  to  check  his  prerogatives,  but  when  the 
city  has  its  charter,  then  it  pleads  its  righte  before  the  king.  Even  thus 
God  has  given  to  his  people  a  charter  of  untold  blessings,  bestowin? 
upon  them  the  sure  mercies  of  David.  Very  much  of  the  validity  of 
a  charter  depends  upon  the  signature  and  the  seal,  and,  my  brethren, 
how  sure  is  the  charter  of  covenant  grace.  The  signature  is  the  hand- 
writing of  God  himself,  and  the  seal  is  the  blood  of  the  Only-begotten. 
The  covenant  is  ratified  with  blood,  the  blood  of  his  own  dear  Son.  It 
is  not  possible  that  we  can  plead  in  vain  with  God  when  we  plead  the 
blood-sealed  covenant,  ordered  in  all  things  and  sure.  Heaven  and 
earth  shall  pass  away,  but  the  power  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  with  God 
can  never  fail.  It  speaks  when  we  are  silent,  and  it  prevails  when  we 
are  defeated.  Better  things  than  that  of  Abel  doth  it  ask  for,  and  its 
cry  is  heard.  Let  us  come  boldly,  for  we  bear  the  promise  in  our  hearts. 
TVhen  we  feel  alarmed  because  of  the  sovereignty  of  God,  let  us  cheer- 
fully sing — 

**  The  ^08pel  bean  my  spirit  up, 

A  faituful  and  unchanging  God 
Lays  the  foundation  for  my  hope 

In  oaths,  and  promises,  and  blood.'* 

May  God  the  Holy  Spirit  help  us  to  use  aright  from  this  time  forward 
"  tlie  throne  of  grace.*'    Amen. 

iftme,  />ee.  7, 187L 

To  MT  Bklovkd  (?iirRrii  and  Friends  in  Gkxkral. 

Belovi'd  in  the  Lord,  having  felt  it  to  be  my  duty  to  leave  England  for  a  abort  tinw 
to  prevent  a  return  of  my  former  complaint,  I  am  bound  gratefully  to  acknowledge  the  frood 
hand  of  the  Lord  upon  me  during  my  short  t^ojoum  A^tMd.  1  hope  to  return  in  a  brief 
season,  so  8trengthi*ned  as  to  continue  to  labour  on  for  a  considerable  peiiod  without 
another  pause.  I  take  this  opportunity  of  thanking  my  affectionate  church  and  Vied 
friends,  for  their  innumerable  nets  of  generous  sympathy,  in  aiding  our  College  and 
Orpliauage,  and  csi>ecially  for  those  many  prayers  which  were  turned  to  my  comfort  and 
healing  in  my  late  illnc'sis  and  are  the  means  of  my  upholding  in  my  eveo'-growing  service 
for  the  Lord.  Vkie  Lord  return  into  their  bosoms  a  thousandfold  the  good  wliich  faithful 
friends  have  imploi*ed  for  me,  and  make  me  far  more  than  ever  the  means  of  hlessiog  to 
them  by  my  miuiiitiy. 

Just  now  I  implore  a  renewal  of  those  prayers  with  increased  earnestness,  for  a  revival 
of  religion  is  grt^atly  needed ;  and  it  would  be  a  sure  evidence  of  its  speedy  coming,  if 
believers  united  in  prayer  for  it  Already  the  flame  is  kindled  at  the  Tabmiacle,  bat  it 
needs  to  bo  fanned  into  a  mighty  conflagration.  Our  country  requires  a  divine  visiXatioD, 
and  the  promise  of  it  only  needis  to  be  pleaded  to  be  fulfilled.  Brethren,  as  one  man,  ciy 
mightily  to  the  God  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  tho  Father  of  glory,  beseeching 
him  to  put  his  hand  to  the  work,  and  magnify  his  Son  in  the  eyes  of  all  the  pe-.^pfe. 
Standing  where  Satan*s  seat  is,  in  the  midst  of  ten  thousand  idols,  I  beseech  those  wbu 
worship  God  in  tho  spirit  to  wrestle  in  prayer  for  times  of  refreshing,  t^t  all  lands  may 
know  that  Jc>sus  Chnst  is  Lord.  How  long  shall  the  name  of  Jesus  be  blasphemed  by  the 
idolatries  of  Antichrist  ?  It  may  bo  that  tho  times  oi  darkness  will  last  till  the  chiMren 
of  light  ci-y  out  bitterly,  day  and  night,  by  reason  of  soul  anguish.  Then  wiU  God  avcogs 
his  own  elect,  and  that  speedily. 

As  I  have  trodden  the  Appian  way  I  have  rejoiced  that  Jesus,  whom  Paul  preached,  is 
yet  alive,  and  is  certain  in  due  season  to  put  down  his  enemies.  Already  he  has  desolued 
tho  Colesseum  where  his  faithful  martyrs  poured  forth  their  blood ;  the  pagan  power  hts 
fallen,  and  so  aUe  shall  the  papal,  and  all  other  which  opposes  his  kingdom.  Let  us  pro- 
claim a  spiritual  crusade,  and  set  up  our  banners  by  redoubled  prayer.  It  is  ct-rUin  that 
supplication  produce's  marvellous  results  in  heaven  and  earth;  its  power  is  proven  in  'ur 
own  pii-soual  exptTJeucc,  and  throughout  tho  history  of  the  church.  Brethren,  lkt  W 
*'tA^-  Yours,  for  Jesus'  sak<>, 

C.  IL  SPURGEON. 


^tirapWm  ©abwuadc  fttlpit. 


A  VISIT  TO  THE  HAEVEST  FIELD. 


gl  ^mvion 


DELIVERED  BY 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT     THE     METROPOLITAN     TABERNAOLB,     NSWINGTON. 


'*  De  patient  therefore,  brethren,  unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  Behold,  the 
hasbnndman  waited  for  the  precious  fruit  of  the  earth,  and  hath  long  patience  for  it, 
until  he  receive  the  early  and  latter  ruin.  Be  ye  also  patient ;  stahb'sh  your  hearts  : 
for  the  coming  of  the  Lord  drawethnigh." — James  v.  7. 8. 

The  earth  that  yields  seed  to  the  sower  and  bread  to  the  eater  has 
received  its  constitution  from  God;  and  it  is  governed  through  his  wise 
providence  by  fixed  laws  that  are  infinitely  reliable ;  and  yet,  at  the 
same  time,  with  such  diversified  conditions  and  minnte  peculiarities  as 
may  well  convince  us  that  the  Almighty  intended  the  operations  of 
nature  to  supply  us  with  spiritual  instruction  as  well  as  with  material 
good.  He  who  ordained  the  seed  time  and  the  harvest  meant  to  teach 
us  by  them.  Nor  has  he  left  us  in  vague  uncertainty  as  to  the  lessons 
we  should  learn  !  In  metaphor  and  parable  he  has  interpreted  them 
to  us.  The  author  of  the  Bible  is  also  the  architect  of  the  universe. 
The  book  that  is  writ  and  the  things  that  are  made  alike  bear  witness 
to  his  eternal  power  and  Godhead.  He  who  shall  study  them  both 
will  see  clearly  the  idioms  of  one  author.  In  the  two  masterpieces 
the  hand  of  the  same  great  artist  may  be  discerned.  We  are  all  so 
dependent  upon  the  labors  of  the  field,  that  we  ought  at  the  season  of 
harvest  to  remember  how  much  we  owe  to  the  Goa  of  harvest.  It  is 
but  common  gratitude  that  we  should  go  to  the  field  awhile,  and  there 
hear  what  God  the  Lord  may  have  to  say  to  us  among  the  waving 
sheaves.  No  matter  what  our  business  may  be,  the  wealth  of  the 
country  must  after  all,  to  a  large  extent,  depend  upon  the  crops  that  are 
produced,  and  the  well  being  of  the  whole  state  has  a  greater  oependence 
upon  the  harvest  than  many  of  you  could  probably  inagine.  We  will 
not  forget  the  bounties  of  God.  We  will  not  fail  at  least  to  endeavour 
to  learn  the  lesson  which  this  bountiful  season  is  intended  to  teach 
us.  Our  Lord  Jesus  often  preached  of  the  sowing  and  of  the  reaping. 
His  were  the  best  of  sermons  and  bis  the  choicest  of  illustrations :  there- 
fore, we  shall  do  well  if  we  repair  to  the  field,  mark  the  scattering  of  the 
com,  and  the  ingathering  of  it,  to  enforce  the  exhortation  of  the  text. 
No.  1,025. 


686  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACIiE  PULPIT. 

Our  subject,  to-iii<rht,  will  involve  three  or  four  questions :  Hew  dm 
the  hmhandman  tcaii/  What  does  he  wait  for  f  What  is  his  encouragij- 
ment  ?  What  are  t/ie  benojits  of  his  patient  waiting  f  Onr  experience  is 
similar  to  his.  We  are  husbandmen,  so  we  have  to  toil  hard,  and  ve 
have  to  wait  long  :  then,  the  hope  that  cheers,  the  fruit  that  buds  ind 
blossoms,  and  verily,  too,  the  profit  of  that  struggle  of  faith  and  fear 
incident  to  waitinjr  will  all  crop  up  as  we  proceed. 

I.  First,  then,  how  does  the  husbandman  wait?  He  waits  iciOt  a 
reasonable  hope  for  the  precious  fruit  of  the  earth,  and  hath  long  patience 
for  it  until  he  receive  the  early  and  latter  rain.  He  exi)ect6  the  hanrcst 
because  he  has  ploughed  the  fields  and  sown  the  grain.  If  he  had  not,  be 
would  not  be  an  example  for  our  imitation.  Had  he  left  his  fields  fallow, 
never  stirred  the  clods,  and  never  cast  in  among  them  the  golden  seed,  he 
would  be  an  idiot  were  he  expecting  the  soil  to  produce  a  harvest.  Thom* 
and  thistles  would  it  bring  forth  to  him — nothing  more.  Out  on  the  folly 
of  those,  who  flatter  their  souls  with  a  prospect  of  good  things  in  time 
to  come  while  they  neglect  the  opportunity  of  sowing  good  things  in  the 
time  present.  They  say  they  hope  it  will  be  well  with  them  at  the  end; 
but,  since  it  is  not  well  with  them  now,  why  should  they  expect  any 
chanjre — much  less  a  change  contrary  to  the  entire  order  of  Provi- 
dence ?  Is  it  not  written  "  He  that  soweth  to  the  flesh  shall  of  Uic 
flesh  reap  corruption*'?  Do  you  expect  to  sow  to  the  flesh  and 
reap  salvation  ?  That  is  a  blessing  reserved  for  him  who  soweth 
to  the  spirit;  for  he  that  soweth  to  the  spirit  shall  of  the  spirit  reap  life 
everlasting.  As  for  the  man  who  scatters  nothing  but  the  wild  oats  of 
sin,  who  simply  lives  to  indulge  his  own  passions,  and  determinatcly 
resolves  to  neglect  the  things  that  make  for  his  peace, — he  can  but 
upbraid  himself  if  he  expect  to  reap  anything  good  of  the  Lord.  They 
that  sow  to  the  wind  shall  reap  the  whirlwind,  they  that  sow  nothing 
shall  reap  nothing,  they  tliat  sow  sparingly  shall  reap  also  sparingly. 
It  is  only  those  who  by  God's  grace  have  been  enabled  to  sow  abundantly, 
though  they  have  gone  forth  weeping,  who  shall  afterwards  come  again 
rejoicing,  bringing  their  sheaves  with  them.  Patience  by  all  means, 
but  not  that  foolish  patience  which  expects  something  good  to  turn  np 
in  spiritual  things,  as  some  fools  do  in  business  when  they  turn  aside 
from  legitimate  trade  to  foster  bubble  schemes.  Thou  shalt  have,  my 
brother,  nfter  all  according  to  what  thou  art,  and  to  what  thou  art  fairly 
^'oing  for.  If  thou  art  a  believer,  to  thee  shall  be  the  promise — then 
shnlt  share  the  victories  and  spoils  of  thy  Lord.  If  thou  art  a  careless, 
irodless  worldling,  to  thee  shall  be  the  fruit  of  thy  deeds,  and  sad  and 
Inttrr  shall  he  those  grapes  of  Gomorrah  that  thou  shalt  have  to  eat 
The  husbandman  waits  with  a  reasonable  hope;  he  does  not  look  for 
grain  where  he  has  cast  in  garlic.  Save  then  that  thou  art  a  fool, 
thou  wilt  like  him  count  only  on  the  fruit  of  thine  own  sowing. 

While  he  waits  with  a  patient  hope,  he  is  no  doubt  all  the  more 
patient  of  the  issue,  because  his  hope  is  so  reasonable.  And  not 
only  does  he  wait  with  patience,  but  some  stress  is  put  upon  the  length 
of  it ;  "  and  hath  long  patience  for  the  precious  fruit  of  the  earth."  Xow, 
brethren  in  Christ,  our  waiting,  if  it  be  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  must 
■have  this  long  patience  in  it.  Are  you  a  suiferer  ?  There  are  sweet 
fruits  to  come  from  suffering  1  "Not  for  the  present  seemeth  it  to  be 


TIBIT  TO  THB  HABTK  FULD.  687 

joyous  bnt'  grieroas,  neyertheless,  afUrumrd  it  yieldeth  the  peace- 
able fruits  of  righteousness  unto  them  that  are  exercised  thereby." 
Have  long  patience  for  those  peaceable  fruits.  You  shall  be  brought 
out  of  your  trouble,  deliTeranoe  will  be  found  for  you  out  of  your 
affliction  when  the  discipline  for  which  you  were  brought  into  it  has 
been  fiilfilled.  Hare  long  patience,  however,  for  not  the  first  month 
does  the  husbandman  find  a  harrest.  If  he  has  sown  in  the  winter,  he 
does  not  expect  he  will  reap  in  the  early  spring :  he  does  not  go  forth 
with  his  sicKle  in  the  month  of  May  and  expect  to  find  golden  sheaves. 
He  waits.  The  moons  wax  and  wane;  sans  rise  and  set;  but  the 
husbandman  waits  till  the  appointed  time  is  come.  Wait  thou,  O 
sufferer,  till  the  night  be  over.  Watch  after  watch  thou  bast  already 
passed  through  ;  the  morning  breaketh.  Tarry  thou  a  little  longer,  for 
if  the  vision  tarry  it  shall  come.  '^  Thou  shalt  stand  in  thy  lot  in  the 
end  of  the  days."  Ere  long  thou  shalt  have  a  happy  exit  out  of  thy 
present  trials.  Are  you  a  worker  ?  Then  you  need  as  much  patience  in 
working  as  you  do  in  suffering.  We  must  not  expect  to  see  immediate 
lesnlts  in  all  cases  firom  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  from  the  teach- 
ing of  Scriptare  in  our  classes,  from  distributing  religious  literature, 
or  from  any  other  kind  of  effort.  Immediate  results  may  oome.  Some- 
times they  do,  and  they  greatly  cheer  the  worker ;  but  it  is  given  to  some 
to  wait  long,  like  the  husbandman,  ere  the  fruit  reaches  maturity. 
Truth,  Uke  the  grain  of  mustard  seed,  does  not  wax  inte  a  tree  to- 
morrow being  sown  to-day :  it  takes  its  leisure.  Or,  like  the  leaven  in  the 
measure,  it  doth  not  work  in  the  next  moment ;  it  must  have  its  time. 
If  you  have  some  principle  to  teach  that  is  now  obnoxious,  go  cm  with  it. 
Perhaps,  you  may  never  see  it  popular  in  jroiir  day.  Do  not  mind  the 
fickle  winds  or  fret  yourself  because  of  the  nipping  frosts.  Truth 
is  mighty  and  it  will  prevail,  though  it  may  have  a  hard  fight 
before  it  wins  the  victory.  Souls  may  not  be  won  to  God  the  first  time 
you  pray  for  them,  nor  the  first  time  you  exhort  them,  nay,  nor  the 
twentieth  time.  If  thou  hast  gone  to  a  sinner  once  on  Cbrist*8  errand 
and  he  has  rejected  thee,  go  again  seven  times  ;  nay,  go  again  seventy 
times  seven ;  for  if  thou  shouldst  at  last  succeed  by  thy  master's 
gracious  help,  it  will  well  repay  thee.  The  long,  te&ous  winter  of 
thy  waiting  will  appear  as  a  short  span  to  look  back  upon  when  thou 
haist  reaped  the  field  of  thy  labour.  The  HttlQ  patience  that  thou 
hadst  to  exert  for  a  while  will  seem  as  nothing,  like  the  travail  of  the 
mother  when  the  man-^hild  is  bom  into  the  world.  Hush,  then, 
your  sad  complaints,  and  still  your  petulant  wailings. 

**  O  drearr  life  !  we  cr^,  O  dreary  life ! 
And  stiU  the  generations  of  the  birds 
Sing  thro*  our  sighing ;  and  the  flocks  and  herds 
Serenely  live  wlule  we  are  keeping  strife.** 

Be  patient,  0  worker,  for  impatience  sours  the  temper,  chills  the 
blood,  sickens  the  heart,  prostrates  the  vigour  of  one's  ^irit,  and 
spoils  the  enterprise  of  life  before  it  is  ripe  for  history.  Wait 
thou,  clothed  with  patience,  like  a  champion  clad  in  steel.  Wait  with 
a  sweet  grace,  as  one  who  guards  the  faith  and  sets  an  example  of 
humility.    Wait  in  a  right  spirit^  anxious,  prayerful,  earnest  snbmisdve 


C88  METROPOLITAN  TABBRKACLS  PULPIT. 

to  the  ways  of  God,  not  doubtfal  of  his  will.    Disciple  of  Jesas, ''  kan 
to  labour  and  to  wait." 

With  regard  to  the  resnlt  of  Christian  obedience,  the  lesson  is  no 
less  striking.  The  first  thing  that  a  farmer  does  by  way  of  seeking 
gain  on  his  farm  is  to  make  a  sacrifice  which  could  seem  immediatdj 
to  entail  on  him  a  loss.  He  has  some  good  wheat  in  the  granary, 
and  he  takes  out  sacks  full  of  it  and  buries  it.  He  is  so  mudi 
the  poorer,  is  not  he  ?  At  any  rate,  there  is  so  much  the  less 
to  make  bread  for  his  household.  He  cannot  get  it  again ;  it  is 
under  the  clod,  and  there  too  it  must  die;  for  except  it  die, 
it  bringeth  not  forth  fruit.  You  must  not  expect  as  soon  as  yoa 
become  a  Christian,  that  you  shall  obtain  all  the  gains  of  your 
religion,  perhaps  you  may  lose  all  that  you  have  for  Christ's  sake. 
Some  have  lost  their  lives;  they  have  sown  their  house  and  land, 
relatives,  comfort,  ease,  and  at  last  they  have  sown  life  itself  in  Christ's 
field,  and  they  seemed  for  the  time  to  be  losers ;  but,  verily  I  say  unto 
you,  this  day,  if  you  could  see  them  in  their  white  i-obes  before  the 
throne  of  God,  rejoicing,  you  would  see  how  rich  a  harvest  they  hare 
reaped,  and  how  the  sowing  which  seemed  a  loss  at  first  has  ended, 
through  God's  abundant  grace,  in  the  greatest  eternal  gain.  Hafe 
patience,  brother,  have  patience.  That  is  a  false  religion  that  aims  at 
present  wordly  advantage.  He  who  becomes  religious  for  the  loaves  and 
fishes,  when  he  hath  eaten  his  loaves  and  fishes,  hath  devoured  his 
religion.  There  is  nothing  in  such  piety  but  pretension.  If  thou  canst 
be  bought,  thou  canst  be  sold :  if  tnou  hast  taken  it  up  for  gain,  tboa 
wilt  lay  it  down  for  what  promises  thee  a  better  bargain.  Be  willing  to 
be  a  loser  for  Christ,  and  so  prove  thou  art  his  genuine  follower.  The 
husbandman,  I  say,  does  not  expect  immediate  reward,  but  reckons 
upon  being  a  loser  for  a  while.  He  waits,  waits  with  long  patience,  for 
the  precious  fruit  of  the  earth.  It  is  a  reasonable  waiting  on  the 
outset,  and  not  regretful  when  wearied  and  worried  with  delay. 

And,  while  the  husbandman  waits,  you  observe  in  the  text  he  waits 
with  his  eye  upward,  he  waits  until  God  shall  send  him  the  early  and 
the  latter  rain.  He  has  wit  enough  for  this ;  even  if  he  be  a  worldly  man 
he  knows  that  the  harvest  depends  not  only  on  the  seed  be  sows  and  on 
the  soil  he  cultivates,  but  upon  the  rain  which  he  cannot  control ;  the 
rain  that  cometh  at  the  bidding  of  the  Almighty.  If  the  skies  be  brass, 
the  clods  will  be  iron.  Unless  God  shall  speak  to  the  clouds,  and  the 
clouds  shall  speak  to  the  earth,  the  earth  will  not  speak  to  the  com, 
and  the  com  will  not  make  us  speak  the  words  of  rejoicing. 
Every  husbandman  is  aware  of  this,  and  every  Christian  must 
remember  it.  **  I  am  to  wait,"  says  a  sufferer,  **  for  God's  help 
and  for  the  graces  that  come  by  affliction,  but  I  must  wait 
with  my  eye  upward,  for  all  the  plouj:hing  of  affliction  will  not 
profit  me,  and  all  the  sowing  of  meditation  will  not  speed  me, 
unless  God  send  his  gracious  Spirit  like  showers  of  heavenly  rain. 
If  I  am  a  worker,  I  must  work.  When  I  wait,  I  must  wait  always 
looking  upward."  The  keys  of  the  rain-clouds  which  water  the  earth 
hang  at  the  girdle  of  Jehovah.  None  but  the  eternal  Father  can  send 
the  Holy  Spirit  like  showers  on  the  church.  He  can  send  the  comforter, 
and  my  labour  will  prosper ;  it  will  not  be  in  vain  in  the  Lord  ;  but  if 


A  VISIT  TO  THE  HARVEST  FIELD.  689 

he  deny,  if  he  withold  this  covenanb  blessing,  ah  me  !  work  is  useless, 
patience  is  worthless,  and  all  the  cost  is  bootless:  it  is  in  vain. 
In  spiritnal,  as  in  temporal  things,  ''it  is  vain  to  rise  up  early 
and  sit  np  late,  and  eat  the  bread  of  carefulness."  "  Except  the  Lord 
build  the  house,  they  labour  in  vain  that  build  it/'  We  must  have  the  dew, 
O  God,  or  else  our  seed  shall  rot  under  the  clod.  We  must  wait,  and 
wait  with  our  eye  upwards,  or  else  our  expectation  will  perish  as  a 
still-born  child.  So  with  regard  to  the  comfort,  and  joy,  and  ulti- 
mate fruit  of  our  faith,  we  must  have  our  eye  upward  looking  for  the 
coming  of  the  Lord  from  heaven,  for  the  day  of  his  appearing  will  be 
the  day  of  our  manifestation.  Our  life  is  hid  with  Christ  now  ;  when 
he  shall  appear  we  shall  appear  with  him.  When  he  shall  be  revealed 
in  glory  before  the  eyes  of  the  assembled  multitude,  we  shall  be  con- 
spicuous in  glory  too.  Not  till  then  shf^ll  the  fulness  of  the  reward  be 
bestowed,  but  the  risen  saints  shall  be  glorified  in  the  glorification  of 
their  coming  Lord.  01»,  for  more  of  this  livrag  with  the  eyes  upward, 
less  minding  of  earthly  things,  and  more  looking  for  and  hasting  unto 
the  coming  of  the  Son  of  God ! 

Note,  however,  that  while  the  husbandman  waits  with  his  eye  upward, 
he  waits  with  his  hands  at  work,  engaged  in  restless  toil.  He  sows, 
and  it  is  a  busy  time.  *  When  he  sees  the  green  blade,  what  then  ?  He 
has  to  work.  Those  weeds  must  not  be  suffered  to  outgrow  the 
wheat  and  choke  it.  Up  and  down  the  field  the  labourer  must  go, 
and  the  husbandman  must  be  at  the  expense  of  this,  and  all  along 
until  the  wheat  is  ripened  there  is  sure  to  be  something  to  do  in  this 
field,  so  his  eyes  must  be  keen,  his  skill  must  be  taxed,  and  no  drudgery 
must  be  disdained.  In  all  labour  there  is  profit,  but  nothing  is  gained 
without  pains.  We  look  up  to  God.  He  will  not  accept  the  look  of  a 
sluggard.  The  eye  that  looks  up  to  God  must  be  attended  with  the 
hand  that  is  ready  for  work.  So  if  I  snffer  and  expect  the  blessing  for 
the  suffering,  I  must  spend  solitary  hours  in  my  chamber  seeking  and 
searching ;  to  wit,  seeicing  in  prayer,  and  searching  God's  Word  for 
the  blessing.  If  I  am  a  worker,  I  must  look  to  God  for  the  result,  but 
then  I  must  also  use  all  the  means.  In  fact,  the  Christian  should  work 
as  if  all  depended  upon  him,  and  pray  as  if  it  all  depended  upon  God. 
He  should  be  always  nothing  in  his  own  estimation  ;  yet  he  should  be 
one  of  those  gloriously  active  nothings  of  which  God  makes  great  use, 
for  he  treats  the  things  that  are  not  as  though  they  were,  and  gets 
glory  out  of  them.  Yes,  the  husbandman  waits.  He  cannot  push  on 
the  months;  he  cannot  hasten  the  time  of  the  harvest  home;  but  he 
does  not  wait  in  silence ;  in  sluggisliness  and  negligence ;  he  keeps  to 
his  work  and  waits  too.  So  do  you,  0  Christian  men !  wait  for  the 
coming  of  your  Lord,  but  let  it  be  with  your  lamps  trimmed  and  jour 
lights  burning,  as  good  servants  attending  to  the  duties  of  the  house, 
until  the  master  of  the  house  returns  to  give  you  the  reward. 

The  husbandman  waits  under  chanceful  circumstances,  and  various 
contingences.  At  one  time  he  sees  the  fair  prospect  of  a  good  crop.  The 
wheat  has  come  up  well.  He  has  never  seen  more  green  springing  from 
the  ground;  but,  peradventure,  it  may  be  too  strong,  and  may  need  even 
to  be  put  back.  Bv-and-by,  after  long  showers  and  cold  nights,  the  wheat 
looks  yellow,  and  he  is  half  afraid  about  it.    Anon  there  comes,  or  he 


690  METBOPOLTTAK  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

fancies  there  is  a  blight  or  a  black  smut.  Nobody  knows  what  may 
happen.  Only  a  farmer  knows  how  his  hopes  and  fears  alternate  and 
fluctuate  from  time  to  time.  It  is  too  hot,  too  cold  ;  it  is  too  dry  ;  it 
is  too  wet;  it  is  hardly  ever  quite  right,  according  to  his  judgment,  or 
rather  according  to  his  unbelief.  He  is  full  of  jchanges  in  his  mind 
because  the  season  is  full  of  changes.    Yet  he  waits,  he  waits  with 

Eatience.  Ah  dear  friends,  when  we  work  for  God,  how  often  will  this 
appen  !  I  speak  from  no  inconsiderable  experience.  There  are  always 
chaugcs  in  the  field  of  Christian  labour.  At  one  time  we  see  many 
conversions,  and  we  bless  God  that  there  are  so  many  seals  to  our  testi- 
mony. But  some  of  the  converts  after  a  while  disappoint  us.  There  m 
the  blossom,  but  it  produced  no  fruit.  Then  there  will  come  a  seasoo 
when  many  appear  to  backslide.  The  love  of  many  waxes  co^ 
Perhaps  we  have  found  in  the  church  the  black  smut  of  heresy.  Some 
deadly  heresy  creeps  in,  and  the  anxious  husbandman  fears  there  will  be 
no  harvest  after  all  Oh,  patience,  sir,  patience.  Ten  thousand  farmen' 
fears  have  been  disappointed  this  year.  Many  a  fretfnl  expression  aad 
murmuring  word  need  to  be  repented  of,  as  the  farmer  has  looked  it 
last  upon  the  well-filled  ear,  and  the  heavy  wheat  sheaf.  So,  too,  mayhap, 
O  evangelical  worker,  it  will  be  with  you.  When  God  shall  giveyoi 
a  rich  return  for  all  you  have  done  for  him,  yon  will  blush  to  think  yon 
ever  doubted  ;  you  will  be  ashamed  to  think  you  ever  grew  weary  in  hk 
service.  Yon  shall  have  your  reward.  Not  to-morrow,  so  wait:  not 
the  next  day  perhaps,  so  be  patient.  You  may  be  full  of  doubts  ooe 
day,  your  joys  sink  low.  It  may  be  rou(;h  windy  weather  with  yon  in 
your  spirit.  You  may  even  doubt  whether  you  are  the  Lord's,  but  if 
yon  have  rested  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  if  by  the  grace  of  God  you  are 
what  you  are,  if  he  is  all  your  salvation,  and  all  your  desire, — have 
patience ;  have  patience,  for  the  reward  will  surely  come  in  God's  good 
time.  Now  this  is  how  the  husbandman  waits,  and  becomes  to  us  the 
model  of  patience. 

II.  Very  briefly,  in  the  second  place,  we  have  to  ask,  what  does  the 
HUSBANDMAN  WAIT  FOR?  for  we  are  in  this  respect  like  him.  He  waits  for 
results,  for  real  results;  right  results;  he  ho|)es  also  rich  results.  And 
this  is  ju8t  what  we  are  waiting  for — waiting  as  sufferers  for  the  results 
of  sanctified  affliction.  May  those  results  bo  real ;  may  they  be  right; 
may  they  be  rich.  Oh  that  we  might  have  every  virtue  strengthened, 
every  grace  refined,  by  passing  through  the  furnace.  There  are  great 
blessings  connected  with  patient  endurance  as  in  Job*s  case.  He  had  a 
plenteous  harvest,  may  we  have  the  same.  And  you  workers,  yon  must 
work  for  results,  for,  though  conversion  is  the  work  of  God,  it  is  in 
many  cases  as  clearly  a  product  of  the  holy  living,  the  devout  teaching, 
and  the  fervent  praying  of  his  servants,  as  any  effect  can  be  the  result 
from  a  cause.  Go  on,  go  on,  and  may  you  have  real  conversions — not 
pretended  conversions — not  such  as  are  sometimes  chronicled  in  news- 

Eapei-s — "  fifly-one  conversions  of  an  evening  " — as  if  anybody  knew  I 
fay  there  be  real  conversions,  and  ripe  fruits  for  Jesus,  in  the  growth  and 
advance  of  those  who  are  converted,  and  may  many  of  them  turn  out  to 
be  such  fruit-bearing  Christians  when  they  are  matured  in  grace,  that 
the  richest  result  in  the  prosperity  of  the  Church  may  come  to  you  from 
all  your  work.    You  are  waiting  for  results.     And  you  are,  also,  dear 


A  VISIT  TO  THE  HARVEST  FIELD.  691 

bretliren,  like  the  husbandman,  waiting  for  a  reward.  All  the  while  till 
the  harvest  comes,  he  has  nothing  tut  outlay.  From  the  moment  he 
sows,  it  is  all  outgoing  until  he  sells  his  crops,  and  then,  recovering  at  once 
the  principal  aW  the  interest,  he  gets  his  reward.  In  this  world,  look  not 
for  a  recompense.  You  may  have  a  grateful  acknowledgment  in  the  peace, 
and  quiet,  and  contentment  of  your  own  spirit,  but  do  not  expect  even 
that  from  your  fellow-men.  The  pure  motive  of  any  man  who  serves 
his  generation  well  is  generally  misrepresented.  As  a  rule  the  lounger 
looks  on  at  the  labourer  not  to  praise  but  to  blame  him:  not  to  cheer 
him  but  to  chide  him.  The  less  he  does,  the  less  he  will  be  open  to 
rebuke,  and  the  more  he  does  oftentimes,  and  the  more  vigorously,  the 
more  he  shall  be  upbraided.  Look  not  for  your  reward  here.  Suppose 
men  praise  you,  what  is  their  praise  worth  ?  It  would  not  fill  your 
nostrils  if  you  were  about  to  die.  The  approbation  of  those  who  have 
neither  skill  nor  taste — what  pleasure  can  it  afford  the  artist?  Should 
one  stoop  for  it,  or,  having  it,  lift  his  head  the  higher  ?  Our  reward  is 
the  approbation  of  God,  which  he  will  give  of  his  abundant  grace.  He 
first  gives  us  good  works,  as  one  observes,  and  then  rewards  us  for  those 
good  works,  as  if  they  were  altogether  our  own.  He  gives  rewards 
though  they  are  not  a  aebt,  but  altogether  of  grace.  Look  for  the  reward 
hereafter.  Wait  a  bit,  man,  wait  a  bit ;  your  reward  is  not  yet.  Wait 
till  thf  week  is  over,  and  then  shall  come  the  wage.  Wait  until  the 
sun  is  gone  down„  and  then  there  will  be  the  penny  for  every  labourer 
in  the  vineyard.  Not  yet,  not  yet,  not  yet.  The  husbandman  waiteth 
for  the  precious  fruit  of  the  earth.    This  is  what  we  wait  for. 

in.  Thirdly,  what  is  the  husbandman's  encouragement  in  wait- 
ing ?    Well,  he  has  many. 

The  first  is,  that  the  fruit  he  waits  for  is  precious.  He  waiteth  for 
the  precious  fruit  of  the  earth.  It  is  worth  waiting  for.  Who  that 
walks  through  a  com  field,  such  com  fields  as  we  have  seen  this  year, 
where  the  crops  are  plentiful,  but  will  say,  "  Well,  this  was,  after  all, 
worth  all  the  trouble  and  all  the  expense,  and  all  the  long  patience 
of  that  winter  which  is  over  and  gone?  "  If  the  Lord  should  draw  you 
near  unto  himself  by  your  affliction,  if  he  should  make  his  image  in 
you  more  clear,  it  will  be  worth  waiting  for.  And  if,  after  your  labours 
he  should  give  you  some  soul  for  your  reward,  oh,  will  it  not  repay 
you  ?  Mother,  if  your  dear  child  should  after  all  be  brought  back 
from  his  sinful  ways  to  love  his  Saviour !  Sunday-school  teacher,  if 
some  of  those  little  girls  should  love  the  name  of  Jesue,  and  you 
should  live  to  see  them  honoured  members  of  the  Church  of  God,  will 
it  not  be  wortji  waiting  for  ?  It  were  worth  while  to  preach  every 
Sabbath  for  a  million  years,  if  but  one  soul  were  brought  in  at  last.  I 
remember  Mr.  Richard  Knill  saying,  if  there  were  one  unconverted 
person,  and  he  were  in  Siberia,  and  God  hud  ordained  that  he  should 
only  be  saved  by  all  the  Christians  in  all  the  world  (and  that  would  be 
a  vast  number),  all  of  them  making  a  journey  to  Siberia  to  talk  with 
him,  it  would  be  worth  all  the  trouble  if  the  soul  were  at  length 
brought  in.  And  so  it  would.  We  may  wait,  therefore,  with  patience, 
because  the  reward  of  our  labour  will  be  precious.  Above  all,  the  reward 
of  hearing  the  master  say,  *'  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant,"  is 
worth  waiting  for !     Even  now  to  get  a  word  from  him  is  quite  enough 


692  METROPOLITAN  TABEKNACLK  PULPIT. 

to  cheer  us  on,  tliou^^h  it  l»e  a  soft.,  still  voice  that  8p)eaks  it,  but  ob,  the 
joy  of  tImL  loud  voice  "Well  done. 

It  were  worth  going  through  u  thousand  perils  bj  land  and  by  sea  to 
come  out  and  win  that  **  Well  done."  TTe  might  count  it  worth  while 
to  face  the  lions  of  hell  and  do  battle  with  Apollyon  himself,  to  snatch 
but  one  poor  lamb  from  between  their  jaws.  It  were  worth  while  to  do 
all  thnt.  I  say,  if  we  might  hear  the  Master  say  to  us,  *•  Well  done,*'  a; 
the  last.  This  then  encourages  us,  as  well  as  the  husbandman— the 
preciousness  of  the  fruit 

A  godly  husbandman  waits  with  patience,  again,  because  he  knows 
God's  covenant.  God  has  said  "seed  time  and  harvest,  summer  an«i 
winter,  shall  not  cense,"  and  the  Christian  farmer  knowing  this  is  confi- 
dent. But  oh,  what  strong  confidences  have  we  who  have  looked  to 
Christ,  and  who  are  resting  on  the  faithful  word  of  a  covenant  God. 
He  cannot  fail  us.  It  is  not  possible  that  he  should  suffer  our  faith  to 
be  confounded.  "  Heaven  and  earth  may  pass  away,"  and  they  shall, 
but  his  word  shall  not  fail.  They  that  sow  in  faith  shall  reap 
abundantly.  The  glory  shall  be  theirs.  And,  brother  workers,  if  ire 
do  not  for  a  time  see  all  the  results  we  expect,  yet  the  Lord  has  said, 
"  Surelv  all  flesh  shall  see  the  salvation  of  God."  The  dav  must  come 
when  the  dwellers  in  the  wilderness  shall  bow  before  him  and  lick  the 
dust.  "  He  has  set  his  king  upon  his  holy  hill  of  Zion,"  and  they  that 
said,  "  Let  us  break  their  bands  asunder,  and  cast  their  cords  from  us," 
will  have  to  submit  themselves  and  lick  the  dust  at  his  feet.  Have 
courage,  therefore.  The  covenant  stands  good,  the  harvest  most  come 
as  surely  as  the  seed  time  has  come. 

^lorcover,  every  husbandman  is  encouraged  by  the  fact,  that  he  ha» 
seen  other  liarvests.  I  suppose  if  the  farmer  had  never  heard  of  a 
harvest,  and  had  never  seen  one,  it  would  take  some  considerable 
persuasion  to  get  him  to  sow  his  seed.  But  then  he  knows  his  father 
sowed  seed,  and  his  grandsire,  and  that  the  race  of  men  in  all  generations 
have  j)ut  tlieir  seed  under  the  clods  as  an  act  of  faith,  and  God  has 
accepted  their  faith,  and  sent  them  a  return.  And,  0  brethren,  have 
not  wc  multitudes  of  instances  to  confirm  our  confidence?  Let  D8 
cherfully  resign  ourselves  to  the  Lord's  will  in  suffering,  for  as  others  of 
his  saints  who  went  before  us  have  reaped  the  blessing,  so  shall  we. 
Let  us  work  on  for  our  Lord  and  Master,  knowing  that  apostles  and 
confessors,  and  a  great  cloud  of  witnesses  who  have  gone  before,  hare 
seen  great  results,  and  so  shall  we.  Let  us  patiently  tarry  till  the  Lord 
come,  lor  as  in  the  first  coming  those  that  waited  for  him  rejoiced, 
so  shall  those  who  are  found  watching  and  waiting  at  his  second  advent. 
AVe  have  not  only  the  promise  of  God,  but  that  promise  fulfilled  to 
tens  of  thousands  who  have  preceded  us,  therefore,  we  should  be  ashamed 
to  be  impatient,  rather  let  us  patiently  wait  and  work  on,  till  the  day 
bieuketh.  and  the  harvest  cometh. 

IV.  And  now,  brethren,  do  you  ask,  what  arb  the  benefits  of 
PATiENCK  ?  To  patieutly  wait  God*s  appointed  time  is  our  business.  I 
have  shown  you  how  we  are  to  wait,  but  note  this,  whatever  benefit  there 
may  be  in  patience,  it  is  very  clear  there  is  none  in  impatience.  S«ippo?ea 
man  should  be  impatient  under  suffering.  Will  it  diminish  his  suffering? 
AVill  it  increase  the  probabilities  of  his  restoration?     We  all  know  that 


.^M 


A  VISIT  TO  THS  HARVEST  FIBLD.  693 

the  irritability  of  temper  which  is  caused  by  impatience,  .is  one  of  the 
difficnities  which  the  physician  has  to  battle  with.  When  the  patient 
is  calm  there  is  a  better  chance  of  his  recovery.  If  we  were  never 
impatient  till  there  was  any  good  to  be  derived  from  our  fretfiilne?8,  we 
should  not  be  impatient  just  yet.  There  is  a  story  told  of  Mr.  Hill 
being  on  board  a  vessel  once.  It  is  said  he  heard  the  mate  swear,  and 
afterwards  he  heard  the  captain  use  a  profane  oath.  I  think  Mr.  Hill 
interposed  as  the  captain  was  about  to  swear  again,  and  s^id,  ''  No,  no, 
let  us  be  fair,  let  us  have  everything  turn  and  turn  about.  Your  mate 
has  sworn,  and  you  have  had  an  oath.  Now  it  is  my  turn — ray  turn  to 
swear."  The  captain  looked  at  him  somewhat  astonished,  and  could 
not  bnt  admit  that  there  was  a  degree  of  rightness  and  propriety  in 
every  man  having  his  turn.  However,  Mr.  Hill  did  not  swear,  and  the 
captain  said,  **  I  suppose,  sir,  you  don't  mean  to  take  your  torn,  you 
don't  mean  to  swear."  "  Oh,  yes,"  said  the  good  old  man,  "  I  mean  to 
swear  as  soon  as  ever  I  can  see  the  good  of  it."  We  might  do  the 
same  by  our  impatience  brethren.  Let  us  be  impatient  as  soon  as  ever 
we  can  see  the  use  it  will  serve.  If  the  farmer  should  want  rain  just  now, 
his  impatience  would  not  influence  the  clouds  and  make  them  pour  ont 
their  torrents.  If  your  child  happened  to  be  very  petulant,  and  have  a 
very  noisy  tongue,  and  a  mischievous  disposition,  the  mother's  impa- 
tience would  not  calm  the  child,  control  its  temp»^r,  still  its  fitful  passion, 
or  subdue  its  stubborn  humor.  Whatever  happens  to  yon,  there  is  no- 
thing can  happen  to  you  worse  than  your  being  impatient,  for  of  all 
troubles  in  the  world  that  one  can  be  troubled  with,  an  impatient  spirit 
is  about  the  worst.  0  that  ye  would  endeavour  to  conquer  impatience. 
It  cast  Satan  out  of  heaven,  when  he  was  impatient  at  the  honour 
and  dignity  of  the  Son  of  God.  He  was  impatient  at  being  a  servant 
to  his  Maker,  and  was  driven  from  his  high  estate.  Let  us  be  rid 
of  impatience  which  made  Cain  kill  his  brother,  and  which  has  done 
a  thousand  mischievous  things  since.  May  Qod  grant  us  like  the  hus- 
bandman patiently  to  watch  and  wait. 

Bnt  the  benefits  of  patience  are  too  many  for  me  to  hope  to  enume- 
rate them.  Suffice  it  to  say,  patience  saves  a  man  from  great 
discouragement.  If  I  expect  that  God  will  bless  my  labours  to  a  large 
extent  the  first  month,  and  so  strain  every  nerve  and  toil  with  every 
sinew  till  my  strength  is  ready  to  yield,  and  my  spirit  begins  to  flag  ; 
and  the  blessing  does  not  come  at  the  time  I  looked  for;  I  shall  be  dis- 
heartened. Bnt^  if  I  expect  some  result,  a  great  result  in  God's  appointed 
week  of  harvest,  even  though  I  may  not  count  on  seeing  it  myself  at 
once  ;  I  shall  keep  on  renewing  my  labors,  reviving  my  hopes,  and*en- 
couraging  myself  in  the  Lord  my  God.  Surely  a  farmer  would  give  up 
his  farm  in  sheer  despair  if  he  expected  a  harvest  in  a  month's  time 
after  sowing.  He  would  be  month  after  month  in  a  verj  sad  way,  if 
waiting  to  see  it  were  not  a  condition  for  which  he  was  thorougly  pre- 
pared. If  you  expect  an  interval  during  which  your  patience  will  be 
tried,  you  will  not  grow  discouraged,  because  it  is  absolutely  requisite 
that  you  should  wait.  Expect  to  wait  for  the  glory  ;  expect  to  wait 
for  the  reward  which  God  hath  promised ;  and,  while  you  are  waiting 
on  the  Lord  your  bread  shall  be  certain,  and  your  water  shall  be  sure : 
you  shall  often  eat  meat,  thank  God,  and  take  conrage.    The  short  days 


694  ICETBOPOLITAR  TABEBVACLE  PULPIT. 

and  long  nights  shall  not  be  all  charged  with  gloom,  bat  fall  often  they 
shall  be  tempered  with  good  cheer.  When  we  have  patience  it  keef»  \a 
in  good  heart  for  serrice.  A  man  to  whom  it  is  given  to  wait  for  t 
reward  keeps  np  his  courage,  and  when  he  has  to  wait,  he  says,  *'  It  is 
no  more  than  I  expected.  I  never  reckoned  that  I  was  to  slay  my 
enemy  at  the  first  blow.  I  never  imagined  that  I  was  to  captare  tbe 
city  as  soon  as  ever  I  had  digged  the  first  trench ;  I  reckoned  upon 
waiting,  and  now  that  is  come,  I  find  that  Ood  gives  me  the  grace  to 
fight  on  and  wrestle  on,  til]  the  victory  shall  come."  And  patience 
saves  a  man  from  a  great  deal  of  haste  and  folly.  A  hasty  man  never 
is  a  wise  man.  He  is  wise  that  halts  a  little,  and  ponders  his  ways, 
especially  when  adversity  crosses  his  path.  I  have  known  brethren  in 
the  ministry  get  discouraged  and  leave  their  pnlpits,  and  repent  as 
long  as  ever  they  lived  that  they  left  a  sphere  of  labour,  where  they 
ought  to  have  toiled  on.  I  have  known  Christian  people  get  discour- 
aged, and  touchy,  and  angry,  fall  out  with  the  chnrch  of  which  th^ 
were  members,  go  out  in  the  wilderness,  and  leave  the  fat  pastures 
behind  them.  They  have  only  had  to  regret  all  their  lives,  that  th^ 
had  not  a  little  more  patience  with  their  brethren,  and  with  the  circom- 
stances  which  surrounded  them.  Whenever  you  are  about  to  do  any- 
thing in  a  great  hurry,  pause  and  prav.  The  hot  fever  in  your  own 
3ystem  ill  fits  you  to  act  discreetly.  While  yon  tarry  for  a  more  healthy 
temperature  of  your  own  feelings,  there  may  be  a  great  change  in  die 
thermometer  outside  as  to  the  circumstances  that  influence  you.  Oreat 
haste  makes  little  speed.  He  that  believeth  shall  not  make  haste ;  and 
as  the  promise  runs,  he  shall  never  be  confounded. 

Above  all,  patience  is  to  be  commended  to  you  because  it  glorifies 
God.  The  man  that  can  wait,  and  wait  calmly,  astonishes  the  wordling, 
for  the  worldling  wants  it  now.  You  remember  John  Bunyan*B  pretty 
parable  (as  you  all  know  it,  I  will  only  give  the  outline) — of 
Passion  and  Patience.  Passion  would  have  all  his  best  things  first,  and 
one  came  in,  and  lavished  before  him  out  of  a  bag  all  that  Uie  child 
could  desire.  Patience  would  have  his  best  things  last,  and  Patience  sat 
and  waited,  so  when  Passion  had  used  up  all  his  joy,  and  all  he  sought 
for,  Patience  came  in  for  his  portion,  and  as  John  Bunyanvery 
well  remarked,  there  is  nothing  to  come  after  the  last,  and  so  the  portion 
of  Patience  lasted  for  ever.  Let  me  have  my  best  things  4ast,  my  Lord, 
and  my  worst  things  first.  Be  they  what  they  may,  they  shall  be  over, 
and  then  my  best  things  shall  last  for  ever  and  for  ever.  He  that  can 
wait  has  faith,  and  it  is  faith  that  marks  the  true  Christian.  He  that 
can  wait  hath  grace,  and  it  is  grace  that  marks  the  child  of  God.  0 
that  the  liord  would  grant  to  every  one  of  you  more  and  more  of  this 
excellent  grace  of  patience,  to  the  praise  and  glory  of  his  name. 

I  have  well  nigh  done.  Yet  there  is  one  other  respect  in  which  our 
case  is  like  that  of  the  husbandman.  As  the  season  advances,  his 
anxieties  are  prone  to  increase  rather  than  to  abate.  If  he  has  had  long 
need  of  patience  while  the  seasons  have  succeeded  each  other,  and  while 
.organic  changes  have  been  in  course  of  development,  surely  there  is  a 
stronger  demand  on  his  patience  as  the  crisis  aj^roaches  when  he  shall 
reap  the  produce.  How  anxiously  at  this  season  will  he  observe  tbe 
skies,  watch  the  clouds,  and  wait  the  opportnne  time  to  get  in  his 


A  VISIT  TO  THE   HARVEST  FIELD.  695 

orops  and  j^arncr  them  in  jjood  condition  !  Is  there  no  peril  that 
liaunts  him  lest,  after  all,  the  hlast  or  the  mildew  should  cheat  his 
hopes;  lest  fierce  winds  should  lay  the  full-grown  stems  prostrate  on 
the  irronnd  ;  lest  then  the  pelting  showers  of  rain  should  drench  the 
well-filled  ears  of  com  ?  I  might  almost  call  this  the  husbandman's 
last  fear,  and  yet  the  most  nervous  fear  that  agitates  his  mind.  In  like 
manner,  beloved,  we  have  a  closing  scene  in  prospect  which  may,  und 
will  in  all  probability,  involve  ,a  greater  trial  of  faith,  and  a  sterner 
call  for  patience,  than  any  or  all  of  the  struggles  through  which  we 
have  already  passed.  Perhaps  I  can  best  describe  it  to  you  by  quoting 
two  passages  of  Scripture,  one  specially  addressed  to  workers,  the  other 
more  particularly  to  sufferers.  For  the  first  of  these  texts ;  you  will 
find  it  in  Hebrews  x.  35,  36.  "  Cmt  not  away  therefore  your  confidence^ 
which  hnth  great  recompence  of  reward.  For  ye  have  need  of  patience^ 
that,  after  ye  have  done  the  will  of  God^  ye  might  receive  the  promise,^* 
This  is  sweet  counsel  for  thee,  0  pilgrim,  to  Zion's  city  bound.  When 
thou  wast  young  and  strong,  thou  didst  walk  many  a  weary  mile  with 
that  staff  of  promise.  It  helped  thee  over  the  ground.  Don't  throw 
it  aside  as  useless,  now  that  thou  art  old  and  infirm.  Lean  upon  it. 
Rest  upon  that  promise,  in  thy  present  weakness,  which  lightened  thy 
labour  in  the  days  of  thy  vigour.  "  Cast  not  away  your  confidence." 
But,  brethren,  there  is  something  more.  The  Apostle  says,  "  Ye  have 
need  of  patience,  after  ye  have  done  the  will  of  God."  But  why,  you 
will  say,  is  patience  so  indispensable  at  this  juncture  of  experience  ? 
Doubtless  you  all  know  that  we  are  never  so  subject  to  impatience  as 
when  there  is  nothing  we  can  do.  All  the  while  the  farmer  is  occupied 
with  ploughing,  harrowing,  tilling,  drilling,  hoeing,  and  the  like,  he  is 
too  busy  to  be  fretful.  It  is  when  the  work  is  done,  and  there  is 
nothing  more  to  occupy  his  hands,  that  the  very  leisure  he  has  to 
endure  gives  occasion  to  secret  qualms  and  lurking  cares.  So  it  ever 
is  with  us.  While  "  we  are  labourers  together  with  God,"  our  occupa- 
tion is  so  pleasant  that  we  little  heed  the  toil  and  moil  of  hard  service. 
But  when  it  comes  to  a  point  where  we  have  no  province,  for  it  is 
**  God  that  giveth  the  increase,"  we  are  apt  to  be  grievously  distrustful ; 
our  unbelief  finds  full  play.  Hence  it  is,  brethren,  that  after  our  fight 
is  fought,  after  our  race  is  run,  after  our  allotted  task  is  finished,  there 
is  so  much  need  of  patience,  of  such  patience  as  waits  only  on  God 
and  watches  unto  prayer,  that  we  may  finish  our  course  with  joy  and 
the  ministry  we  have  received  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  And  what  about  the 
second  text  ?  Where  is  that  to  be  found  ?  It  is  in  the  early  part  of 
rhi6  epistle  of  James.  Turn  to  James  i.  4.  ^^  Let  patience  have  her 
furfect  work,  that  ye  may  he  perfect  and  entire,  wanting  nothing,''  Oh, 
how  indisposed  we  all  of  us  are  to  take  this  advice  !  Me  thinks  I  see 
Paul  retiring  thrice  to  wrestle  with  God  in  prayer,  that  he  would 
remove  the  thorn  from  his  flesh.  He  felt  the  rankling,  and  he  craved 
for  relief.  He  had  hardly  thought  of  it  as  a  seton  that  must  irritate 
before  it  could  relieve,  or  as  a  medicine  that  must  gripe  before  it  could 
heal.  But  oh,  patience  is  then  wrought  up  to  its  climax,  when  the  soul 
so  accepts  the  chastisement  from  the  hand  of  God  that  she  cannot,  and 
will  not,  ask  him  to  change  his  treatment  or  alter  his  discipline. 
Seemeth  it  not  as  though  patience  were  a  virtue  par  excellence  which 


696  METROPOLITAX  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

puts  the  last  polish  on  Christinn  chastity?  We  will  hie  ns  back  to  the 
cornfields  a^n:  I  am  afraid  we  were  forj^etting  them.  But  this  time  we 
will  not  talk  so  much  with  the  farmer  as  with  the  crops.  Knowest  thou 
then  what  it  is  that  gives  that  brijjht  yellow  tin^e  of  maturity  to  those 
blades  which  erst  were  p:rcen  and  growini:^?  What,  think  you,  imparts 
that  golden  hue  to  the  wheat?  How  do  you  suppose  the  husbandman 
judges  when  it  is  time  to  thrust  in  the  sickle?  I  will  tell  you. 
All  the  while  the  corn  was  growing,  tho^e  hollow  stems  served  as  ducts 
that  drew  up  nourishment  from  the  soil.  At  length  the  process  of 
vegetation  is  fulfilled.  The  fibres  of  the  plant  become  rigid;  they  cease 
their  office;  down  below  there  has  been  a  failure  of  the  vital  power  which 
is  the  precursor  of  death.  Henceforth  the  heavenlypowers  work  quick  and 
marvellous  changes;  the  sun  paints  his  superscription  on  thcearsof  grrain. 
They  have  reached  the  last  stage:  having  fed  on  the  riches  of  the  soil  long^ 
enough,  they  arc  only  influenced  from  above.  The  time  of  their  removal 
is  at  hand,  when  they  shall  be  cut  down,  carried  away  in  the  team,  and 
housed  in  the  garners.  So,  too,  beloved  in  the  Lord,  it  is  with  some  of 
you.  Do  I  speak  as  a  prophet?  Do  I  not  rather  echo  a  trite  observation? 
**  The  fall  of  the  year  is  most  thickly  strewn  with  the  fall  of  human 
life."  You  have  long  been  succoured  with  mercies  that  have  come  op 
from  mother-earth ;  you  have  been  exposed  to  cold  dews,  chilling  frosts^ 
stormy  blasts;  you  have  had  the  trial  of  the  vapory  fog,  the  icy 
winter,  the  fickle  spring,  and  the  summer  drought ;  but  it  is  nearly  all 
over  now.  You  arc  ready  to  depart.  Not  yet  for  a  brief  space  has  the 
reaper  come.  "  Ye  have  need  of  patience.**  Having  suffered  thus  far, 
your  tottering  frame  h»s  learnt  to  bend.  Patience,  man — patience !  A 
mighty  transformation  is  about  to  be  wrought  on  you  in  a  short  space. 
Wait  on  the  Lord.  Holiness  shall  now  be  legibly,  more  legibly  than 
ever,  inscribed  on  your  forefront  by  the  clear  shining  of  the  Sun  of 
Kighteousness.  The  heavenly  husbandman  has  you  daily,  hourly,  in 
his  eye,  till  he  shall  say  to  the  angel  of  his  presence,  *'  Put  in  vonr 
sickle.**  Then,  as  we  pronounce  your  obituary  with  the  meed  of  praise 
due  to  one  in  whom  Ood  has  wrought  a  perfect  work,  we  shall  record 
that  you  were  patient  under  affliction,  resigned  to  the  will  of  the  Lord, 
and  ready  to  depart  and  to  be  with  Christ,  which  is  far  better.  Patience 
has  had  iier  perfect  work:  you  lack  nothing.  God  grant  unto  yoa  this 
gracious  "  7ui7ic  di'miffis'*  when  your  time  for  ingathering  has  come  I 

Now,  I  have  only  spoken  to  believers,  because  as  I  have  already  said, 
the  unbeliever  cannot  wait  with  patience,  for  he  has  nothing  to  wait  for. 
There  is  nothing  for  him  but  a  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment.  Oh,  it 
must  be  an  awful  thing  to  go  from  a  life  of  poverty,  or  of  suffering,  or  of 
drudgery  here,  into  the  world  where  the  wrath  of  Ood  abideth  for  ever.  It 
matters  not  what  your  position  here  may  be,  if  at  the  end  you  enter  into 
rest.  Equally  little  does  it  matter  what  joys  or  wealth  you  have  here,  if 
after  all  you  are  driven  from  the  Lord's  presence.  May  you  be  led  to 
believe  in  Jceus.  There  lies  safety.  May  you  rest-  in  his  precious 
blood.  There  is  pardon;  there  is  salvation.  God  grant  it,  for  Chnst*s 
sake!   Amen. 


^etr0B0Kta[tt  ^isSatmult  f  tiljit. 


JOY  BORN  AT  BETHLEHEM. 


^   ^^rmon 


DKLIVEBiO)    ON  LORD*S  DaY  MOBNIKa,   DXCSMBEB  24tH,   1871,  BT 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

* 

AT     THE     KETROPOLITAN     TABEBNACLX,     NBWINGTON. 


'*  And  the  angel  said  unto  them,  Fear  not :  for,  behold,  I  bring  you  good  tidings 
of  great  joy,  which  shall  be  to  all  people.  For  unto  you  is  bom  tlus  day  in  the  city 
of  David  a  Saviour,  which  is  Christ  the  Lord.  And  this  shall  be  a  sigpi  unto  you ; 
Ye  shall  find  the  babe  wrapped  in  swaddling  clothes,  lying  in  a  manger." — Luke  ii. 
10,  11,  12. 

We  have  no  superstitious  regard  for  times  and  seasons,  (yertainlj  we  do 
not  believe  in  the  present  ecclesiastical  arrangement  called  Christmas  : 
first,  because  we  do  not  believe  in  the  mass  at  all,  but  abhor  it,  whether 
it  bo  said  or  sung  in  Latin  or  in  English;  and,  secondly,  because  we 
find  no  Scriptural  warrant  whatever  for  observing  any  day  as  the  birth- 
day of  the  Saviour  ;  and,  consequently,  its  observance  is  a  superstition, 
because  nob  of  divine  authority.  Superstition  has  fixed  most  positively 
the  day  of  our  Saviour's  birth,  although  there  is  no  possibility  of  dis- 
covering when  it  occurred.  Fabricius  gives  a  catalogue  of  136  different 
learned  opinions  upon  the  matter;  and  various  divines  invent  weighty 
arguments  for  advocating  a  date  in  every  month  in  the  year.  It  was  not 
till  the  middle  of  the  third  century  that  any  part  of  the  church  celebrated 
the  nativity  of  our  Lord  ;  and  it  was  not  till  very  long  after  the  Western 
church  had  set  the  example,  that  the  Eastern  adopted  it.  Because 
the  dav  is  nob  known,  therefore  superstition  has  fixed  it;  while, 
since  the  day  of  the  death  of  our  Saviour  might  be  determined  with 
much  certainty,  therefore  superstition  shifts  the  date  of  its  observance 
every  year.  Where  is  the  method  in  the  madness  of  the  superstitious  ? 
Probably  the  fact  is  that  the  holy  days  were  arranged  to  fit  in  with 
heathen  festivals.  We  venture  to  assert,  that  if  there  be  any  day  in  the 
year,  of  which  we  may  be  pretty  sure  that  it  was  not  the  day  on  which 
the  Saviour  was  born,  it  is  the  twenty-fifbh  of  December.  Nevertheless, 
since,  the  current  of  men's  thoughts  is  led  this  way  just  now,  and  I  see 
no  evil  in  the  current  itself,  I  shall  launch  the  bark  of  our  discourse  upon 
that  stream,  and  make  use  of  the  fact,  which  I  shall  neither  justify  nor 
condemn,  by  endeavouring  to  lead  your  thoughts  in  the  same  direction. 
Since  it  is  lawful,  and  even  laudable,  to  meditate  upon  the  incarnation 
No.  1,026. 


69S  METROI»OLlTAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

of  the  Lord  upon  any  day  in  the  year,  it  cannot  be  in  the  power  of  oUier 
men's  supersritions  to  render  such  a  meditation  improper  for  to-day. 
Rep:ardinc:  not  the  day,  let  us,  nevertheless,  giye  God  thanks  for  the 
gifD  of  his  dear  Son. 

In  our  text  we  have  before  us  the  sermon  of  the  first  evangjelist 
under  tlie  gospel  dispensation.  The  preacher  was  an  angel,  and  it  was 
meet  it  should  be  so,  for  the  grandest  and  last  of  all  evangels  will  be 
proclaimed  by  an  angel  when  he  shall  sound  the  trumpet  of  the  resur- 
rection, and  the  children  of  the  regeneration  shall  rise  into  the  fulness 
of  their  joy.  The  key-note  of  this  angelic  gospel  is  joy — "I  bring 
unto  you  good  tidings  of  great  joy."  Nature  fears  in  the  presence  of 
God— the  shepherds  were  sore  afraid.  The  law  itself  served  to  deepen 
this  natural  feeling  of  dismay;  seeing  men  were  sinful,  and  the  law 
came  into  the  world  to  reveal  sin,  its  tendency  was  to  make  men  fear 
and  tremble  under  any  and  every  divine  revelation.  The  Jews  unani- 
mously believed  that  if  any  man  beheld  supernatural  appearances,  he 
would  be  sure  to  die,  so  that  what  nature  dictated,  the  law  and  the  general 
beliefs  of  those  under  it  also  abetted.  But  the  first  word  of  the  gospel 
ended  all  this,  for  the  angelic  evangelist  said,  "  Fear  not,  behold  I  bfing 
you  good  tidings."  Henceforth,  it  is  to  be  no  dreadfnl  thing 'for  man 
to  approach  his  Maker  ;  redeemed  man  is  not  to  fear  when  God  unveils 
the  splendour  of  his  majesty,  since  he  appears  no  more  a  judge  upon  bis 
throne  of  terror,  but  a  Father  unbending  in  sacred  familiarity  before 
his  own  beloved  children. 

The  joy  which  this  first  gospel  preacher  spoke  of  was  no  mean  one, 
for  he  said,  "I  bring  you  good  tidings'' — that  alone  were  joy :  and  not 
good  tidings  of  joy  only,  but  "good  tidings  oi great  joy."  Every  word 
is  emphatic,  as  if  to  show  that  the  jrospel  is  above  all  things  intended 
to  promote,  and  ^\\\\  most  abundantly  create  the  greatest  possible  joy 
in  the  human  heart  wherever  it  is  received.  Man  is  like  a  harp  un- 
strung, and  the  music  of  his  soul's  living  strings  is  discordant,  his 
whole  nature  wails  with  sorrow  ;  but  the  son  of  David,  that  mighty 
har[x;r,  has  come  to  restore  the  harmony  of  humanity,  and  where  his 
gracious  fingers  move  among  the  strings,  the  touch  of  the  fingers  of  an 
incarnate  God  brings  forth  music  sweet  as  that  of  the  spheres,  and 
melody  rich  as  a  seraph's  canticle.  Would  God  that  all  men  felt  that 
divine  hand. 

In  trying  to  open  up  this  angelic  discourse  this  morning,  we  shall 
note  three  things :  the  joy  which  U  spoken  of;  next,  the  persons  to  whom 
this  joy  comes  ;  and  then,  thirdly,  tJie  siyn,  which  is  to  us  a  sign  as  well 
as  to  these  shepherds — a  sign  of  the  birth  and  source  of  joy. 

I.  First,  then,  the  joy,  which  is  mentioned  in  our  text — whence 
com^  s  it,  and  what  is  it  ? 

We  have  already  said  it  is  a  '^ great  joy" — "good  tidings  of  great 
joy."  Earth's  joy  is  small,  her  mirth  is  trivial,  but  heaven  has  sent  us 
joy  immeasurable,  fit  for  immortal  minds.  Inasmuch  as  no  note  of 
time  is  appended,  and  no  intimation  is  given  that  the  message  will  ever 
be  reversed,  we  may  say  that  it  is  a  lasting  joy,  a  joy  which  will  ring 
all  down  the  ages,  the  echoes  of  which  shall  be  heard  until  the  trumpet 
brings  the  resurrection ;  aye,  and  onward  for  ever  and  for  ever.  For 
when  God  sent  forth  the  angel  in  his  brightness  to  say,  "I  bring  you 


JOY  BOSK  IT  BETHLSHEK.  699 

good  tiding  of  great  joy,  which  shall  be  to  all  people,"  be  did  as  much 
as  saj,  ''  From  this  time  forth  it  shall  be  joj  to  the  sons  of  men  ;  there 
shall  be  peace  to  the  human  race,  and  goodwill  towards  men  for  ever 
and  for  ever,  as  long  as  there  is  glory  to  God  in  the  highest."  0 
blessed  thought !  the  Star  of  Bethlehem  shall  never  set.  Jesus,  the 
fairest  among  ten  thousand,  the  most  lovely  among  the  beautiful,  is  a 
joy  for  ever. 

Since  this  joy  is  expressly  associated  with  the  glory  of  God,  by  the 
words,  "  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,"  we  may  be  quite  clear  that  it  is 
a  fwre  and  holy  joy.  No  other  would  an  angel  have  proclaimed,  and, 
indeed,  no  other  joy  is  joy.  The  wine  pressed  from  the  grapes  of 
Sodom  may  sparkle  and  foam,  but  it  is  bitterness  in  the  end,  and  the 
dregs  thereof  are  death ;  only  that  which  comes  from  the  clusters  of 
Eschol  is  the  true  wine  of  the  kingdom,  making  glad  the  heart  of  God 
and  man.  Holy  joy  is  the  joy  of  heaven,  and  that,  be  ye  sure,  is  the 
yery  cream  of  joy.  The  joy  of  sin  is  a  fire-fountain,  having  its  source  in 
the  burning  soil  of  hell,  maddening  and  consuming  those  who  drink  its 
fire-water ;  of  such  delights  we  desire  not  to  drink.  It  were  to  be  worse 
than  damned  to  be  happy  in  sin,  since  it  is  the  beginning  of  grace  to 
be  wretched  in  sin,  and  the  consummationof  grace  to  be  wholly  escaped 
from  sin,  and  to  shudder  even  at  the  thought  of  it.  It  is  hell  to  live 
in  sin  and  misery,  it  is  a  deep  lower  still  when  men  could  fashion  a  joy 
in  sin.  God  save  us  from  unholy  peace  and  from  unholy  joy !  The  joy 
announced  by  the  angel  of  the  nativity  is  as  pure  as  it  is  lasting,  as 
holy  as  it  is  great.  Let  us  then  always  believe  concerning  the  Christian 
religion  that  it  has  its  joy  within  itself,  and  holds  its  feasts  within  its 
own  pure  precincts,  a  feast  whose  viands  all  grow  on  holy  ground.  There 
are  those  who,  to-morrow,  will  pretend  to  exhibit  joy  in  the  remem- 
brance of  our  Saviour's  birth,  but  they  will  not  seek  their  pleasure  in 
the  Saviour :  they  will  need  many  additions  to  the  feast  before  they  can 
be  satisfied.  Joy  in  Immanuel  would  be  a  poor  sort  of  mirth  to  them. 
In  this  country,  too  often,  if  one  were  unaware  of  the  name,  one 
might  believe  the  Christmas  festival  to  be  a  feast  of  Bacchus,  or  of  Ceres, 
certainly  not  a  commemoration  of  the  Divine  birth.  Yet  is  there  cause 
enough  for  holy  joy  in  the  Lord  himself,  and  reasons  for  ecstacy  in  his 
birth  among  men.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  most  men  imagine  that  in 
Christ  there  is  only  seriousness  and  solemnity,  and  to  them  consequently 
weariness,  gloom,  and  discontent ;  therefore,  they  lookout  of  and  beyond 
what  Christ  allows,  to  snatch  from  the  tables  of  Satan  the  delicacies 
with  which  to  adorn  the  banquet  held  in  honour  of  a  Saviour.  Let 
it  not  be  so  among  you.  The  joy  which  the  gospel  brings  is  not 
borrowed  but  blooms  in  its  own  garden.  We  may  truly  say  in  the 
language  of  one  of  our  sweetest  hymns — 

"  I  need  not  go  abroad  for  joy, 
I  have  a  feast  at  home, 
My  sighs  are  turned  into  songs. 
My  heart  has  ceased  to  roam. 

Down  from  above  the  Blessed  Dove 
Has  come  into  my  breast. 
To  witness  his  eternal  love. 
And  give  my  spirit  rest.** 


700  METBOPOLITAN  TABBRirACLB  PULPIT. 

Let  onr  joy  be  living  water  from  those  sacred  wells  which  the  Lord 
himself  has  digged ;  may  his  joy  abide  in  ns,  that  our  joy  may  be  folL 
Of  Christ's  joy  we  cannot  have  too  much  ;  no  fear  of  running  to  exceflB 
when  his  love  is  the  wine  we  drink.  Oh  to  be  planged  in  this  pore 
stream  of  spiritual  delights  I 

But  why  is  it  that  the  coming  of  Christ  into  the  world  is  the  occa- 
sion of  joy  ?  The  answer  is  as  follows : — First,  because  it  is  ewr- 
more  a  joyous  fact  that  God  should  be  in  alliance  tvith  man^  especiallj 
when  the  alliance  is  so  near  tliat  God  should  in  yery  deed  take  onr 
manhood  into  union  with  his  godhead ;  so  that  God  and  man  should 
constitute  one  divine,  mysterious  person.  Sin  had  separated  between 
God  and  man ;  but  tiie  incarnation  bridges  the  separation :  it  is  a  pre- 
lude to  the  atoning  sacrifice,  but  it  is  a  prelude  full  of  the  richest  hope. 
From  henceforth,  when  God  looks  upon  man,  he  will  remember  that  his 
own  Son  is  a  man.  From  this  day  forth,  when  he  beholds  the  sinner, 
if  his  wrath  should  burn,  he  will  remember  that  his  own  Son,  as  nuin, 
stood  in  the  sinner*s  place,  and  bore  the  sinner's  doom.  As  in  thecaae 
of  war,  the  feud  is  ended  when  the  opposing  parties  intermarry,  so 
there  is  no  more  war  between  God  and  man,  because  God  has  takoi 
man  into  intimate  union  with  himself  Herein,  then,  there  was  caose 
for  joy. 

But  there  was  more  than  that,  for  the  shepherds  were  aware  that  ihm 
Jiad  been  promises  made  of  old  \vhic\i  had  been  the  hope  and  comfort  of 
believers  in  all  ages,  and  these  irere  now  to  be  fulfilled.  There  was  that 
ancient  promise  made  on  the  threshold  of  Eden  to  the  first  sinners  of 
onr  race,  that  the  seed  of  the  woman  should  bruise  the  serpent's  head; 
another  promise  made  to  the  Father  of  the  faithful  that  in  his  seed 
should  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be  blessed,  and  promises  uttered  by 
the  mouths  of  prophets  and  of  saints  since  the  world  began.  Now,  the 
announcement  of  the  angel  of  the  Lord  to  the  shepherds  was  a  declara- 
tion that  the  covenant  was  fulfilled,  that  now  in  the  fulness  of  time  God 
would  redeem  his  word,  and  the  Messiah,  who  was  to  be  Israel's  gloiy 
and  the  world's  hope,  was  now  really  come.  Be  glad  ye  heavens,  and 
be  joyful  0  earth,  for  the  Lord  hath  done  it,  and  in  mercy  hath  he 
visited  his  people.  The  Lord  hath  not  suflfered  his  word  to  fail,  bat 
hath  fulfilled  unto  his  people  his  promises.  The  time  to  favour  Zion, 
yea  the  set  time,  is  come.  Now  that  the  sceptre  is  departed  from  Jndab, 
behold  theShiloh  comes,  the  Messenger  of  the  covenant  suddenly  appears 
in  his  temple  I 

Hut  the  angers  song  had  in  it  yet  fuller  reason  for  joy ;  for  our  Lord 
who  was  born  in  Bethlehem  came  as  a  Saviour.  **  Unto  you  is  born  this 
day  a  Saviour.**  God  had  come  to  earth  before,  but  not  as  a  Saviour. 
Remember  that  terrible  coming  when  there  went  three  angels  into 
Sodom  at  night-fall,  for  the  Lord  said,  **  I  will  go  now  and  see  whether 
it  be  altogether  according  to  the  cry  thereof.**  He  had  come  as  a  spy 
to  witness  human  sin,  and  as  an  avenger  to  lift  his  hand  to  heaven,  acd 
bid  the  red  fire  descend  and  bum  up  the  accursed  cities  of  the  plain. 
Horror  to  the  world  when  God  thus  descends.  If  Sinai  smokes  when 
the  law  is  proclaimed,  the  earth  itself  shall  melt  when  the  breaches  of 
the  law  are  punished.  But  now  not  as  an  angel  of  vengeance,  but  as 
a  man  in  mercy  God  has  come  ;  not  to  spy  out  our  sin,  but  to  remove 


JOY  BORN  AT  BETHLEHEM.  701 

it ;  not  to  punish  guilt,  but  to  forgive  it.  The  Lord  might  have  come 
with  thunderbolts  in  both  his  hands,  he  might  have  come  like  Elios  to  call 
fire  from  heaven ;  but  no,  his  hands  are  full  of  gifts  of  love,  and  his 
presence  is  the  guarantee  of  grace.  The  babe  bom  in  the  manger  might 
have  been  another  prophet  of  tears,  or  another  son  of  thunder,  but  he 
was  not  so :  he  came  in  gentleness,  his  glory  and  his  thuuder  alike  laid 
aside. 

"  *Twas  mercy  filled  the  throne. 

And  wrath  stood  silent  by, 

When  Christ  on  the  kind  errand  came 

To  sinners  doomed  to  die.'* 

Rejoice,  ye  who  feel  that  ye  are  lost;  your  Saviour  comes  to  seek 
and  save  you.  Be  of  good  cheer  ye  who  are  in  prison,  for  he  comes 
to  set  you  free.  Ye  who  are  famished  and  ready  to  die,  rejoice  that 
he  has  consecrated  for  you  a  Bethlehem,  a  house  of  bread,  and  he  has 
come  to  be  the  bread  of  life  to  your  souls.  Rejoice,  0  sinners,  every- 
where for  the  restorer  of  the  castaways,  the  Saviour  of  the  fallen  is 
born.  Join  in  the  joy,  ye  saints,  for  he  is  the  preserver  of  the  saved 
ones,  delivering  them  ^om  innumerable  perils,  and  he  is  the  sure 
prefecter  of  such  as  he  preserves.  Jesus  is  no  partial  Saviour,  beginning 
a  work  and  not  concluding  it ;  but,  restoring  and  upholding,  he  also 
prefects  and  presents  the  saved  ones  without  spot  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such 
tking  before  his  Father's  throne.  Rejoice  aloud  all  ye  people,  let  your 
hills  and  valleys  ring  with  joy,  for  a  Saviour  who  is  mighty  to  save  is 
bom  among  yon. 

Nor  was  this  all  the  holy  mirth,  for  the  next  word  has  also  in  it  a 
fulness  of  joy  : — "  a  Saviour,  who  is  Christ^''  or  the  Anointed.  Our 
Lord  was  not  an  amateur  Saviour  who  came  down  from  heaven  upon 
an  unauthorised  mission  ;  but  he  was  chosen,  ordained,  and  anointea  of 
God ;  he  could  truly  say,  **  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  me,  because 
the  Lord  hath  anointed  me.'*  Here  is  great  comfort  for  all  such  as 
need  a  Saviour;  it  is  to  them  no  mean  consolation  that  God 
has  himself  authorised  Christ  to  save.  There  can  be  no  fear 
of  a  jar  between  the  mediator  and  the  judge,  no  peril  of  a  nonacceptance 
of  our  Saviour's  work ;  because  God  has  commissioned  Christ  to  do 
what  he  has  done,  and  in  saving  sinners  he  is  only  executing  his  Father's 
own  will.  Christ  is  here  called  "  the  anointed."  AH  his  people  are 
anointed,  and  there  were  priests  after  the  orderof  Aaron  who  were  anointed, 
but  he  is  the  anointed,  ^'  anointed  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above  his 
fellows;"  so  plenteously  anointed  that,  like  the  unction  upon  Aaron's 
head,  the  sacred  anointing  of  the  Head  of  the  church  distils  in  copious 
streams,  till  we  who  are  like  the  skirts  of  his  garments  are  made  sweet 
with  the  rich  perfume.  He  is  "  the  anointed  "  in  a  threefold  sense :  as 
prophet  to  preach  the  gospel  with  power ;  as  priest  to  offer  sacrifice ;  as 
king  to  rale  and  reign.  In  each  of  these  he  is  preeminent ;  he  is  such 
a  teacher,  priest,  and  raler  as  was  never  seen  before.  In  him  was  a  rare 
conjunction  of  glorious  offices,  for  never  did  prophet,  priest,  and  king 
meet  in  one  person  before  among  the  sons  of  men,  nor  shall  it  ever  be 
so  again.  Triple  is  the  anointing  of  him  who  is  a  priest  after  the  order 
of  Melchisedec,  a  prophet  like  unto  Moses,  and  a  king  of  whose 
dominion  there  is  no  end.    In  the  name  of  Christ,  the  Holy  Ghost  is 


700  METBOPOLITAN  TABBRirAOLB  PULPIT. 

Let  onr  joy  be  living  water  from  those  sacred  wells  which  the  Lord 
himself  has  digged ;  may  his  joy  abide  in  ns,  that  onr  joj  may  be  fdlL 
Of  Christ's  joy  we  cannot  have  too  much  ;  no  fear  of  running  to  excesB 
when  his  love  is  the  wine  we  drink.  Oh  to  be  planged  in  this  pare 
stream  of  spiritual  delights  I 

But  why  is  it  that  the  coming  of  Christ  into  the  world  is  the  occa- 
sion of  joy  ?  The  answer  is  as  follows : — First,  because  ii  is  ever* 
more  a  joyous  fact  that  God  should  b$  in  alliance  with  man,  especially 
when  the  alliance  is  so  near  that  God  shonld  in  yery  deed  take  onr 
manhood  into  union  with  his  godhead ;  so  that  Gk)d  and  man  should 
constitute  one  divine,  mysterious  person.  Sin  had  separated  between 
God  and  man  ;  but  the  incarnation  bridges  the  separation :  it  is  a  pre- 
lude to  the  atoning  sacrifice,  but  it  is  a  prelude  full  of  the  richest  hope. 
From  henceforth,  when  God  looks  upon  man,  he  will  remember  that  his 
own  Son  is  a  man.  From  this  day  forth,  when  he  beholds  the  sinner, 
if  his  wrath  should  burn,  he  will  remember  that  his  own  Son,  as  man, 
stood  in  the  sinner's  place,  and  bore  the  sinner's  doom.  As  in  the  case 
of  war,  the  feud  is  ended  when  the  opposing  parties  intermarry,  so 
there  is  no  more  war  between  God  and  man,  because  Ood  has  tf^en 
man  into  intimate  union  with  himself.  Herein,  then,  there  was  cause 
for  joy. 

But  there  was  more  than  that,  for  the  shepherds  were  aware  that  tiim 
had  been  promises  made  of  old  x^hich  had  been  the  hope  and  comfort  of 
believers  in  all  ages,  and  these  were  now  to  be  fulfilled.  There  was  that 
ancient  promise  made  on  the  threshold  of  Eden  to  the  first  sinners  of 
onr  race,  that  the  seed  of  the  woman  should  bruise  the  serpent's  head; 
another  promise  made  to  the  Father  of  the  faithful  that  in  his  seed 
should  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be  blessed,  and  promises  uttered  by 
the  mouths  of  prophets  and  of  saints  since  the  world  began.  Now,  iht 
announcement  of  the  angel  of  the  Lord  to  the  shepherds  was  a  declara- 
tion that  the  covenant  was  fulfilled,  that  now  in  the  fulness  of  time  God 
would  redeem  his  word,  and  the  Messiah,  who  was  to  be  Israel's  glory 
and  the  world's  hope,  was  now  really  come.  Be  glad  ye  heavens,  and 
be  joyful  0  earth,  for  the  Lord  hath  done  it,  and  in  mercy  hath  he 
visited  his  people.  The  Lord  hath  not  suflfered  his  word  to  fail,  but 
hath  fulfilled  unto  his  people  his  promises.  The  time  to  favour  Zion, 
yea  the  set  time,  is  come.  Now  that  the  sceptre  is  departed  from  Judab, 
behold  theShiloh  comes,  the  Messenger  of  the  covenant  suddenly  appears 
in  his  temple  I 

But  the  angel's  song  had  in  it  yet  fuller  reason  for  joy ;  for  our  Lord 
who  was  born  in  Bethlehem  came  as  a  Saviour.  **  Unto  you  is  bom  this 
day  a  Saviour."  God  had  come  to  earth  before,  but  not  as  a  Saviour. 
Remember  that  terrible  coming  when  there  went  three  angels  into 
Sodom  at  night-fall,  for  the  Lord  said,  **  I  will  go  now  and  see  whether 
it  be  altogether  according  to  the  cry  thereof."  He  had  come  as  a  spy 
to  witness  human  sin,  and  as  an  avenger  to  lift  his  hand  to  heaven,  and 
bid  the  red  fire  descend  aud  hum  up  the  accursed  cities  of  the  plain. 
Horror  to  the  world  when  God  thus  descends.  If  Sinai  smokes  when 
the  law  is  proclaimed,  the  earth  itself  shall  melt  when  the  breaches  of 
the  law  are  punished.  But  now  not  as  an  angel  of  vengeance,  but  as 
a  man  in  mercy  God  has  come  ;  not  to  spy  out  our  sin,  but  to  remove 


JOY  BORN  AT  BETHLEHBM.  701 

it ;  not  to  punish  gailt,  but  to  forgiye  it.  The  Lord  might  have  come 
with  thunderbolts  in  both  his  hands,  he  might  have  come  like  lillias  to  call 
fire  from  heaven ;  but  no,  his  hands  are  fall  of  gifts  of  love,  and  his 
presence  is  the  guarantee  of  grace.  The  babe  bom  in  the  manger  might 
have  been  another  prophet  of  tears,  or  another  son  of  thunder,  but  he 
was  not  so :  he  came  in  gentleness,  his  glory  and  his  thunder  alike  laid 
aside. 

"  'Twas  mercy  filled  the  throne, 
And  wrath  stood  silent  by, 
When  Christ  on  the  kind  errand  came 
To  sinners  doomed  to  die/' 

Rejoice,  ye  who  feel  that  ye  are  lost ;  your  Saviour  comes  to  seek 
and  save  you.  Be  of  good  cheer  ye  who  are  in  prison,  for  he  comes 
to  set  you  free.  Ye  who  are  famished  and  ready  to  die,  rejoice  that 
he  has  consecrated  for  you  a  Bethlehem,  a  house  of  bread,  and  he  has 
come  to  be  the  bread  of  life  to  your  souls.  Rejoice,  0  sinners,  every- 
where for  the  restorer  of  the  castaways,  the  Saviour  of  the  fallen  is 
born.  Join  in  the  joy,  ye  saints,  for  he  is  the  preserver  of  the  saved 
ones,  delivering  them  ft'om  innumerable  perils,  and  he  is  the  sure 
prefecter  of  such  as  he  preserves.  Jesus  is  no  partial  Saviour,  beginning 
a  work  and  not  concluding  it ;  but,  restoring  and  upholding,  he  also 
prefects  and  presents  the  saved  ones  without  spot  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such 
tking  before  his  Father's  throne.  Rejoice  aloud  all  ye  people,  let  your 
hills  and  valleys  ring  with  joy,  for  a  Saviour  who  is  mighty  to  save  is 
bom  among  you. 

Nor  was  this  all  the  holy  mirth,  for  the  next  word  has  also  in  it  a 
falness  of  joy  : — **  a  Saviour,  who  is  Christ,'*  or  the  Anointed.  Our 
Lord  was  not  an  amateur  Saviour  who  came  down  from  heaven  upon 
an  unauthorised  mission  ;  but  he  was  chosen,  ordained,  and  anointed  of 
Crod ;  he  could  traly  say,  **  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  me,  because 
the  Lord  hath  anointed  me."  Here  is  great  comfort  for  all  such  as 
need  a  Saviour;  it  is  to  them  no  mean  consolation  that  Ood 
has  himself  authorised  Christ  to  save.  There  can  be  no  fear 
of  a  jar  between  the  mediator  and  the  judge,  no  peril  of  a  nonacceptance 
of  our  Saviour's  work ;  because  God  has  commissioned  Christ  to  do 
what  he  has  done,  and  in  saving  sinners  he  is  only  executing  his  Father's 
own  will.  Christ  is  here  called  "  Ihe  anointed."  All  his  people  are 
anointed,  and  there  were  priests  after  the  order  of  Aaron  who  were  anointed, 
but  he  is  ihe  anointed,  *^  anointed  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above  his 
fellows;"  so  plenteously  anointed  that,  like  the  unction  upon  Aaron's 
head,  the  sacred  anointing  of  the  Head  of  the  church  distils  in  copious 
streams,  till  we  who  are  like  the  skirts  of  his  garments  are  made  sweet 
with  the  rich  perfume.  He  is  "  the  anointed  "  in  a  threefold  sense :  as 
prophet  to  preach  the  gospel  with  power ;  as  j)riest  to  offer  sacrifice ;  as 
king  to  mle  and  reign.  In  each  of  these  he  is  preeminent ;  he  is  such 
a  teacher,  priest,  and  ruler  as  was  never  seen  before.  In  him  was  a  rare 
conjunction  of  glorious  offices,  for  never  did  prophet,  priest,  and  king 
meet  in  one  person  before  among  the  sons  of  men,  nor  shall  it  ever  be 
so  again.  Triple  is  the  anointing  of  him  who  is  a  priest  after  the  order 
of  Melchisedcc,  a  prophet  like  unto  Moses,  and  a  king  of  whose 
dominion  there  is  no  end.    In  the  name  of  Christ,  the  Holy  Ghost  is 


702  METROPOLITAN  TABERKAOLE  FOLPTT. 

glorified,  by  being  seen  as  anointing  the  incarnate  (Jod.  Tmly,  detr 
brethren,  if  we  did  but  understand  all  this,  and  receive  it  into  our 
hearts,  our  souls  would  leap  for  joy  on  this  Sabbath  day,  to  think  that 
there  is  bom  unto  us  a  Saviour  who  is  anointed  of  the  Lord. 

One  more  note,  and  this  the  loudest,  let  us  sound  it  well  and  hear  it 
well — "  which  is  Christ  the  Lord,''  Now  the  word  Lord,  or  Kurw, 
here  used  is  tantamount  to  Jehovah.  We  cannot  doubt  that,  becaose 
it  is  the  same  word  used  twice  in  the  ninth  Terse,  and  in  the  ninth 
verse  none  can  question  that  it  means  Jehovah.  Hear  it,  "  And,  lo, 
the  angel  of  the  Lord  came  upon  them,  and  the  glory  of  the  lAird 
shone  round  about  them."  And  if  this  be  not  enough,  read  the 
23rd  verse,  **  As  it  is  written  in  the  law  of  the  Lord^  erery  male  that 
openeth  the  womb  shall  be  called  holy  to  the  Lordr  Now  the  word 
Lord  here  assuredly  refers  to  Jehovah,  the  one  God,  and  so  it  must  do 
here.  Our  Saviour  is  Christ,  God,  Jehovah.  No  testimony  to  his 
divinity  could  be  plainer ;  it  is  indisputable.  And  what  joy  there  is 
in  this ;  for  suppose  an  angel  had  been  our  Saviour,  he  would  not  have 
been  able  to  bear  the  load  of  my  sin  or  yours  ;  or  if  anything  less  thim 
God  had  been  set  up  as  the  ground  of  our  salvation,  it  might  have  been 
found  too  ^il  a  foundation.  But  if  he  who  undertakes  to  save  is  none 
other  than  the  Infinite  and  the  Almighty,  then  the  load  of  our  gnilt 
can  be  carried  upon  such  shoulders,  the  stupendous  labonr  of  our 
salvation  can  be  achieved  by  such  a  worker,  and  that  with  ease:  foraO 
things  arc  possible  with  God,  and  he  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermoflt 
them  that  come  unto  God  by  him.  Ye  sons  of  men  perceive  ye  here 
the  subject  of  your  joy.  The  God  who  made  yon,  and  against  whom 
you  have  offended,  has  come  down  from  heaven  and  taken  upK>n  himself 
your  nature  that  he  might  save  yon.  He  has  come  in  the  fulness  of 
his  glory  and  the  infinity  of  his  mercy  that  he  might  redeem  you.  Do 
you  not  welcome  this  news  ?  What !  will  not  your  hearts  be  thankful 
for  this  ?  Does  this  matchless  love  awaken  no  gratitude  ?  Were  it  not 
for  this  divine  Saviour,  your  life  here  would  have  been  wretchedness, 
and  your  future  existence  would  have  been  endless  woe.  Oh,  I  pray 
you  adore  the  incarnate  God,  and  trust  in  him.  Then  will  you  ble« 
the  Lord  for  delivering  you  from  the  wrath  to  come,  and  as  you  laf 
hold  of  Jesus  and  find  salvation  in  his  name,  you  will  tune  your  songs 
to  his  praise,  and  exult  with  sacred  joy.    So  much  concerning  this  joy. 

II.  Follow  me  while  I  briefly  speak  of  the  people  to  whom  this  joy 
comes.  Observe  how  the  angel  begins,  "  Behold,  I  bring  ijou  good 
tidinujs  of  great  joy,  for  uuto  you  is  bom  this  day."  So,  then,  the  joy 
began  with  the  first  who  heard  it,  the  shepherds.  "  To  you"  saith  he; 
**  for  unto  you  is  bom.*'  Beloved  hearer,  shall  the  joy  begin  with  yon 
to-day  ? — for  it  little  avails  you  that  Christ  was  bom,  or  that  Christ 
died,  unless  unto  you  a  child  is  born,  and  for  you  Jesus  bled.  A 
pergonal  interest  is  the  main  point.  **  But  I  am  poor,"  saith  one.  So 
were  the  shepherds.  0  ye  poor,  to  you  this  mysterious  child  is  bom. 
'*  The  poor  have  the  gospel  preached  unto  them.*'  **  He  shall  jo^ 
the  poor  and  needy,  and  break  in  pieces  the  oppressor."  But  I  am 
obscure  and  unknown,''  saith  one.  So  were  the  watchers  on  the  mid- 
night plain.  Who  knew  the  men  who  endured  hard  toil,  and  kept  their 
flocks  by  night  ?     But  you,  unknown  of  men,  are  known  to  God  :  shall 


JOY  BOBN  AT  BETHLEHEM.  703 

it  not  be  said,  that  "  unto  you  a  child  is  born  ?  The  Lord  rejjardeth 
not  the  greatness  of  men,  but  hath  respect  unto  the  lowly.  But  yon 
are  illiterate,  you  say,  you  cannot  understand  much.  Be  it  so,  but 
unto  the  shephords  Christ  was  born,  and  their  simplicity  did  not  hinder 
their  receiving  him,  but  even  helped  them  to  it.  Be  it  so  with  your- 
self: receive  gladly  the  simple  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  The  Lord  hath 
exalted  one  chosen  out  of  the  people.  No  aristocratic  Christ  have  I  to 
preach  to  you,  but  the  Saviour  of  the  people,  the  friend  of  publicans 
and  sinners.  Jesus  is  the  true  "poor  man's  friend;"  he  is  "a  cove- 
nant for  the  people,"  given  to  be  "  a  leader  and  commander  to  the 
people."  To  you  is  Jesus  given.  0  that  each  heart  might  truly  say, 
to  me  is  Jesus  bom  ;  for  if  I  truly  believe  in  Jesus,  unto  me  Christ  is 
bom,  and  I  may  be  as  sure  of  it  as  if  an  angel  announced  it,  since  the 
Scripture  tells  me  that  if  I  believe  in  Jesus  He  is  mine. 

After  the  angel  had  said  "  to  you,"  he  went  on  to  say,  "  it  shall  be 
to  all peaple.**  But  our  translation  is  not  accurate,  the' Greek  is,  "it 
shall  be  to  all  the  people."  This  refers  most  assuredly  to  the  Jewish 
nation  ;  there  can  be  no  question  about  that;  if  any  one  looks  at  the 
original,  he  will  not  find  so  large  and  wide  an  expression  as  that  given 
by  our  translators.  It  should  be  rendered  "  to  all  t/te  people."  And 
here  let  us  speak  a  word  for  the  Jews.  How  long  and  how  sinfully  has 
the  Christian  church  despised  the  most  honorable  amoufrst  the  nations  ! 
How  barbarously  has  Israel  been  handled  by  the  so-called  church !  I  felt 
my  spirit  bum  indignantly  within  me  in  Rome  when  I  stood  in  the  Jew's 
quarter,  and  heard  of  the  crael  indignities  which  Popery  has  heaped 
upon  the  Jews,  even  until  recently.  At  this  hour  there  stands  in  the 
Jew's  quarter  a  church  built  right  in  front  of  the  entrance  to  it,  and 
into  this  the  unhappy  Jews  were  driven  forcibly  on  certain  occasions. 
To  this  church  they  were  compelled  to  subscribe — subscribe,  mark  you, 
as  worshippers  of  the  one  invisible  God,  to  the  sapport  of  a  system  which 
is  as  leprous  with  idolatry  as  were  the  Canaanites  whom  the  Lord  ab- 
horred. Paganism  is  not  more  degrading  than  Romanism.  Over  the 
door  of  this  church  is  placed,  in  their  own  tongue  in  the  Hebrew,  these 
words: — "All  day  long  have  I  stretched  out  my  hands  to  a  dis- 
obedient and  gainsaying  generation;"  how, by  such  an  insult  as  that, 
could  they  hope  to  convert  the  Jew.  The  Jew  saw  everywhere  idols 
which  hlH  soul  abhorred,  and  he  loathed  the  name  of  Christ,  because  he 
associated  it  with  idol  worship,  and  I  do  not  wonder  that  he  did.  I  praise 
the  Jew  that  he  could  not  give  up  his  own  simple  theism,  and  the  worship 
of  the  true  God,  for  such  a  base,  degrading  buperstition  as  that  which 
Rome  presented  to  him.  Instead  of  thinking  it  a  wonder  of  unbelief 
that  the  Jew  is  not  a  Christian,  I  honour  him  for  his  faith  and  his 
couiageous  resistance  of  a  fascinating  heathenism.  If  Romanism  be 
Christianity  I  am  not,  neither  could  I  be,  a  Christian.  It  were  a  more 
manly  thing  to  be  a  simple  believer  in  one  God,  or  even  an  honest 
doubter  upon  all  religion,  than  woi-ship  such  crowds  of  gods  and  god- 
desses as  Popery  has  set  up,  and  to  bow,  as  she  does,  before  rotten 
bones  and  dead  men's  winding  sheets.  Let  the  true  Christian  church 
think  lovingly  of  the  Jew,  and  with  respectful  earnestness  tell  him  the 
true  gospel ;  let  her  sweep  away  superstition,  and  set  before  him  the  one 
gracious  God  in  the  Trinity  of  his  divine  Unity ;  and  the  day  shall  yet 


704  METIIOPOMTAX   TABEUXACLE   I'ULPIT. 

come  when  the  Jews,  who  \\ei*e  the  first  apostles  to  the  Gentiles,  the 
first  inissinnaries  to  us  wlio  were  afar  oft',  shall  be  gathered  in  again. 
Until  that  shall  be,  the  fulness  of  the  church's  glory  can  never  ccme. 
Matchless  benefits  to  the  world  ire  bound  up  with  the  restoration  of 
Israel;  their  gatherin^^  in  shall  be  as  life  from  the  dead.  Jesns  the 
Saviour  is  tiie  joy  of  all  nations,  but  let  not  the  chosen  race  be  denied 
their  peculiar  share  of  whatever  promise  holy  writ  has  recorded  with  a 
special  view  to  them.  The  woes  which  their  sins  brought  upon  them 
have  fallen  thick  and  heavily;  and  even  so  let  the  richest  blessing* 
distil  upon  them. 

Although  our  translation  is  not  literally  correct,  it,  nevertheless 
expresses  a  great  truth,  taught  plainly  in  the  context ;  and,  therefore, 
we  will  advance  another  step.  The  coming  of  Christ  is  a  joy  to  alt 
jyeople.  It  is  so,  for  the  fourteenth  verse  says:  '*  On  earth  peace/' 
which  is  a  wide  and  even  unlimited  expression.  It  adds,  "  Good  will 
towards "  — not  Jews,  but  "men" — all  men.  The  word  is  the 
generic  name  of  the  entire  race,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  the 
coming  of  Christ  does  bring  joy  to  all  sorts  of  people.  It  brings 
a  measure  of  joy  even  to  those  who  are  not  Christians.  Christ 
does  not  bless  them  in  the  highest  and  truest  sense,  but  the 
influence  (»f  his  teaching  imparts  benefits  of  an  inferior  sort, 
such  as  they  are  capable  of  receiving;  for  wherever  the  gospel 
is  proclaimed,  it  is  no  small  blessing  to  all  the  populatioa 
Note  this  fact :  there  is  no  land  beneath  the  sun  where  there 
is  an  open  Bible  and  a  preached  gospel,  where  a  tyrant  long  can 
hold  his  place.  It  matters  not  who  he  be,  whether  pope  or  king ;  let  the 
|)ulpit  be  used  properly  for  the  preaching  of  Christ  crucified,  let  the 
Bible  be  opened  to  be  read  by  all  men,  and  no  tyrant  can  long  rule  in 
peace.  England  owes  her  freedom  to  the  Bible ;  and  France  will  never 
possess  liberty,  lasting  and  well-established,  till  she  comes  to  reverence 
the  gospel,  which  too  long  she  has  rejected.  There  is  joy  to  all  man- 
kind where  Christ  comes.  The  religion  of  Jesus  makes  men  think, 
and  to  make  men  think  is  always  dangerous  to  a  despot's  power.  The 
religion  of  Jesus  Christ  sets  a  man  free  from  superstition ;  when  he 
believes  in  Jesus,  what  cares  he  for  Papal  excommunications,  or  whether 
priests  give  or  withhold  their  absolution  ?  The  man  no  longer  cringes 
and  bows  down ;  he  is  no  more  willing,  like  a  beast,  to  be  led  by  the 
nose;  but,  learning  to  think  for  himself^  and  becoming  a  man,  be 
disdains  the  childish  fears  which  once  held  him  in  slavery.  Hence, 
where  Jesus  comes,  even  if  men  do  not  receive  him  as  the  Saviour, 
and  so  miss  the  fullest  joy,  yet  they  get  a  measure  of  benefit ;  and  1 
pray  God  that  everywhere  his  gospel  may  be  so  proclaimed,  and  that  so 
many  may  be  actuated  by  the  spirit  of  it,  that  it  may  be  better 
for  all  mankind.  If  men  receive  Christ,  there  will  be  no  more 
oppression  :  the  true  Christian  does  to  others  as  he  would  that  they 
should  do  to  him,  and  there  is  no  more  contention  of  classes,  nor  grind- 
ing of  the  faces  of  the  poor.  Slavery  must  go  down  where  Christianity 
rules,  and  mark  yon,  if  Romanism  be  once  destroyed,  and  pure  Chris- 
tianity nhall  govern  all  nations,  war  itself  must  come  to  an  end ;  for  if 
there  be  anything  whicii  this  book  denounces  and  counts  the  hugest  of 
all  crimes,  it  is  the  crime  of  war.  Put  up  thy  sword  into  thy  sheath,  for 


JOT  BOBN  AT  BETHLEHEM.  705 

hath  not  he  said,  ''  Thou  shalt  not  kill,"  and  he  meant  not  that  it  was  a 
sin  to  kill  one  but  a  glory  to  kill  a  million,  but  he  meant  that  bloodshed 
on  the  smallest  or  largest  scale  was  sinfiil.  Let  Christ  govern,  and  men 
shall  breuk  the  bow  and  cut  the  spear  in  snnder,  and  barn  the  chariot 
in  the  fire.  It  is  joy  to  all  nations  that  Christ  is  born,  the  Prince  of  Peace, 
the  King  who  rules  in  righteousness. 

But,  beloved,  the  greatest  joy  is  to  those  who  know  Christ  as  a 
Saviour.    Here  the  song  rises  to  a  higher  and  sublimer  note.     Unto  us 
indeed  a  child  is  bom,  if  we  can  say  that  he  is  our  '*  Saviour  who  is 
Christ  the  Lord."    Let  me  ask  each  of  you  a  few  personal  questions. 
Are  your  sins  forgiven  you  for  his  name's  sake  ?     Is  the  head  of  the 
serpent  bruised  in  your  soul  ?     Does  the  seed  of  the  woman  reign  in 
sanctifying  power  over  your  nature  ?     Oh  then,  you  have  the  joy  that 
is  to  all  the  people  in  the  truest  form  of  it ;  and,  dear  brother,  dear 
sister,   the    further  you    submit  yourself  to  Christ    the   Lord,   the 
more  completely  you  know  him,  and  are  like  him,  the  fuller  will  your 
happiness  become.    Surface  joy  is  to  those  who  live  where  the  Saviour 
is  preached  ;  but  the  great  deeps,  the  great  fathomless  deeps  of  solemn 
joy  which  glisten  and  sparkle  with  delight,  are  for  such  as  know  the 
Saviour,  obey  the  anointed  one,  and  have  communion  with  the  Lord  him- 
self.   He  is  the  most  joyful  man  who  is  the  most  Christly  man.    I  wish 
that  some  Christians  were  more  truly  Christians  :  they  are  Christians  and 
something  else ;  it  were  much  better  if  they  Were  altogether  Christians. 
Perhaps  you  know  the  legend,  or  perhaps  true  history  of  the  awaken- 
ing of  St.  Augustine.      He   dreamed    that    he   died,   and  went  to 
the  gates  of  heaven,   and   the  keeper    of   the  gates  said   to   him, 
'*  Who  are  you  ? "      And  he  answered,  *'  Christianus  sum*'   I    am 
a  Christian.    But  the  porter  replied,  •*No,  you  are  not  a  Christian, 
you  are  a  Ciceronian,  for  your  thoughts  and  studies  were  most  of  all 
directed  to  the  works  of  Cicero  and  the  classics,  and  you  neglected 
the   teaching  of  Jesus.      We  judge  men  here  by  that  which  most 
engrossed  their  thoughts,  and  you  are  judged  not  to  be  a  Christian  but 
a  Ciceronian."    When  Augustine  awoke,  he  put  aside  the  classics  which 
he  had  studied,  and  the  eloquence  at  which  he  had  aimed,  and  he 
said,  ** I  will  be  a  Christian  and  a  theologian;  "  and  from  that  time  he 
devoted  his  thoughts  to  the  word  of  God,  and  his  pen  and  his  tongue 
to  the  instruction  of  others  in  the  truth.     Oh  I  would  not  have  it  said 
of  any  of  you,  "  Well,  he  may  be  somewhat  Christian,  but  he  is  far 
more  a  keen  money-getting  tradesman."     I  would  not  have  it  said, 
"  Well,  he  may  be  a  believer  in  Christ,  but  he  is  a  good  deal  more  a 
nolitician."     Perhaps  he  is  a  Christian,  but  he  is  most  at  home  when 
te   is  talking  about  science,   farming,   engineering,   horses,   mining, 
navigation,  or  pleasure-taking.     No,  no,  you  will  never  know  the  fulness 
of  the  joy  which  Jesus  brings  to  the  soul,  unless  under  th*e  power  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  you  take  the  Lord  your  Master  to  be  your  All  iu  all,  and 
make  him  the  fountain  of  your  iutensest  delight.     "  He  is  my  Saviour, 
my  Christ,  my  Lord,"  be  this  your  loudest  boast.     Then  will  you  know 
the  joy  which  the  angel's  song  predicts  for  men. 

111.*  But  1  must  pass  on.  The  last  thing  iu  the  text  is  the  sign. 
Tke  shepherds  did  not  ask  for  a  sign,  but  one  was  graciously  given. 
Sometimes  it  is  sinful  for  us  to  require  as  an  evidence  what  God's 


706  METBOPOLITAH  TABEBNACLX  FULP!T. 

tenderaess  may  nevertheless  see  fit  to  give  as  an  aid  to  &ith.  Wilfal 
nnbelief  shall  have  no  sign,  bnt  weak  faith  shall  have  compassioDate 
aid.  The  sign  that  the  joy  of  the  world  had  come  was  tlus, — tbej 
were  to  go  to  the  manger  to  find  the  Christ  in  it,  and  he  was  to  be 
the  sign.  Every  circumstance  is  therefore  instractive.  The  babe  was 
found  "  wrapped  in  swaddling  clothes."  Now,  observe,  as  yon  look  at 
this  infant,  that  there  is  not  the  remotest  appearance  of  temporal 
power  here.  Mark  the  two  little  puny  arms  of  a  little  babe  thtt 
must  be  carried  if  it  go.  Alas,  the  nations  of  the  earth  look  for 
joy  in  military  power.  By  what  means  can  we  make  a  nati<m 
of  soldiers  ?  The  Prussian  method  is  admirable  ;  we  most  hare 
thousands  upon  thousands  of  armed  men  and  big  cannon  and  iron- 
clad vessels  to  kill  and  destroy  by  wholesale.  Is  it  not  a  nation's 
pride  to  be  gigantic  in  arms  ?  What  pride  flushes  the  patriot's  cheek 
when  he  remembers  that  his  nation  can  murder  faster  than  any  oth^ 
people.  Ah,  foolish  generation,  ye  are  groping  in  the  flames  of  hell 
to  find  your  heaven,  raking  amid  blood  and  bones  for  the  foul  thing 
which  ye  call  glory.  A  nation's  joy  can  never  lie  in  the  misery  of 
others.  Killing  is  not  the  path  to  prosperity  ;  huge  armaments  are  a 
cnrse  to  the  nation  itself  as  well  as  to  its  neighbours.  The  joy  of  a 
nation  is  a  golden  sand  over  which  no  stream  of  blood  has  ever  rippled. 
It  is  only  found  in  that  river,  the  streams  whereof  make  glad  the  city  of 
God.  The  weakness  of  submissive  gentleness  is  true  power.  Jesns 
founds  his  eternal  empire  not  on  force  but  on  love.  Here,  O  ye  people, 
see  your  hope;  the  mild  i)acific  prince,  whose  glory  is  his  self-sacrifice, 
is  our  true  benefactor. 

But  look  again,  and  you  shall  observe  no  pomp  to  dazzle  yon.  Is  the 
child  wrapj>ed  in  purple  and  fine  linen  ?  Ah,  no.  Sleeps  he  in  a  cradle 
of  gold?  The  manger  alone  is  his  shelter.  No  crown  is  upon  the 
babe's  head,  neither  does  a  coronet  surround  the  mother's  brow.  A 
simple  maiden  of  Galilee,  and  a  little  child  in  ordinary  swaddling  bands, 
it  is  all  you  see. 

"  Bask  not  in  courtly  bower. 
Or  sunbright  hall  of  power, 
Pass  Babel  quick,  and  seek  the  holy  land. 
From  robes  of  Tyrian  dye, 
Turn  with  undazzled  eye 
To  Bethlehem's  glade,  and  by  the  manger  stand.'' 

Alas,  the  nations  are  dazzled  with  a  vain  show.  The  pomp  of  empires, 
the  pageants  of  kings  arc  their  delight.  How  can  they  admire  those  gaudy 
courts,  in  which  too  often  glorious  apparel,  decorations,  and  rank  stand  in 
the  stead  of  viitue,  chastity,  and  truth.  When  will  the  people  cease  to 
be  children?  Must  they  for  ever  crave  for  martial  music  which 
stinmlates  to  'violence,  and  delight  in  a  lavish  expenditure  which 
burdens  them  with  taxation?  These  make  not  a  nation  great  or  joyous. 
Bah!  how  has  the  bubble  burst  across  yon  narrow  sea,  A  bubble 
empire  has  collapsed.  Ten  thousand  bayonets  and  millions  of  gold 
proved  but  a  sandy  foundation  for  a  Babel  throne.  Vain  are  the  men 
who  look  for  joy  in  pomp;  it  lies  in  truth  and  righteousness,  in  peace 
and  salvation,  ot*  which  yonder  new-bom  prince  in  the  garments  of  a 
peasant  child  is  the  true  symbol. 


JOY  BORN  AT  BETHLEHEM.  707 

Neither  was  there  wealth  to  be  seen  ac  Bethlehem.  Here  in  this 
aniet  island,  the  bulk  of  men  are  comfortably  seeking  to  acquire  their 
tnonsands  by  commerce  and  manufactures.  We  are  the  sensible 
people  who  follow  the  main  chance,  and  are  not  to  be  deluded  by 
ideas  of  glory ;  we  are  making  all  the  money  we  can,  and  wondering 
that  other  nations  waste  so  much  in  fight.  The  main  prop  and 
pillar  of  England's  joy  is  to  be  found,  as  some  tell  us,  in  the  Three  per 
Gents.,  in  the  possession  of  colonies,  in  the  progress  of  machinery, 
in  steadily  increasing  our  capital.  Is  not  Mammon  a  smiling  deity? 
But,  here,  in  the  cradle  of  the  world's  hope  at  Bethlehem,  I  see 
far  more  of  poverty  than  wealth;  I  perceive  no  glitter  of  gold,  or 
spangle  of  silver.  I  perceive  only  a  poor  babe,  so  poor,  so  very  ])oor, 
that  he  is  in  a  manger  laid  ;  and  his  mother  is  a  mechanic's  wife,  a  woman 
who  wears  neither  silk  nor  gem.  Mot  in  your  gold,  0  Britons,  will 
ever  lie  your  joy,  but  in  the  gospel  enjoyed  by  all  classes,  the  gospel 
freely  preached  and  joyfully  received.  Jesus,  by  raising  us  to  spiritual 
wealth,  redeems  us  from  the  chains  of  Mammon,  and  in  that  liberty 
gives  us  joy. 

And  here,  too,  I  see  no  svpersUtion,  I  know  the  artist  paints  angels 
in  the  skies,  and  surrounds  the  scene  with  a  mysterious  light,  of  which 
tradition's  tongue  of  falsehood  has  said  that  it  made  midnight  as  bright 
as  noon.  This  is  fiction  merely ;  there  was  nothing  more  there  than 
the  stable,  the  straw  the  oxen  ate,  and  perhaps  the  beasts  themselves, 
and  the  child  in  the  plainest,  simplest  manner,  wrapped  as  other  child- 
ren are ;  the  cherubs  were  invisible  and  of  haloes  there  were  none. 
Around  this  birth  of  joy  was  no  sign  of  superstition  :  that  demon  dared 
not  intrude  its  tricks  and  posturings  into  the  sublime  spectacle:  it 
would  have  been  there  as  much  out  of  place  as  a  harlequin  in  the  holy 
of  holies.  A  simple  gospel,  a  plain  gospel,  as  plain  as  that  babe 
wrapped  in  the  commonest  garments,  is  this  day  the  only  hope  for  men. 
Be  ye  wise  and  believe  in  Jesus,  and  abhor  all  the  lies  of  Rome,  and 
inventions  of  those  who  ape  her  detestable  abominations. 

Nor  does  the  joy  of  the  world  lie  in  philosophy.  You  could  nob  have 
made  a  schoolmen's  puzzle  of  Bethlehem  if  you  had  tried  to  do  so ;  it 
was  just  a  child  in  the  manger  and  a  Jewish  woman  looking  on  and 
nursing  it,  and  a  carpenter  standing  by.  There  was  no  metaphysical 
difficulty  there,  of  which  men  could  say,  "A  doctor  of  divinity  is 
needed  to  explain  it,  and  an  assembly  of  divines  must  expound  it."  It 
is  true  the  wise  men  came  there,  but  it  was  only  to  adore  and  offer 
gifts;  would  that  all  the  wise  had  been  as  wise  as  they.  Alas,  human 
subtlety  has  disputed  over  the  manger,  and  logic  has  darkened  counsel 
with  its  words.  But  this  is  one  of  man's  many  inventions ;  God's  work 
was  sublimely  simple.  Here  was  "  The  Word  made  flesh'*  to  dwell  among 
us.  a  mystery  for  faith,  but  not  a  football  for  argument.  Mysterious, 
yet  the  greatest  simplicity  that  was  ever  spoken  to  human  ears,  and 
seen  by  mortal  eyes.  And  such  is  the  gospel,  in  the  preaching  of  which 
our  apostle  said, "  we  use  great  plainness  of  speech."  Away,  away,  away 
with  your  learned  sermons,  and  your  fine  talk,  and  your  pretentious  philo- 
sophies ;  these  never  created  a  jot  of  happiness  in  this  world.  Fine- 
spun theories  are  fair  to  gaze  on,  and  to  bewilder  fools,  but  they  are  of 
no  use  to  practical  men,  they  comfort  not  the  sons  of  toil,  nor  cheer  the 


70ft  MERTOl'OLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

daughters  of  sorrow.  The  man  of  common  sense,  who  feels  the  dtUj  mb 
and  tear  of  this  poor  world,  needs  richer  consolation  than  joor  no?el 
theologies,  or  neologies,  can  give  him.  In  a  simple  Christ,  and  in  a 
simple  faith  in  that  Christ,  there  is  a  peace  deep  and  lasting;  in  a  plain, 
poor  man's  gos])el  there  is  a  joj  and  a  bliss  nnspeakable,  of  whidi 
thousands  can  speak,  and  speak  with  confidence,  too,  for  they  declare 
what  they  do  know,  and  testify  what  they  have  seen. 

I  say,  then,  to  you  who  would  know  the  only  tme  peace  and  lastiug 
joy,  come  ye  to  the  babe  of  Bethlehem,  in  after  days  the  Man  of 
Sorrows,  the  substitutionary  sacrifice  for  sinners.  Come,  ye  little  chil- 
dren, ye  boys  and  girls,  come  ye ;  for  he  also  was  a  boy.  "  The  holj 
child  Jesus  "  is  the  children's  Saviour,  and  saith  still,  **  Suffer  the  little 
children  to  come  unto  me,  and  forbid  them  not.  Come  hi^er,  je 
maidens,  ye  who  are  still  in  the  morning  of  your  beauty,  .and,  like 
Mary,  rejoice  in  God  your  Saviour.  The  virgin  bore  him  on  her 
bosom,  so  conic  ye  and  l)ear  him  in  your  hearts,  saying,  "  Unto  as  a 
child  is  born,  unto  us  a  son  is  given."  And  yon,  ye  men  in  tk 
plenitude  of  your  strength,  remember  how  Joseph  cared  for  him,  and 
watched  with  reverent  solicitude  his  tender  years;  be  yon  to  his  canse 
as  a  F'ather  and  a  helper;  sanctify  your  strength  to  his  service.  And  ye 
women  advanced  in  years,  ye  matrons  and  widows,  come  like  Anna  aod 
bless  the  Lord  that  you  have  seen  the  salvation  of  Israel,  and  ye  boar 
heads,  who  like  Simeon  are  ready  to  depart,  come  ye  and  take  the  Saviour 
in  your  arms,  adoring  him  as  your  Saviour  and  your  all.  Ye  shepherdfi, 
ye  simple  hearted,  ye  who  toil  for  your  daily  bread,  come  and  adore  the 
Saviour;  and  stand  not  back  ye  wise  men,  ye  who  know  by  experience 
and  who  by  meditation  peer  into  deep  truth,  come  ye,  and  like  the  sages 
of  the  East  bow  low  before  his  presence,  and  make  it  your  honour  to  par 
honour  to  Christ  the  Lord.  For  my  own  part,  the  incarnate  God  is  all 
my  hope  and  trust.  I  have  seen  the  world's  religion  at  the  fountain 
head,  and  my  heart  has  sickened  within  me ;  I  come  back  to  preach,  by 
God's  help,  yet  more  earnestly  the  gospel,  the  simple  gospel  of  the  Son 
of  Man.  Jesus,  Master,  I  take  thee  to  be  mine  lor  ever  !  May  all  in 
this  house,  through  the  rich  grace  of  God,  be  led  to  do  the  same,  and 
may  they  all  he  thine,  great  Sun  of  God,  in  the  day  of  thine  appearing, 
for  thy  love\s  sake.     Amen. 


^etr0pBtan  ^nhmuk 


THE  JOY  OF  THE  LORD,  THE  STEBNGTH  OF  HIS 

PEOPLE. 


|l   ^^rmon 


Delivered  on  Lord's  Day  Mobniko,  December  Slerr,  1871,  bt 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT     THE     MBTROPOLTTAN     TABERNACLE,     NEWINGTON. 


**The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength." — Nehemiah  viii.  10. 

**  And  the  singers  sang  aloud,  with  Jezrahiah  their  overseer.  Also  that  day  they 
offered  great  sacrifices,  and  rejoiced  :  for  God  had  made  them  rejoice  with  great  joy : 
the  wives  also  and  the  children  rejoiced :  so  that  the  joy  of  Jerusalem  was  heard  even 
afar  off."— Nehemiah  xii.  42,  43. 

Last  Sabbath  day  in  the  morning  I  spoke  of  the  birth  of  our  Savionr  as 
being  full  of  joy  to  the  people  of  God,  and,  indeed,  to  all  nations.  We 
then  looked  at  the  joy  from  a  distance ;  we  will  now  in  contemplation 
draw  nearer  to  it,  and  perliaps  as  we  consider  it,  and  remark  the  multi- 
plied reasons  for  its  existence,  some  of  those  reasons  may  operate  upon 
our  own  hearts,  and  we  may  go  out  of  this  house  of  prayer  ourselves  par- 
takers of  the  exceeding  great  joy.  We  shall  count  it  to  have  been  a 
successful  morning:  if  the  people  of  God  are  made  to  rejoice  in  the 
Lord,  and  especially  if  those  who  have  been  bowed  down  and  burdened 
in  soul  shall  receive  the  oil  of  joy  for  mourning.  It  is  no  mean  thing 
to  comfort  the  liord's  mourners ;  it  is  a  work  specially  dear  to  the 
Spirit  of  God,  and,  therefore,  not  to  be  lightly  esteemed.  Holy  sorrow 
is  precious  before  God,  and  is  no  bar  to  godly  joy.  Let  it  be  carefully 
noted  in  connection  with  our  first  text  that  abounding  mourning  is  no- 
reason  why  there  should  not  speedily  be  seen  an  equally  abundant  joy, 
for  the  very  people  who  were  bidden  by  Nehemiah  and  Ezra  to  rejoice 
were  even  then  melted  with  penitential  grief,  **  for  all  the  people  wept 
when  they  heard  the  words  or  the  law.*'  The  vast  congregation  before 
the  Watergate,  under  the  teaching  of  Ezra,, were  awakened  and  cut  to 
the  heart ;  they  felt  the  edge  of  the  law  of  God  like  a  sword  opening 
np  their  hearts,  tearing,  cutting,  and  killing,  and  well  might  they 
lament :  then  was  the  time  to  let  them  feel  the  gospePs  balm  and  hear 
the  gospel's  music,  and,  therefore,  the  former  sons  of  thunder  changed 
their  note,  and  became  sons  of  consolation,  saying  to  them,  *'  This  day 
is  holy  unto  the  Lord  your  God ;  mourn  not,  nor  weep.  Go  your  way 
No.  1,027. 


710  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

cat  the  fat,  and  drink  the  sweet,  and  send  portionB  nnto  them  for  whom 
nothing  is  prepared :  for  this  day  is  holy  nnto  oiir  Lord :  neither  be 
ye  sorry ;  for  the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength."  Now  that  they 
were  penitent,  and  sincerely  tnmed  to  their  God,  they  were  bidden  to 
rejoice.  As  certain  fabrics  need  to  be  damped  before  they  will  take  the 
glowing  colours  with  which  they  are  to  be  adorned,  ao  cor  spirits 
need  the  bedewing  of  repentance  before  they  can  reoeiye  the  radiant 
colouring  of  delight.  The  glad  news  of  the  gospel  can  only  be  printed 
on  wet  paper.  Have  you  ever  seen  clearer  shining  than  that  whidi 
follows  a  shower  ?  Then  the  sun  transforms  the  rain-drops  into  gems, 
the  flowers  look  up  with  fresher  smiles  and  faces  glittering  from 
their  refreshing  bath,  and  the  birds  from  among  the  dripping  branches 
sing  with  notes  more  rapturous,  because  they  have  paused  awhik 
So,  when  the  soul  has  been  saturated  with  the  rain  of  penitence, 
the  clear  shining  of  forgiving  love  makes  the  flowers  of  gladnees 
blossom  all  around.  The  steps  by  which  we  ascend  to  the  palace  of 
delight  are  nsually  moist  with  tears.  Grief  for  sin  is  the  pordi  of  the 
House  Beautiful,  where  the  guests  are  full  of  "  The  joy  of  the  Lori*  I 
hope,  then,  that  the  mourners,  to  whom  this  discourse  shall  come,  will 
discover  and  enjoy  the  meaning  of  that  divine  benediction  in  the  sermon 
on  the  mount,  *^  "Blessed  are  they  that  mourn,  for  they  shall  be  com- 
forted.'' 

From  our  text  we  shall  draw  several  themes  of  thought,  and  shall 
remark :  first,  there  is  a  joy  of  divine  origin^ — "  The  joy  of  the  Loid;" 
and,  secondly,  t?uii  Joy  is  to  all  who  partake  of  it  a  source  of  strengfhy— 
"  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength."  Then  we  shall  go  on  to  show 
that  such  strength  always  reveals  itself  practically ; — onr  second  text  wiD 
help  us  there :  and  we  shall  close  by  noticing,  in  the  fourth  place,  M 
this  joy,  and,  consequently,  this  strength,  are  within  our  reach  U>-day, 

I.  There  is  a  joy  of  divine  origin, — "  The  joy  of  the  Lori" 
Springing  from  the  Lord  as  its  source,  it  will  necessarily  be  of  a  voy 
elevated  character.  Since  man  fell  in  the  garden,  he  has  too  often 
sought  for  his  enjoyments  where  the  serpent  finds  his.  It  is  written, 
^^  upon  thy  belly  shalt  thou  go  and  dust  shalt  thou  eat  all  the  days  of 
thy  life,"  this  was  the  serpent's  doom;  and  man,  with  infatuated 
ambition,  has  tried  to  find  his  delight  in  his  sensual  appetites,  and  to 
content  his  soul  with  earth's  poor  dust.  But  the  joys  of  time  cannot 
satisfy  an  undying  nature,  and  when  a  soul  is  once  quickened  by  the 
eternal  Spirit,  it  can  no  more  fill  itself  with  worldly  mirth,  or  even 
with  the  common  enjoyments  of  life  than  can  a  man  snuff  up  wind 
and  feed  thereon.  But,  beloved,  we  are  not  left  to  search  for  joy;  it  is 
brought  to  our  doors  by  the  love  of  God  our  Father  ;  joy  refiined  and 
satisfying,  befitting  immortal  spirits.  God  has  not  left  us  to  wander 
among  those  unsatisfactory  things  which  mock  the  chase  which  thej 
invite ;  he  has  given  us  appetites  which  carnal  things  cannot  content, 
and  he  has  provided  suitable  satisfaction  for  those  appetites;  he 
has  stored  up  at  his  right  hand  pleasures  for  evermore,  which  even  now 
he  reveals  by  his  Spirit  to  those  chosen  ones  whom  he  has  taught  to  long 
for  them. 

Let  us  endeavour  to  analyse  that  special  and  peculiar  pleasure  whidi 
is  here  called  "  The  joy  of  the  Lord."    It  springs  from  Ood^  and  h$$ 


THE  JOT  OF  THE  LORD,  THE  STRENGTH  OF  HIS  PEOPLE.  711 

Ood  for  its  object  The  believer  who  is  in  a  Bpirituallj  healthy  state 
rejoices  mainly  in  God  himself;  he  is  happy  becanse  there  is  a  God,  and 
b^nse  God  is  in  his  person  and  character  what  he  is.  All  the  attributes 
of  God  become  well-springs  of  joy  to  the  thoughtfal,  contemplative 
believer ;  for  such  a  man  says  within  his  soul,  '*  All  these  attribates 
of  my  God  are  mine :  his  power,  my  protection  ;  his  wisdom,  my 
^idcmce;  his  faithfnlness,  my  foundation;  his  grace,  my  salvation." 
He  is  a  God  who  cannot  lie,  faithful  and  true  to  his  promise;  he 
is  all  love,  and  at  the  same  time  infinitely  just,  supremely  holy. 
Why,  the  contemplation  of  God  to  one  who  knows  that  tnis  God  is  his 
God  for  ever  and  ever,  is  enough  to  make  the  eyes  overflow  with  tears, 
because  of  the  deep,  mvsterious,  unutterable  bliss  which  fills  the  heart. 
Hiere  was  nothing  in  the  character  of  Jupiter,  or  any  of  the  pretended 
gods  of  the  heathen,  to  make  glad  a  pure  and  holy  spirit,  but  there  is 
everything  in  the  character  of  Jehovah  both  to  purify  the  heart  and  to 
make  it  thrill  with  delight.  How  sweet  is  it  to  think  over  all  the  Lord 
has  done ;  how  he  has  revealed  himself  of  old,  and  especially  how  he 
has  displayed  his  glory  in  the  covenant  of  grace,  and  in  the  person  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  How  charming  is  the  thought  that  he  has 
revealed  himself  to  me  personally,  and  made  me  to  see  in  him  my 
Father,  my  friend,  my  helper,  my  Gk)d.  Oh,  if  there  be  one  word 
out  of  heaven  that  cannot  be  excelled,  even  by  the  brightness  of  heaven 
itself,  it  is  this  word,  "  My  God,  my  Father,"  and  that  sweet  promise,  '*  I 
will  be  to  them  a  God,  and  they  shall  be  to  me  a  people."  There  is  no 
richer  consolation  to  be  found :  even  the  Spirit  of  God  can  bring  nothing 
home  to  the  heart  of  the  Christian  more  fraught  with  delight  than  that 
blessed  consideration.  When  the  child  of  God,  after  admiring  the 
character  and  wondering  at  the  acts  of  God,  can  all  the  while  feel  '*  he 
is  my  God  ;  I  have  taken  him  to  be  mine ;  he  has  taken  me  to  be  his  ; 
he  has  grasped  me  with  the  hand  of  his  powerful  love  ;  having  loved 
me  with  an  everlasting  love,  with  the  bands  of  lovingkindness  has  he 
drawn  me  to  himself ;  my  beloved  is  mine  and  I  am  his  ;"  why,  then, 
his  soul  would  fain  dance  like  David  before  the  ark  of  the  Lord, 
rejoicing  in  the  Lord  with  all  its  might. 

A  further  source  of  joy  is  found  by  the  Christian,  who  is  living  near 
to  God,  in  a  deep  sense  of  reconcUialion  to  God^  of  acceptance  toith  God, 
and  yety  beyond  that,  of  adoption  and  close  relationship  to  God.  Does  it  not 
make  a  man  glad  to  know  that  though  once  his  sins  had  provoked  the 
Lord  they  are  all  blotted  out,  not  one  of  them  remaineth  ;  though  once 
he  was  estranged  from  God,  and  far  off  from  him  by  wicked  works, 
yet  he  is  made  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ.  The  Lord  is  no  longer 
an  angry  judge  pursuing  us  with  a  drawn  sword,  but  a  loving  Father  into 
whose  bosom  we  pour  our  sorrows,  and  find  ease  for  every  pang  of  heart. 
Oh,  to  know,  beloved,  that  God  actually  loves  us  I  I  have  often  told  you 
I  cannot  preach  upon  that  theme,  for  it  is  a  subject  to  muse  upon  in 
silence,  a  matter  to  sit  by  the  hour  together  and  meditate  upon.  The 
infinite  to  love  an  insignificant  creature,  an  ephemera  of  an  hour,  a 
shadow  that  declineth  !  Is  not  this  a  marvel  ?  For  God  to  pity  me  I  can 
understand,  for  God  to  condescend  to  have  mercy  upon  me  I  can  com- 
prehend ;  but  for  him  to  love  me,  for  the  pure  to  love  a  sinner,  for  the 
infinitely  great  to  love  a  worm,  is  matchless,  a  miracle  of  miracles  I 


712  ICRTBOFOLITAN  TABERNACLE  FULPIT. 

Snch  thoughts  must  comfort  the  soul.    And  then,  add  to  this,  that 
the  divine  love  has  brought  us  believers  into  actual  relationship  with 
God,  so  that  we  are  his  sons  and  daughters,  this  again  is  a  river  of 
sacred  pleasure.    *^  Unto  which  of  the  angels  said  he  at  any  time,  Thon 
art  my  Son."     No  minister  of  flame,  though  perfect  in  obedience,  hai 
received  the  honour  of  adoption ;  to  us,  even  to  us  frail  creatures  of  the 
dust,  is  given  a  boon  denied  to  Gabriel,  for  throngh  Jesos  Christ  the 
firstborn,  we  are  members  of  the  family  of  God.  Oh  I  the  abyss  of  joy  whidi 
lies  in  sonship  with  God,  and  joint  heirship  with  Christ !  Words  are  vui 
here.    Moreover,  the  joy  springing  from  the  spirit  of  adoption  is  another 
portion  of  the  believer's  bliss.     He  cannot  be  an  unhappy  man  who  on 
cry,  "  Abba,  Father."  The  spirit  of  adoption  is  always  attended  by  lore, 
joy,  and  peace,  which  are  fruits  of  the  Spirit ;  for  we  have  not  received  the 
spirit  of  bondage  again  to  fear,  but  we  have  received  the  spirit  of  libei^ 
and  joy  in  Christ  Jesus.    "  My  God,  my  Father."     Oh  how  sweet  the 
sound.    But  all  men  of  God  do  not  enjoy  this,  say  you.     Alas!  le 
grant  it,  but  we  also  add  that  it  is  their  own  fault.     It  is  the  right  aad 
portion  of  every  believer  to  live  in  the  assurance  that  he  is  reconciled  to 
God,  that  God  loves  him,  and  that  he  is  God*s  child,  and  if  he  doth  notio 
live  he  has  himself  only  to  blame.   If  there  be  any  starving  at  God*6  taUe; 
it  is  because  the  guest  stints  himself,  for  the  feast  is  superabundant   If 
however,  a  man  comes,  and  I  pray  you  all  may,  to  live  habitoaUr 
under  a  sense  of  pardon  through  the  sprinkling  of  the  precious  Uooi 
and  in  a  delightful  sense  of  perfect  reconciliation  with  the  great  Gd, 
he  is  the  possessor  of  a  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory. 

But,  beloved,  this  is  not  all.  The  joy  of  the  Lord  in  the  wpaHi 
gprings  also  from  an  assurance  that  all  the  future,  whatever  it  may  h$j  k 
^laranteed  hj  divine  goodness,  that  being  children  of  God,  the  love  of 
God  towards  us  is  not  of  a  mutable  character,  but  abides  and  re- 
mains unchangeable.  The  believer  feels  an  entire  satisfaction  ii 
leaving  himself  in  the  hands  of  eternal  and  immutable  love.  However 
happy  I  may  be  to-day,  if  I  am  in  doubt  concerning  to-morrow,  there  k 
a  worm  at  the  root  of  my  peace ;  although  the  past  may  now  be  sweet 
in  retrospect,  and  the  present  fair  in  enjoyment,  yet  if  the  future  be 
grim  with  fear,  my  joy  is  but  shallow.  If  my  salvation  be  still  i 
matter  of  hazard  and  jeopardy,  unmingled  joy  is  not  mine,  and  deef 
peace  is  still  out  of  my  reach.  But  when  I  know  that  he  whom  I  han 
rested  in  hath  power  and  grace  enough  to  complete  that  which  he  had 
begun  in  me,  and  for  me ;  when  I  see  the  work  of  Christ  to  be  no  half-wiy 
redemption,  but  a  complete  and  eternal  salvation;  when  I  perceive  thi 
the  promises  are  established  upon  an  unchangeable  basis,  and  are  jtt 
and  amen  in  Christ  Jesus,  ratified  by  oath  and  seal^  by  blood, 
then  my  soul  hath  perfect  contentment.  It  is  true,  that  looking  for- 
ward there  may  be  seen  long  avenues  of  tribulation,  but  the  glory  is  st 
tlie  end  of  them ;  battles  may  be  foreseen,  and  woe  unto  the  man  who 
does  not  expect  them,  but  the  eye  of  faith  perceives  the  crown  of 
victory.  Deep  waters  are  mapped  upon  our  journey,  but  faith  can  see 
Jehovah  fording  these  rivers  with  us,  and  she  anticipates  the  day  when 
we  shall  ascend  the  banks  of  the  hither  shore  and  enter  into  Jehovah's 
rest.  When  we  have  received  these  priceless  truths  into  our  souls  we 
are  satisfied  with  favour  and  full  of  the  goodness  of  the  Lord.    There 


THE  JOT  OF  THE  LORD,  THE  GrTBENGTH  OF  HIB  PEOPLE.  713 

is  a  theology  which  denies  to  belieyera  this  coDSolatioD,  we  will  not 
enter  into  controversy  with  it,  but  sorrowfully  hint  that  a  heavy 
chastisement  for  the  errors  of  that  system  of  doctrine,  lies  in  the  loss  of 
the  comfort  which  the  truth  would  have  brought  into  the  souL  For 
my  part,  I  value  the  gospel  not  only  for  what  it  has  done  for  me  in  the. 
past,  bub  for  the  guarantees  which  it  affords  me  of  eternal  salvation.  *'  I 
give  unto  my  sheep  eternal  life,  and  they  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall 
any  plack  them  out  of  my  hand." 

Now,  beloved,  I  have  not  yet  taken  yon  into  the  great  deeps  of  joy, 
though  these  streams  are  certainly  by  no  means  shallow.  There  is  an 
abyss  of  delight  for  every  Christian  when  he  comes  into  ciciiuH  fellow- 
skip  with  God,  I  spoke  of  the  truth  that  Ood  loved  us,  and  the  fact 
that  we  are  related  to  him  by  ties  most  near  and  dear  ;  but»  oh,  when 
these  doctrines  become  experiences,  then  are  we  indeed  anointed  with  the 
oil  of  gladness.  When  we  enter  into  the  love  of  God,  and  it  enters  into 
OS ;  when  we  walk  with  God  habitually,  then  our  joy  is  like  Jordan  at 
harvest  time,  when  it  overdoweth  all  its  banks.  Do  you  know  what  it 
means — ^to  walk  with  God — Enoch's  joy ;  to  sit  at  Jesus'  feet — Mary's 
joy ;  to  lean  your  head  upon  Jesus'  bosom — John's  familiar  joy  ?  Oh 
TeB,  communion  with  the  Lord  is  no  mere  talk  with  some  of  us.  We 
have  known  it  in  the  chamber  of  affliction ;  we  have  known  it  in  the 
solitude  of  many  a  night  of  broken  rest ;  we  have  known  it  beneath 
discouragements  and  under  sorrows  and  de&mations,  and  all  sorts  of 
ills  ;  and  we  reckon  that  one  dram  of  fellowship  with  Christ  is  enough 
to  sweeten  an  ocean  full  of  tribulation,  and  that  only  to  know  that  he  is 
near  us,  and  to  see  the  gleaming  of  his  dear  eye,  would  transform  even 
hell  itself  into  heaven,  if  it  were  possible  for  us  to  enjoy  his  presence 
there.  Alas  !  ye  do  not  and  cannot  know  this  bliss,  ye  who  quaff  your 
foaming  bowls,  listening  to  the  sound  of  stringed  instruments,  ye  do  not 
know  wh^t  this  bliss  means — ye  have  not  dreamed  of  it,  nor  could  ye  com- 
pass it  though  a  man  should  tell  it  unto  you.  As  the  beast  in  the 
meadow  knows  not  the  far-reaching  thoughts  of  him  who  reads  the  stars 
and  threads  the  spheres,  so  neither  can  the  carnal  man  make  so  much 
as  a  guess  of  what  are  the  joys  which  God  hath  prepared  for  them 
that  love  him,  which  anv  day  and  every  day,  when  our  hearts  seek  it, 
he  revealeth  unto  us  by  his  Spirit.  This  is  "  the  joy  of  the  Lord,"  fellow- 
ship with  the  Father  and  with  his  Son  Jesns  Christ  Bekved,  if 
we  reach  this  point,  we  must  labour  to  maintain  onr  standing,  for  our 
Lord  saith  to  us  *'  abide  in  me."  The  habit  of  communion  is  the 
life  of  happiness. 

Another  form  of  "the  joy  of  the  Lord"  will  visit  us  practically  every  day 
in  the  honour  of  being  allowed  to  serve  him.  It  is  a  joy  worth  worlds 
to  be  allowed  to  do  good.  To  teach  a  little  child  his  letters  for  Christ, 
vnll  give  a  true  heart  some  taste  of  the  joy  of  the  Lord,  if  it  be  con- 
sciously done  for  the  Lord^s  sake  alone.  To  bear  the  portion  to  those 
for  whom  nothing  is  prepared,  to  visit  the  sick,  to  comfort  the  mourner, 
to  aid  the  poor,  to  instruct  the  ignorant,  any,  and  all  of  such  Christian 
works,  if  done  in  Jesus'  name,  will  in  their  measure  array  us  in 
Jehovah's  joy.  And  happy  are  we,  brethren,  if  when  we  cannot  work 
we  are  enabled  to  lie  still  and  suffer,  for  acquiescence  is  another  silver 
pipe  through  whieh  '^  the  joy  of  the  Ix)rd"  will  come  to  us.    It  is  sweet 


714  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

to  smart  beneath  God's  rod,  and  feel  that  if  God  would  have  us  suier 
it  is  happiness  to  do  so,  to  fall  back  with  the  faintness  of  nature,  but  at 
the  same  time  with  the  strength  of  grace,  and  say,  "  Thy  will  be  done." 
It  is  joy,  when  between  the  millstones  crushed  like  an  olive,  to  jidd 
nothing  but  the  oil  of  thankfulness ;  when  bruised  beneath  the  flail  of 
tribulation,  still  to  lose  nothing  but  the  chafP,  and  to  yield  to  God  the 
precious  grain  of  entire  submissiyeness.  Why,  this  is  a  little  lieaten 
upon  earth.  To  glory  in  tribulations  also,  this  is  a  high  degree  of  np- 
climbing  towards  the  likeness  of  our  Lord.  Perhaps,  the  usual  com- 
munions which  we  have  with  our  Beloved,  though  exceeding  precious, 
will  never  equal  those  which  we  enjoy  when  we  have  to  break  through 
thorns  and  briars  to  be  at  him  ;  when  we  follow  him  into  the  wildemea 
then  we  feel  the  love  of  our  espousals  to  be  doubly  sweet.  It  is  a 
joyous  thing  when  in  the  midst  of  mournful  circumstances,  we  yet  ferf 
that  we  cannot  mourn  because  The  Bridesroom  is  with  us.  Blessed  is 
that  man,  who  in  the  most  terrible  storm  is  driven  in  not  from  his  God, 
but  even  rides  upon  the  crest  of  the  lofty  billows  nearer  towards 
heaven.  Such  happiness  is  the  Christian's  lot.  I  do  not  say  thateTCij 
Christian  possesses  it,  but  I  am  sure  that  every  Christian  ought  to  doso. 
There  is  a  highway  to  heaven,  and  all  in  it  are  safe ;  but  in  the  middle  of 
that  road  there  is  a  special  way,  an  inner  path,  and  all  who  walk  therein 
are  happy  as  well  as  safe.  Many  professors  are  only  just  within  the 
hedge,  tney  walk  in  the  ditch  by  the  road  side,  and  because  they  m 
safe  there,  they  are  content  to  put  up  with  all  the  inconveniences  of 
their  walk ;  but  he  who  takes  the  crown  of  the  causeway,  and  walks 
in  the  very  centre  of  the  road  that  God  has  cast  up,  shall  find  that 
no  lion  shall  be  there,  neither  shall  any  ravenous  beast  go  up 
thereon,  for  there  the  Lord  himself  shall  be  his  companion,  and 
will  manifest  himself  to  him.  You  shallow  Christians  who  do  bat 
believe  in  Christ,  and  barely  that,  whose  bibles  are  unread,  whose 
closets  are  unfrequented,  whose  communion  with  God  is  a  thing  of 
spasms,  you  have  not  the  joy  of  the  Lord,  neither  are  you  strong.  I 
beseech  you,  rest  not  as  you  are,  but  let  your  conscious  feebleness 
provoke  you  to  seek  the  means  of  strength :  and  that  means  of  strength 
IS  to  be  found  in  a  pleasant  medicine,  sweet  as  it  is  profitable — the 
delicious  and  eflPectual  medicine  of  "  the  joy  of  the  Lord." 

II.  But  time  would  fail  me  to  prolong  our  remarks  upon  this  very 
fruitful  subject,  and  we  shall  turn  to  our  second  head,  which  is  this': 

that  THIS  JOY  IS  A  SOURCE  OF  GREAT  STRENGTH. 

Very  rapidly  let  us  consider  this  thought.  It  is  so  because  this  joT 
arises  from  considerations  which  always  strengthen  the  soul.  Very 
much  of  the  depth  of  our  piety  will  depend  upon  our  thonghtfulness. 
Many  persons,  after  having  received  a  doctrine,  put  it  by  on  the  shelf; 
they  are  orthodox,  they  have  received  the  truth,  and  they  are  content 
to  keep  that  truth  on  hand  as  dead  stock.  Sirs,  of  what  account  can  this 
be  to  you,  to  store  your  garners  with  wheat  if  you  never  grind  the  com  for 
bread,  or  sow  it  in  the  furrows  of  your  fields  ?  He  is  the  joyful  Christian 
who  uses  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  for  spiritual  meat,  as  they  wot 
meant  to  be  used.  Why,  some  men  might  as  well  have  a  heterodox 
creed  as  an  orthodox  one  for  all  the  diflFerence  it  makes  to  them. 
Having  the  notion  that  they  know,  and  imagining  that  to  know  sufSceth 


THE  JOY  OP  THE  LORD,  THE  STRENGTH  OF  HIS  PEOPLE.  715 

tfaem,  they  do  not  consider,  contemplate,  or  rejjard  the  truths  which 
they  profess  to  believe,  and,  consequently,  they  derive  no  benefit  from 
them.  Now,  to  contemplate  the  great  truths  of  divine  election,  of 
eternal  love,  of  covenant  engagements,  of  justification  by  faith  through 
the  blood  of  Christ,  and  the  indwelling  and  perpetual  abiding  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  in  his  people, — to  turn  over  these  things  is  to  extract  joy 
from  them  ;  and  this  also  is  strengthening  to  the  mind.  To  press  the 
heavenly  grapes  by  meditation,  and  make  the  red  wine  flow  forth  in 
torrents,  is  an  exercise  as  strengthening  as  it  is  exhilarating.  Joy 
comes  from  the  same  truths  which  support  our  strength,  and  comes  by 
the  process  of  meditation. 

Again,  "  the  joy  of  the  Lord  "  within  us  is  always  the  sign  and  symbol 
of  strong  spiritual  life.  Holy  vivacity  betokens  spiritual  vigour.  I 
said  that  he  who  had  spiritual  joy  gained  it  by  communion  with  God, 
but  communion  with  God  is  the  surest  fosterer  of  strength.  You  can- 
not be  with  a  strong  God  without  getting  strength  yourself,  for  God  is 
always  a  transforming  God ;  regarding  and  looking  upon  him  our  like- 
ness changes  till  we  become  in  our  measure  like  our  God.  The  warmth  of 
the  South  of  France,  of  which  you  often  hear  so  much,  does  not  spring 
from  soft  balmy  winds,  but  from  the  sun ;  at  sunset  the  temperature 
falls*  You  shall  be  on  one  side  of  the  street  in  Italy  and  think  it  May, 
cross  the  street  into  the  shade  and  it  is  cold  as  January.  The  sun  does 
it  all.  A  man  who  walks  in  the  sunlight  of  God's  countenance, 
for  that  very  reason  is  warm  and  strong.  The  sunlight  of  joy 
usually  goes  with  the  warmth  of  spiritual  life.  As  the  light  of  joy 
varies  so  does  the  warmth  of  holy  strength  ;  he  who  dwells  in  the  light 
of  God  is  both  happy  and  strong.  He  who  goes  into  the  shade  and  loses 
the  joy  of  the  Lord  becomes  weak  at  the  same  time.  So  the  joy  of 
the  Lord  becomes  our  strength,  as  being  an  indicator  of  its  rise  or  fall. 
When  a  soul  is  really  vigorous  and  active,  it  is  like  the  torrent 
which  dashes  down  the  mountain  side,  which  scorns  in  winter  to  own 
the  bonds  of  frost :  in  a  few  hours  the  stagnant  pools  and  slowly 
moving  streams  are  enchained  in  ice  ;  but  the  snow  king  must  bring 
forth  all  his  strength  ere  he  can  manacle  the  rashing  torrent.  So  when 
a  soul  dashes  on  with  the  sacred  force  of  faith,  it  is  hard  to  freeze  it 
into  misery,  its  vigour  secures  its  joy. 

Furthermore,  the  man  who  possesses  "the  joy  of  the  Lord,"  finds  it  his 
strength  in  another  respect,  that  it  fortifies*  him  against  temptation. 
What  is  there  that  he  can  be  tempted  with  ?  He  has  more  already  than 
the  world  can  offer  him  as  a  reward  for  treachery.  He  is  already  rich ; 
who  shall  ensnare  him  with  the  wages  of  unrighteousness  ?  He  is 
already  satisfied ;  who  is  he  that  can  seduce  him  witli  pleasing  baits  ? 
"  Shall  such  a  man  as  I  flee  ?"  The  rejoicing  Christian  is  equally 
proof  against  persecution.  They  may  well  afford  to  be  laughed  at  who 
win  at  such  a  rate  as  he  does.  "  You  may  scoff,"  saith  he,  **  but  I  know 
what  true  religion  is  within  my  soul,  and  your  scofBng  will  not  make 
me  relinquish  the  pearl  of  great  price."  Sach  a  man  is,  moreover,  made 
strong  to  bear  affliction;  for  all  the  sufferings  put  upon  him  are  bat  a 
few  drops  of  bitterness  cast  into  his  cup  of  bliss,  to  give  a  deeper  tone 
to  the  sweetness  which  absorbs  them. 

Such  a  man  becomes  strong  for  service,  too.    What  can  he  not  do  who 


716  UETTROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPTT. 

is  happy  in  his  God  ?  Bv  his  God  he  leaps  otct  a  wall,  or  break 
through  a  troop.  Strong  is  he,  too,  for  any  kind  of  self-sacrifice.  To 
the  God  who  gives  him  all,  and  remains  to  him  as  his  perpetual  portion, 
such  a  man  gives  up  all  that  he  hath,  and  thinks  it  no  surrender. 
It  is  but  laying  up  his  treasure  in  his  own  peculiar  treasure  house,  even 
in  the  God  of  his  salvation. 

A  joyous  man,  such  I  have  now  in  my  mind's  eye,  is  to  all  intents 
and  purposes  a  strong  man.  He  is  strong  in  a  calm  restful  manner. 
Whatever  happens  he  is  not  ruffled  or  disturbed.  He  is  not  afraid  of  evil 
tidings,  his  heart  is  fixed,  trusting  in  the  Lord.  The  raffled  man  is  e?a 
weak.  He  is  in  a  hurry,  and  doth  things  ill.  The  man  full  of  joy  within 
is  quiet,  he  bides  his  time  and  croucheth  in  the  fhlness  of  his  strength. 
Such  a  man,  though  he  is  humble,  is  firm  and  steadfast  ;  he  is  not 
carried  away  with  every  wind,  or  bowed  by  every  breeze,  he  knows  what 
he  knows,  and  holds  what  he  holds,  and  the  golden  anchor  of  his  hope 
entereth  within  the  veil,  and  holds  himfast.  His  strength  is  not  pretentions 
bnt  real.  The  happiness  arising  from  communion  with  God  breeds  in  him 
no  boaBtfulness ;  he  does  not  talk  of  what  he  can  do,  but  he  does  it;  be 
does  not  say  what  he  could  bear,  but  he  bears  all  that  comes.  He  does 
not  himself  always  know  what  he  could  do ;  his  weakness  is  the  more 
apparent  to  himself  because  of  the  strength  which'  the  Holy  Ghost  pnts 
upon  him ;  but  when  the  time  comes,  his  weakness  only  illustrates  the 
divine  might,  while  the  man  goes  calmly  on,  conquering  and  to  conquer. 
His  inner  light  makes  him  independent  of  the  outward  sun  ;  his  secret 
granaries  make  him  independent  of  the  outer  harvest ;  his  inward 
^untains  place  him  beyond  dread  though  the  brook  Gherith  may  dry 
up ;  he  is  independent  of  men  and  angels,  and  fearless  of  devils ;  all 
creatures  may  turn  against  him  if  they  please,  but  since  God  himself 
is  his  exceeding  joy,  he  will  not  miss  their  love  or  monm  their  hate. 
He  standeth  where  others  fall,  he  sings  where  others  weep,  he  wins 
where  others  fly,  he  glorifies  his  God  where  others  bring  dishonour  on 
themselves  and  on  the  sacred  name.  God  grant  us  5ie  inward  joy 
which  arises  from  real  strength  and  is  so  linked  with  it  as  to  be  in 
part  its  cause. 

III.  But  now  I  must  hasten  on  to  notice  in  the  third  place  that  this 
STRENGTH  LEADS  TO  PRACTICAL  RESULTS,  I  am  surc  I  shall  have  your 
earnest  attention  to  this,  because  in  manv  of  you  I  have  seen  the  results 
follow  of  which  I  now  speak.  I  would  not  flatter  any  one,  but  my 
heart  has  been  full  of  thanksgiving  to  the  God  of  all"  grace  when  I 
have  seen  many  of  you  rejoicing  in  the  Lord  under  painful  circum- 
stances and  producing  the  fruits  of  a  gracious  strength.  Turn  then  to 
our  second  text,  and  there  you  shall  observe  some  of  the  fruits  of  holy 
joy  and  pious  strength. 

First,  it  leads  to  great  praise,  *'  The  singers  sang  aloud,"  their 
ministrelsy  was  hearty  and  enthusiastic.  Sacred  song  is  not  a  minor 
matter.     Quaint  George  Herbert  has  said — 

.  "  Praying's  the  end  of  preaching.*' 

Might  he  not  have  gone  ftirther  and  have  said,  praising's  the  end  ^ 
praying  J  After  all,  preaching  and  praying  are  not  the  chief  end  of 
man,  but  the  glorifying  of  God,  of  which  praising  Gk)d  Tocally  is  one 


THE  JOY  OF  TAB  LORD,  THE  STBBKGTH  OF  HIS  PEOPLE.     717 

form.  Preaching  is  sowing,  prayer  is  watering,  bat  praise  is  the  harvest. 
6od  aims  at  his  own  glory  so  should  we  ;  and  "  whoso  ofPereth  praise 
glorifieth  me  saith  the  Lord.'*  Be  ye  diligent  then  to  sing  his  praises 
with  understanding.  We  have  put  away  harps  and  trumpets  and 
organs,  let  ns  mind  that  we  really  rise  above  the  need  of  them.  I 
think  we  do  well  to  dispense  with  these  helps  of  the  typical  dis- 
pensation ;  they  are  all  inferior  even  in  music  to  the  human  voice, 
there  is  assuredly  no  melody  or  harmony  like  those  created  by  living 
tongues ;  but  let  ns  mind  that  we  do  not  put  away  an  atom  of  the 
joy.  Let  us  be  glad  when  in  the  congregation  we  unite  in  psalmody. 
It  is  a  wretched  thing  to  hear  the  praises  of  God  rendered  professionally,  as 
if  the  mere  music  were  everything.  It  is  horrible  to  have  a  dozen  people 
in  the  table-pew  singing  for  you,  as  if  they  were  proxies  for  the  whole 
assembly.  It  is  shocking  to  me  to  be  present  in  places  of  worship 
where  not  a  tenth  of  the  people  ever  venture  to  sing  at  all,  and  these  do 
it  through  their  teeth  so  very  softly,  that  one  had  need  to  have  a 
microscope  invented  for  his  ears,  to  enable  him  to  hear  the  dying 
strain.  Out  upon  such  mumbling  and  murdering  of  the  praises  of 
God ;  if  men's  hearts  were  joyous  and  strong,  they  would  scorn  such 
miserable  worship.  In  this  house  we  all  try  to  sing,  but  might  we  not 
have  more  praise  services  ?  We  have  had  a  praise  meeting  every  now 
and  then.  Ought  we  not  to  hold  a  praise  meeting  every  week  ?  Should 
not  the  prayer  meeting  be  more  than  ever  cheered  by  praise.  The 
singing  of  God's  people  should  be,  and  if  they  were  more  full  of  divine 
strength  would  be,  more  constant  and  universal.  How  sinners  chant 
the  praise  of  Bacchus  in  the  streets !  You  can  hardly  rest  in  the  middle 
of  the  night,  but  what  unseemly  sounds  of  revelry  startle  you.  Shall 
the  votaries  of  wine  sing  so  lustily,  and  shall  we  be  silent  ?  We  are  not 
often  guilty  of  disturbing  the  world  with  our  music ;  the  days  in  which 
Christian  zeal  interfered  with  the  wicked  seem  to  have  gone  by;  we 
have  settled  down  into  more  orderliness,  and  I  am  afraid  also  into  more 
Inkewarmness.  Oh  for  the  old  Methodistic  shout  Brethren,  wake  up 
your  singing  again.  May  the  Lord  give  us  again  a  singing-time,  and 
make  us  all  praise  him  with  heart,  and  with  voice,  till  even  the  adver- 
saries shall  say,  *^  The  Lord  hath  done  great  things  for  them  ;"  and  we 
shall  reply,  **  Ay,  ye  speak  the  truth ;  he  hath  done  great  things  for 
us,  whereof  we  are  glad."  Perhaps  there  has  not  been  so  large  a 
blessing  upon  the  churches  of  England,  because  they  have  not  rendered 
due  thanksgiving.  In  all  the  time  in  which  we  are  in  trouble  we  are 
anxious  and  prayerful ;  when  a  prince  is  sick  bulletins  are  issued  every 
hour  or  so ;  but  ah,  when  the  mercy  comes  but  few  bulletins  are  put 
out,  calling  upon  us  to  bless  and  praise  the  name  of  God  for  his 
mercies.  Let  us  praise  the  Lord  ifrom  the  rising  of  the  sun  unto  the 
going  down  of  the  same,  for  great  is  the  Lord,  and  greatly  is  he  to 
be  praised. 

The  next  result  is  great  sacr^ce.  "That  day  they  offered  great 
sacrifices  and  rejoiced."  What  day  is  that  in  which  the  church  of  God 
now  makes  great  sacrifices  ?  I  have  not  seen  it  in  the  calendar  of  late; 
and,  alas  I  if  men  make  any  sacrifice  they  very  often  do  so  in  a  mode 
which  indicates  that  they  would  escape  the  inflection  if  they  could.  Few 
make  great  sacrifices  and  rejoice.    You  can  persuade  a  man  to  give  a 


718  METBOPOLITAN  TABEBNAOLE  PUIiPIT. 

considerable  sam ;  a  great  many  arguments  at  last  overcome  him,  and 
he  does  it  because  he  would  ha?e  been  ashamed  not  to  do  it,  but  in  iiig 
heart  he  wishes  you  had  not  come  that  way,  and  had  gone  to  some 
other  donor.  That  is  the  most  acceptable  giflb  to  God  which  is  gi?ea 
rejoicingly.  It  is  well  to  feel  that  whatever  good  your  gift  may  do  to 
the  church,  or  the  poor,  or  the  sick,  it  is  twice  as  much  benefit  to  jon 
to  give  it.  It  is  well  to  give,  because  you  love  to  give;  as  the 
flower  which  pours  forth  its  perfume  because  it  never  dreamed  <rf 
doing  otherwise;  or  like  the  bird  which  quivers  with  song,  becaose 
it  is  a  bird  and  finds  a  pleasure  in  its  notes;  or  like  the  son 
which  shines,  not  by  constraint,  but  because,  being  a  sun,  it  must  shine; 
or  like  the  waves  of  the  sea  which  flash  back  the  Drill iance  of  the  sim, 
because  it  is  their  nature  to  reflect  and  not  to  hoard  the  light  ?  Oh, 
to  have  such  grace  in  our  hearts  that  we  shall  joyfidly  make  sac- 
rifices unlo  our  God.  The  Lord  grant  that  we  may  have  mnch  of  this; 
for  the  bringing  of  the  tithes  into  the  storehouse  is  the  way  to  the 
blessing ;  as  saith  the  Scripture  :  "  Bring  ye  all  the  tithes  into  the 
storehouse,  that  there  may  be  meat  in  thine  house,  and  prove  me  now 
herewith,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  if  I  will  not  open  you  the  windows 
of  heaven,  and  pour  you  out  a  blessing,  that  there  shall  not  be  room 
enough  to  receive  it" 

Next  to  that,  there  are  sure  to  follow  oilier  expressiana  of  jay,  Tb&r 
**  rejoiced,  for  God  had  made  them  to  rejoice  with  great  joy."  It 
was  not  all  singing  and  giving.  When  the  wheels  of  the  machine  are 
well  oiled  the  whole  machine  goes  easily ;  and  when  the  man  has  the  oil 
of  joy,  then  in  his  business,  and  in  his  family,  the  wheels  of  his  nature 
glide  along  sweetly  and  harmoniously,  because  he  is  a  glad  and  a  happy 
man.  There  are  some  professors  who  imagine  the  sorrow  of  the  Loid 
to  be  their  strength ;  they  glory  in  the  spirit  of  bondage  and  in  an  un- 
believing experience,  having  great  acquaintance  with  the  corruption  of 
their  hearts,  sometimes  of  a  rather  too  practical  character.  They  make 
the  deformities  of  the  saints  to  be  their  beauty-spots,  and  their  faults  to 
be  their  evidences.  Such  men  denounce  all  who  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  and 
only  tolerate  the  unbelieving.  Their  strength  lies  in  being  able  to  take 
you  through  all  the  catacombs  of  nature's  darkness,  and  to  show  you 
the  rottenness  of  their  evil  heai-ts.  Well,  such  strength  as  that  let  those 
have  wlio  will,  but  we  are  persuaded  that  our  text  is  nearer  to  wisdom : 
"  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength."  While  we  know  something 
of  our  corruption,  and  mourn  it,  know  something  of  the  world's 
troubles,  and  sometimes  lament  as  we  bear  them  ;  yet  there  is  a  jo? 
in  the  perfect  ^^ork  of  Christ,  and  a  joy  in  our  union  to  him  whicn 
uplifts  us  far  above  all  other  considerations.  God  becomes  to  us 
such  a  strength  that  we  cannot  help  showing  our  joy  in  our  ordinary 
life. 

But  then  the  text  tells  us  that  holy  joy  leads  to  family  happiness, 
"  The  wives  also  and  the  children  rejoiced."  It  is  so  in  this  church. 
I  have  lately  seen  several  children  from  households  which  God  has 
blessed,  and  I  have  rejoiced  to  see  that  father  and  mother  know  the 
Lord,  and  that  even  the  last  of  the  family  has  been  brought  to  Jesus, 
0  happy  households  where  the  joy  is  not  confined  to  one,  but  where  all 
partake  of  it.     I  dislike  much  that  Christianity  which  makes  a  man 


THE  JOY  OF  THE  LORD,  THE  STRENGTH  OF  HIS  PEOPLE.  719 

feel,  "  If  I  go  to  heaven  it  is  all  I  care  for."  Why,  you  are  like  a 
German  stove  which  I  found  in  the  room  of  an  hotel  the  other  day — a 
kind  of  stove  which  required  all  the  wood  they  could  bring  up  merely 
to  warm  itself,  and  then  all  the  heat  went  up  the  chimney.  We  sat 
around  it  to  make  it  warm,  but  scarce  a  particle  of  heat  came  forth 
from  it  to  us.  Too  many  need  all  the  religion  they  can  get  to  cheer 
their  own  hearts,  and  their  poor  families  and  neighbours  sit  shivering 
in  the  cold  of  ungodliness.  Be  like  those  well  constructed  stoves  of 
our  own  houses,  which  send  out  all  the  heat  into  the  room.  Send  out 
the  heat  of  piety  into  your  house,  and  let  all  the  neighbours  participate 
in  the  blessing,  for  so  the  text  finishes,  '*  The  joy  of  Jerusalem  was 
heard  afar  off."  The  joy  of  the  Lord  should  be  observed  throughout 
our  neighbourhood,  and  many  who  might  ^otherwise  have  been  careless 
of  true  religion  will  then  enquire,  *'  What  makes  these  people  glad,  and 
creates  such  happy  households?"  Your  joy  shall  thus  be  God's 
missionary. 

IV.  And  now  I  have  to  close.  This  joy,  this  strength,  are  both 
WITHIN  OUR  reach  I  "  For  the  Lord  had  made  them  glad  with  great 
joy."  God  alone  can  give  us  this  great  joy.  Then  it  is  within  the  reach  of 
any,  for  God  can  give  it  to  one  as  well  as  to  another.  If  it  depended 
upon  our  good  works  or  our  natural  abilities,  some  of  us  could  never 
reach  it ;  but  if  God  is  the  source  and  giver  of  it  he  may  give  it  to 
me  as  well  as  to  thee,  my  brother,  and  to  thee  as  well  as  to  another. 
What  was  the  way  in  which  God  gave  this  joy  ?  Well  first,  he  gave  it 
to  these  people  by  their  being  attentive  hearers.  They  were  not  only 
hearers,  but  they  heard  with  their  ears,  their  ears  were  into  the  word  ; 
it  was  read  to  them  and  they  sucked  it  in,  receiving  it  into  their  souls. 
An  attentive  hearer  is  on  the  way  to  being  a  joyous  receiver.  Having 
heard  it  they/eW  ihs power  of  it,  and  they  wept.  Did  that  seem  the 
way  to  joy  ?  It  was.  They  received  the  threatenings  of  the  law  with  all 
their  terrors  into  their  soul,  they  allowed  the  hammer  of  the  word  to 
break  them  in  pieces,  they  submitted  themselves  to  the  word  of  reproof. 
Oh  !  that  God  would  incline  you  all  to  do  the  same,  for  this,  again,  is 
the  way  in  which  God  gives  joy.  The  word  is  heard,  the  word  is  felt. 
Then  after  this,  when  they  had  felt  the  power  of  the  word,  we  see  that 
they  ivor shipped  Ood  devoutly.  They  bowed  the  head.  Their  postures 
indicated  what  they  felt  within.  Worshippers  who  with  penitent  hearts 
really  adore  God,  will  never  complain  of  weary  Sabbaths ;  adoration 
helps  us  into  joy.  He  who  can  bow  low  enough  before  the  throne 
shall  be  lifted  as  high  before  that  throne  as  his  heart  can  desire. 

We  read  also  that  these  hearers  and  worshippers  understood  clearly 
what  they  heard.  Never  be  content  with  hearing  a  sermom  unless  you 
can  understand  it,  and  if  there  be  airuth  that  is  above  you,  strain  after 
it,  strive  to  know  it.  Bible-reader,  do  not  be  content  with  going 
through  the  words  of  the  chapter :  pray  the  Holy  Ghost  to  tell  you 
the  meaning,  and  use  proper  means  for  finding  out  that  meaning ;  ask 
those  who  know,  and  use  your  own  enlightened  judgment  to  discover 
the  sense.  When  shall  we  have  done  with  formalism  of  worship  and 
come  into  living  adoration.  Sometimes,  for  all  the  true  singing  that 
there  is,  the  song  might  as  well  be  in  Latin  or  in  Greek.  Oh  I  to 
know  what  you  are  singing,  to  know  what  you  are  saving  in  prayer, 


720  MirrROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

« 

to  know  what  you  are  reading,  to  get  at  it,  to  conae  right  into  it,  to 
understand  it — this  is  the  way  to  holy  joy. 

And  one  other  point.  These  people  when  they  had  understood  wb«t 
they  had  devoutly  heard,  were  eager  to  obey.  They  obeyed  not  only 
the  common  points  of  the  law  in  which  Israel  of  old  had  famished 
them  with  examples,  but  they  found  out  an  old  institution  whidi  had 
been  buried  and  forgotten.  What  was  that  to  them;  God  had  com- 
manded it,  and  they  celebrated  it,  and  in  so  doing  this  pecnliar 
joy  came  upon  them.  Oh,  for  the  time  when  all  believers  shall 
search  the  word  of  God,  when  they  shall  not  be  content  with  saying, 
**  I  have  joined  myself  with  a  certain  body  of  Christians,  and  they  do  so ; 
therefore  I  do  so.*'  May  no  man  say  to  himself  any  longer,  "  Such  is 
the  rule  of  my  church ;"  but  may  each  say,  "  I  am  God's  serrant 
and  not  the  servant  of  man,  not  the  servant  of  thirty-nine  articles,  of 
the  Prayer-book,  or  the  Catechism ;  I  stand  to  my  own  Master,  and 
the  only  law  book  I  acknowledge  is  the  book  of  his  word,  inspired  bj 
his  Spirit."  Oh,  blessed  day,  when  every  man  shall  say,  •*  I  want  to 
know  wherein  I  am  wrong ;  I  desire  to  know  what  I  am  to  do ;  I  am 
anxious  to  follow  the  Lord  fully."  Well,  then,  if  your  joy  in  Grod  leads 
you  to  practical  obedience,  you  may  rest  assured  it  has  made  yoa  strong 
in  the  very  best  manner. 

Beloved  brethren  and  sisters,  we  had,  before  I  went  away  for  needed 
rest,  a  true  spirit  of  prayer  among  us.  I  set  out  for  the  Continent 
joyfully,  because  I  left  with  you  the  names  of  some  eighty  persons 
proposed  for  church-membership.  My  beloved  oflScers,  with  great 
diligence,  have  visited  these  and  others,  and  next  Lord*s-day  we  hope 
to  receive  more  than  a  hundred,  perhaps  a  hundred  and  twenty  fredi 
members  into  the  church.  Blessed  be  God  for  this.  I  should  not  hare 
fek  easy  in  going  away  if  you  had  been  in  a  barren,  cold,  dead  state; 
but  there  was  a  real  fire  blazing  on  God's  altar,  and  souls  were  being 
saved.  Now,  I  desire  that  this  gracious  zeal  should  continue,  and  be 
renewed.  It  has  not  gone  out  in  my  absence.  I  believe,  but  I  desire 
now  a  fresh  blast  from  God's  Spirit  to  blow  the  flame  very  vehemently. 
Let  us  meet  lor  prayer  to-morrow,  and  let  the  prayer  be  very  earnest, 
and  let  those  wrestlers  who  have  been  moved  to  agonizing  supplication 
renew  the  ardour  and  fervency  of  their  desires,  and  may  we  be  a  strong 
people,  and  consequently  a  joyous  people  in  the  strength  and  joy  of  the 
Lord.  !May  sinners  in  great  numbers  look  unto  Jesus  and  be  saved. 
Amen,  and  Amen. 


roiaiox  OF  ScKiFiURE  READ  BEFORE  Sermon — Nchemiah  viiL 


A  FEW  FACTS  FOB  THINKING 

PEOPLE. 

THERE  are  a  few,  perhaps  Iialf  a  dozen,  sewing  machines 
of  real  excellence,  differing  from  one  another  more  or  less 
in  principle,  constmction  and  adaptation;  one  being 
suitable  for  tailoring,  another  for  boot  work,  another  for 
family  use,  &c.,  &c.  The  rest  are  inferior,  and  by  far 
thegreater  number  comparatiyely  worthless. 

mien  a  tailor  or  otner  craftsman  wants  a  sewing 
machine  he  has  no  difficulty  in  finding  out  which  of  the 
half-dozen  is  most  suitable  for  his  special  work;  but 
when  a  sewing  machine  is  wanted  for  family  use  there  is 
nowhere  to  go  for  counsel,  and  it  is  not  so  eaay  to  ascertain 
which  of  seyer^  good  maphines  is  most  suitable  for  that 
purpose. 

It  is  a  common  mistake  to  suppose  that  any  good 
machine  is  a  goodfamih/  wuehine.  With  one  exception 
even  the  best  sewing  machines  lack  the  very  quidities 
which  are  most  required  in  a  family  machine,  viz., 
simpHcity  and  readiness  to  turn  from  one  kind  of  work  ta 
another. 

In  the  trade  and  among  others  who  know  what  the 
results  of  experience  are,  there  is  little  difference  of 
actual  opinion ;  but  tiie  advice  of  interested  persons  is,  of 
course,  influenced  hj  considerations  of  profit.  It 
behooves  buyers  of  family  sewing  machines,  therefore,  to 
receive  with  due  caution  what  meiv  hear  and  read,  and 
judge  for  themselves  by  the  actual  tnal  of  the  machine ,  and 
to  avoid  those  which  cann<A  be  had  for  such  trial  before 
purchase. 

Several  of  the  good  sewing  machines  (as  well  as  most, 
of  the  inferior  ones)  are  alike  in  two  or  three  particulars ;? 
they  are  complicated,  difficult  to  manage  and  make  the 
same  kind  of  stitch.  The  makers,  of  course,  having  a 
common  interest  by  virtue  of  these  resemblances^  aid  one 
another  in  diverting  attention  from  the  faults  of  both> 
stitch  and  maehine. 


But  Lowever  useful  some  of  tliese  macliines  may  be  for 
special  purposes  in  skiliul  handcs  iWjy  uave  not  omy  fiaiiei 
in  thmily  use,  but  have  occasioned  a  very  general  doubt 
whether  the  miscellaneous  and  oceasional  sewing  of  a 
family  can  be  done  by  machine  without  more  skill  than 
i\iiuilies  generally  afford.  The  result  is  that  twenty  yean 
atlin*  the  introduction  of  sewing  machines,  though  the 
viovk  of  all  the  sewing  trades  is  done  by  machine,  the 
greater  part  of  family  sewing  is  still  done  bv  hand.  What 
can  this  mean,  but  that  sewing  maehines  which  are  useM 
in  skilful  hands  may  be  useless  in  unskilful  hands;  in 
other  words  that  they  are  too  difficult  to  manage  P 

The  Willcox  and  Gibbs  differs  from  all  the  others  in 
respoct  to  ease  of  management,  mode  of  working  and 
stitch.  It  is  so  easy  to  Icam  that  anvone  can  work  it 
without  other  help  than  the  Instruction  Book ;  it  is  so 
sim|)le  and  Well  made  that  it  does  not  get  out  of  order; 
and  its  work  is  thoroughly  good. 

All  the  other  good  sewing  machines  require  two  sepa- 
rate threads,  and  more  or  less  delicate  machinery  to 
manipulate  them ;  and  the  difficulties  in  the  management 
of  the  second  thread  are  so  many  and  so  formidab^  as  to 
render  double-thread  sewing  machinea  useless  to  the 
average  housewife. 

The  Willcox  and  Gibbs,  like  the  hand  needle,  works 
with  one  thread,  and  has  the  obvious  advantages  of  sim- 
plicity and  silence:  it  is  always  ready  for  use  at  a 
moment's  notice,  and  is  as  quickly  changed  from  one 
kind  of  work  to  another ;  and  the  quality  of  its  work 
being  unsurpassed  in  beauty  and  strength,  it  answers 
perfectly  every  requirement  of  a  family  sewing  machine. 

This  ever-ready  helpfulness  not  only  distinguishes  the 
Willcox  and  Gibbs  among  Sewing  Machines,  but  places 
it  un(lU(^stionably  before  all  others  for  work  so  difficult 
and  .comprising  so  much  variety  as  family  sewing.  Such 
work  must  generally  be  done  by  members  of  the  family 
in  such  intei*vals  of  leisure  as  other  duties  afford ;  and 
it  will  be  done  by  hand  lather  than  by  sewing  macliines 
which  require  time  to  get  ready  whenever  they  are 
wnnted,  skill  to  manage  and  an  apprenticeship  to  leanou 

There   \s   a  piiCM\\^T  y^o^yv^^>i  va.  tha  i^rivilege  of  an 


ample  trial  at  home  before  the  purchase  of  a  family 
sewing  machine ;  for  ladies  are  not  engineers,  and  the 
sewing  machine  often  gives  them  their  first  experience  in 
the  management  of  ^  machinery.  And  the  object  of  the 
trial  is  not  only  to  find  out  how  good  the  machine  is,  but 
to  find  out  how  helpful  it  is  in  the  hands  of  uns)dlful 
ladies  and  children.  A  sewing  machine  which  cannot 
bear  this  test,  however  good  it  may  be  for  other  purposes, 
is  not  suitable  for  &jnily  use ;  it  is  not  a  family  sewing 
machine  at  alL 

There  is  no  reluctance  in,  subjecting  the  Willcox 
and  Gibbs  to  this  test  in  the  most  liberal  manner.  Any- 
one desiring  to  become  acquainted  with  it  has  only  to 
write  to  the  manufactuTers  for  a  price  list,  select  which- 
ever style  of  mounting  may  seem  most  desirable  (the 
machines  themselves  being  alike)  and  request  the  same 
to  be  forwarded.  No  payment  or  agreement  is  required, 
and  no  assurance  is  asked  beyond  references,  the  usual 
protection  against  firaud.  The  machine  is  sent  carriage 
paid  in  order  that  the  trial  may  be  equally  and  perfectly 
free  in  every  home  in  the  kingdom.  At  the  end  of  the 
month  it  is  either  purchased  or  returned,  as  may  be 
desired.  Payment  may  be  made  in  advance,  if  preferred, 
in  which  case  the  money  paid  is  refunded  in  full  should 
the  machine  be  returned.  The  montli^a  free  trial  is 
assured  in  either  case. 

It  is  not  easy  to  see  what  further  guarantee  could  be 
devised ;  for  the  manufacturers  stake  the  very  existence 
of  their  business  on  the  acceptability  of  their  wares.  Can 
there  be  a  doubt  that  the  experience  of  the  hundred 
thousand  families'  in  which  they  ave  used  justifies  the 
confidence  ? 

The  diflTerence  in  usefiilness  between  the  hest  family 
sewing  machine  and  other  good  sewing  machines  is  much 
greater  than  is  conmionly  supposed.  A  month's  trial  of 
the  Willcox  and  Qibbs  will  secure  this  difierence  in  your 
favour.  However  exorcting  you  may  be^  and  however  high 
yoy/r  a/nticipation,  this  quiet  and  simple  m^achine  will  se7*ve 
you  more  thoroughly  and  more  handily  than  you  can 
imagine.     (See  advertisement  on  next  page;) 


[Thk  uux  UAcam  is  wokkkd  both  n  Hahd  akd  Toot  at  rtBASVU-l 

Ifew  Edition  of  our  Illustrated  Price  list 
now  ready,  with  M  particulars  of  our 
Eeduced  Prices,  and  of  our  system  of  FEEE 
TKIAl  AT  HOME  BEFORE  PTTRCHASE, 
Carriage  Paid,  Exchange,  &c. 
Willcox  &  Gt'iis  Sewing  Machine  Co., 

150,  CHEAPSIDE,  E.C.  \       nwriniM 

13s,  REGENT  STREET,  W.  j     LONDON. 
16,  CROSS  ST.,  Royal  Exchange,  MANCHESTER. 


LIVERPOOI^-OiTOK  &  Co.,  114,  Bold  Street 
BIRMINGHAM— T.  S.  ToKGOT,  3,  Bull  Street. 
BRISTOL— B.  G.  BooH.  61,  Park  Street 
CANTERBURY— T.  Warr  &  Co.,  15,  Merceiy  Lane. 
CORK — Atkins  Bros.,  The  London  House. 
GLASGOW— U.  Browk,  toj,  SanchiehaU  Street. 
CHELinviAU— J.   steel   ft   Co.;   HAsmfOS— AMcrtoa   and   ShimiLwif; 
LncBSTBa— N.  Gee ;  HawToar— A.  Wdluie:  NoaTSAimvK— J.  8c  G.HiaJn*.- 
SotmiAKi^oN— Itted  ft  Co. :  TaowaaioQa— J.  Ritoa  &  Co. ;  WETHomn— 
U  Wheeler ;  and  ia  muw  other  Town. 


r»'  • 


A  SECRET  FOR  HUSBANDS 


V 


Neyeb  refuse  your  wife  anything  she  haa  set  her  lieai*t 
upon ;  never  try  to  convince  her  that  she  does  not  need 
it,  or  that  you  cannot  afford  it.  Don't  get  into  an  argu- 
ment on  the  subject^  or,  rest  assured^  she  will  get  the  best 
or  it.  On  the  contrary,  assent  cheerfiilly  to  her  sugges- 
tionSi  even  though  at  first  glance  if  may  appear  some- 
what startling ;  discuss  the  style  and  quality  of  the  desired 
artidci  and  good-naturedly  compare  tastes.  Then,  if  you 
reaUy  cannot  afford  it,  you  may  say,  "  My  dear,  you  shall 
have  it  shortly;  but  just  now  our  i*ent  must  be  paid,  you 
know.**  (The  wise  husband  never  says  "  niy  **  rent.  It 
makes  a  wife  reaUse  her  partnership  in  the  domestic  firm 
to  be  allowed  an  interest  in  the  rent.)  Or  you  may  speak 
of  whatever  it  may  be  that  really  interferes,  and  the  deaf, 
reasonable  woman  cheerfully  defers  her  pet  scheiaiS^only 
defers,  you  see ;  the  equally  reasonable  husband,  doesnpt 
require  her  to  renounce  it.  In  process  of  time  either 
your  wife  discovers  that  she  can  do  very  well  without  it, 
or  you  will  have  the  pleasure  of  saying,  "  Now,  my  dear, 
if  you  want  that  article  we  were  speaking  of,  I  think  we 
may  afford  it.** 

The  arguing  husband  -iis  the  philosopher  whpse  wife 
always  gets  what  she  wants,  reasonable  or  unreasonable. 
The  husband  who  never  refuses  his  wife  anything  generally 
has  a  wife  who  is  willing  to  wait  until  he  can  afford  to 
gratify  her  wishes.  This  may  seem  paradoxicg^l,  b)it  the 
study  of  human  nature,  of  which  most  wives  liave  a  fair 
share,  will  explain  the  apparent  mystery,  which  really  is 
no  mystery  at  all.  If  your  wife  wants  a  €»w^v[i%\si^M:J^^ 
don't  mention  tlie  "rent,**  but  v.se  c3^  N'jxtc  m\»  ^^'^  ^^^^ 
out  the   rirrht  ono ;    one  Uiau   s\\b  caxi  w.*^^^  ^^^  Vtcv^ 


ple^siire  in  using,  one  that  the  children  can  work  .with 
an4  may-pky  with,-oao  that  anybody  om  inse  olMjand, 


witlionl,/*  ^vinjgi  lier  'TtJ^ol^^ifc^DJ^  t^'  H-m   ; '  ]  ^^'^ 

There  is'  one  such  laacnine^ — only  OBift— it  i«  gflAnfj 
too,  iTou  can  read  the  evening  paper  to  your  wift,  or 
"  ftobinson.  Crusoe"  to  jow  dj^WflWi  lOr  mideia  ktter 
to  the  ^'Tio^s"  tmiiisturbi^i  wJ^e  tbip^  qwet,  ^tea^ 
W9,iJ^ei:,j[s,gUUip^  awiftty  oy^nthe  Uttte^  foocki>»nd  kniatffl- 
bq9^eys  by  79^  .w^e. 

In  the  long  nm^tibe^^  ?eqat "  wjl]  b^i  paid  lalli  the  easier  • 
on.QiCcouBt  pf  the.  Bowing  naoiljuife.  Xt>  Mwrt  fee  p^id  at 
oxioe  perhaps,  fi^U  y^u  neied.  »pt  Nm%*  ^T!hi»\  tMaanre, 
tl^i3  helpor^  thi^  rentnpay^i:!  th^  ccm^Mt-ibiM^ep,  >iim 
sUmt  se.wii;ig  ;machine.  zoay  be;^ot  |iow  fwAfiMd  for  a 
lil^ljie  at  ^  time,  if  ypur  purse  i^  Gftopdi^i?* 

Hut  .there,  is  ooed  of  mup)^  cauitiw  At:  *  the  outlet 
Tbere.are  sev^i:^  gPo4  sewing  inaojwe^;  wbioii  fW)iild  be.of 
no  pse  to  your  ;wife,  because  she  aould  not  usa  them  for 
•  tiie !  gre^^ter  part  of  her  work.  Jii  you  a^k  a  few 'fidaiidbi 
whether,  so  far  asMthey  kpow,  siswiag  maohiiies  br6  xeaUy 
avi^ilablo  for  everyday ,  o^^hand  odds  and^nda  of  fexsiily 
aewWjg.  One  wiUx^ly,  **  Of  couj?ftB i^ot ;  ^jfywifealwiiys 
does  ^^ch  work  by.hp^wl;;  al^e  aaya  it-'s  eaaier.tiiaii  ta^ 
tUe.xpachine  ready.  Xn  fact,  ^he  do^s  not  h^  tike  sewmg 
machine  muoh  heraelfp  she  can;i>pt.aapi9imige  it  yory  well.*' 

Another  will  say,  "My  wife  never  thinks  .of  aewtog  i)y 
hand — she  has  ^ot  i\e  patience  to  da  it.  Xhe  ^e^ring 
machine  is  always  ready  for  anythmg,  .aud  really  is  a 
comfort  to  iny  whole  family.  We  all  use  it  more  or 
less,  children  included.  ^Iwhiled  away  many  an  hour 
with  it  myaelf  at  first,  t  'cau  put  a  thoHSaiid  stitches 
in  a  yard  oi  hem  in  a  minute^ '  foldiitg  ( liie  hom  as 
it  goes  aJong—revery .  etitoh  perfect— ra»d  .w^Wt  is  more 
important,  the  sewing  will  outwear  the  clotih," 

One  haa  got  ^iie  tl^\.  .^€^\i^Taafi.\!iiafi  and, the  other 
has  got  ome  oi  Vixe  tn-axi-^  ^^?rc^Ti^  cr^^^^'Ss^^sJ^  's^^^s^.'^^t^ 
very  Hkely  to  do  \?  ^Vi  Sloxl\. Vs!C^%  i^n«  ^^^^^xs^^^^xi.. 


ThpvAitSli  cec)4ji3itfi  of  a  faittily  M\4Bg  macliine  is 
simplicity.  .  A  sewing  macliine  ..XRay^iirj^e  ajl  .tjae  other 
virtuei,  and  still  l^  li^elgBp  in  tbe  fsixuljry  because  the 
family  cannot  use  it.  SimpUeiiy  is  ikp-  -first  Teq^iisHe 
m  any  iind  of  macM^ery  to  he  managed  hy  ladies  arid 
vnskUful  persons.  Bvepybody  in  the  trade  appreciates 
tl^s  fj^tfiSfid  so  in  .the  adyertiseuientSy  all  the  machines 
.^e  "the  simplest,"  just  as^very  sbopkeoper's  is  **  ti^ 
dieapest  house  in  the  trade."  Some  people  may  be 
caught  by  n^ere  statements,  which  may  or  may  not  be 
mis-statem^ljs ;  but  cleYfr  pMi4^  probably?  xe^A  such 
li  terature  wt^  BOTZne  xnisgiYiBg;  msA  iAj  if  they  read  it  at  all. 

People  ^on't  know  how  helpful  a  sewing  machine  can 
be,  and  generally  oaEpect  of  it  too  little.  Don't  make  this 
mistake.  Require  it  to  stanad  ready  to  ^op  its  needle 
into  erery  little  item  of  sewiiag  befere  joviiwife  could  get 
her  workbasket  in  working  order.  Bemand  that  the 
machine  shaH*  iiot  only  do  all  the  family  sewiog,  but 
make  it  pleasant  oC(^pation~  i&st^ad  of '^tedious  ai^d 
wearing  woi^k.  Don't  b^eve  thf^t  a  member  of  -the 
family  must  be  set  apart  to  manage  the  sewizig  znachinei 
ov^fisachimst  be  employed* for  ^e  purpose;  th&fiEuuily 
sewing  maehine  is  for  the  use  of  every  member  of  the 
family  down  to  the  little  ones.  If  you  don't  find  it 
equal  to  all  these  requirements,  it  will  be  because  you  get 
the  wrong  machiee.  The  right  fimily  sewing  machwe 
will  last  a  life  time,  paying  for  itself  every  year  over  and 
over  again — ^a  perpetual  source  of  satisfaction,  comfoirti 
leisure,  ^and  benefit  to  <  the  whole  family.  An^  of  the 
wrong  ones  will  bother  your  wife;  waste  "  her  time  •  aind 
strength,  and  unless  she  has<an  lunusually  mechauical  head, 
it  will  spoil  material  and  cost  mo^^y  for  repairs ;  aad,  after 
aD  you  will  be  glad  to  get  half  price,  or  less,  for  it  in  ex- 
change for  the  Willcox  and  G^ilA>s. 

It  is  not  wise  to  buy  an  airticle  wjjiich  m?.y  be  either 
so  useful  or  so  usieless  as  a  .3^wiI3g  TiaQhine  'wiiboiut  first 
knowing  whether  it  is  'the  right  one  or  one  of- the  very 
many  wrong  ones.  A  iittle  ;^xperiw^  opens  one's  eyes 
sometimes,  and  is  very  useful. 

The  B^cret  pf  sflfepy  is.fA«  m€utV«  Irldl  al ^vy«v^ ^^e^ vt^ 
purehasa.     After  that  you  mil  ncei.  no  coaiu^d* 


PRICES  REDUCED. 
Quality  same  as  before. 

MathiiteB  aent  carriage  paid  so  that  the  trial  ma/jf  he  e^Moflfr 
and  perfectly  free  tn  every  home  in  the  Kingdom.- 
]£a«hiiiea  of  other  makoia  Uksa.  in  exchange,    £a^  Tema,  Aa. 
«•.  '  Otod  to  Om  lllMtnM  Priot  Hd;  Mleet  & niitafab  itjbofBMdm 
ttM|ch>pt(ir  Httitled  ■*  Ttnu,  tx,"  on  pif«  IS,  irill  mtkt  jvat  mj  oImt  tt 


[Tbk  sAiu  Uacuini  is  woixid  main  ir  Hand  ahd  Foot  at  nwAavtM.} 

H^ilkox  &  Gibbs  Sewing  Machine  Co,, 

150.  CHEAPSIDE,  E.C.  i     _  ^„„^„ 

135.  REGENT  STREET,  W.  j     ^^^^'-'«' 
16,  CROSS  ST.,  Royal  Exchange,  MANCHESTER. 


LIVERPOOU-OiTOM  &  Co.,  1 1+,  Bold  Street. 
BIRMINGHAM— T.  S.  Tongue,  j,  Ball  Street. 
BRISTOL— B.  G.  Boo».  61,  Park  Street. 
CANTERBURY— T.  Warr  &  Co.,  15,  Mercery  Une. 
CORK— AiKiNS  Bros.,  The  LoadoD  HonM. 
GLASGOW— M:.  Brown,  105,  SauchiehaU  StieeL 
fiAWnirut—'W.  a.  aeuwa-,  ■B«o«*.'«ii— ^  V,  ■tt.oA^oa-,  ^mi^us—BUU 
and  06.:  CHaarasa**— 3.  6«*A  k  Co.-,  iJimMD^'a.,  ^-,  ^unKctrM.- 

aamoa    JTWin-  ft  Co  ;  «i4\iiiwt.-?  tfii^ttt.--^ 


"THE  BRIGHTON  MYSTERY." 


JOUT,  a  y.ear.'ago  a  sensation  was  created  at  Brighton  by  the  arrival 
a.  m^n  of  extraordinary  stature  from  the  Celestial  Empire, 
ightpn  was  full,  but  it  riiade  room  for  him.  •  Hotels  conld  not  compass, 
r  private  lodgings  contain  bim,  so  the  Mayor,  with  his  well-known 
aerosity,  placed  the  Pavilion  at  his  service,  where  he  slept  "upon  a  china 
ite,  and  ate  a  bird's  nest  for  breakfast,  as  is  the  custom  of  his  native 
id.  The'giant  was  moody ;  man  delighted  him  not^jaor  woman  either. 
3  was  stared  at  when  he  walked  abroad,  and  the  local  magnates  asked 
m  lo  dinner,  while  a  private  box  was  placed  at  his  service  by  theaaM- 
bing  manager  of  the  theatre.  Still  his  eye  rolled  in  a  fine  frenzy,  and 
was  either  .j^uoting  Confucius  to  himself,  or — shall  we  hazard  the  con- 
:ture1  Aye.  All  great  men  are  public  property, — or  he  was  thinking  of 
Q  little  foot  lie  left  behind  him  at  Shanghae.  Oh,  little  feet !  what 
T^er  for  good  or  evil  you  have  over  great  men  I 

In  spite  of  the  efforts  of  the  authorities  and  peeple  of  Brighton,  the* 
ttled  cloud  of  .  melancholy  would  not  quit  his  brow.  He  became 
)re  anymore  disconsolate.  JSumerous  were  the  efforts  made  to 
eer  him.  In  vain  t9ie  principal  tradesmen  came  to  him  with  gifts,  pie 
3dained  their  presents,  and  would  not  chin-chin  the  donors.  The 
ayar  and  the  Municipal  Council  camo  to  him  in  a  body,  and 
)od  on  their  heads  for  an  hour-and-an-half,  but  he  did  not  even 
lile..  Morose  and  implacable  Celestial !  After  that,  there  was  a 
3e  of  bathing  machines,  drawn  by  oysters,  along  the  Marine  Parade,. 
cCeeded  by  a  ballet  of  lodging-house  keepers  in  front  of  the  grand  hotel^ 
it  the  grtjat  man  did  not  relax  a  muscle  of  his  face,  tboagh  two  of  them 
iire  blowar  out  to  sea,  and  rode  away  to  France  on  the  backs  of  all-de- 
uring  porpdises.     Wliai  was  to  be  done  ] 

The  Mayor  and  Corporation  of  Brighton  were  at  their  wits'  end ; 
.izens  were  aghast;  visitors  began  to  murmur;  and  even  the  ladies  took 
.  inquiring  turn  1 

While  things  were  in  this  dreadfrJ  condition,  all  Brighton  im- 
egnated  with  the  melancholy  of  the  great  Celestial,  a  box  was  delivered 
the  distinguished  straiiger,  who  opened  it  with  a  lethargic  air.  No 
oner  had  he  cast  his  eye  over  its  contents,  than  a  kindly  smile  over- 
read  '  hb  featnset ;  .  his  melancholy  vanished,  he  conversed  freely,, 
rgot  the  littlo  foot  be  had  left  behind  him  in  Shanghae,  and  chin- 
inned  everybody.  The  pleased .  inhabitants  were  anxious  beyond 
easure  to  finS  'oAt  wh*iit  Tiad  worked  the  miraculous  cure.  They 
3wded  round  him,  and  saw  that  the  box  contained  an  artide  of 
•mestic '  use,  the  fune  of  wkioh  had  penetoated  to  China,  and  which 
i  declared  he  bad  crossed  the  ocean  to  investigate  for  the  benefit  of 
e  ladies  of  his  family.  His  grief  was  caused  by  his  having  forgotten  the 
.mes  of  the  makers ;  but  the  timely  arrival  of  THE  LETTEB  Q 
stored  his  spirits :  the  magical  names  which  had  escaped  his  treache- 
us  memory,  brought  serenity  to  his  mind.  After  the  usual  monthV 
al  he  ordered  a  few  thousand  for  exportation  to  his  native  land,  and 
vo  a  grand  ball  at  the  Pavilion  on  the  evening  of  his  departure, 
ncing  until  he  had  a  stitch  in  his  side  and  felt  thoroughly  8QW«(i  xis^ 


My  person,  residing  in 

any  part  of  the  United 
SiBgdom,  desiring  tol)Wome 

acquainted  with  our  Sewing 
MaeMne,  will,  on  appMealacm 
with  8ati£^actory  rdferenees, 
reocnye  it,  free  and  carziage 

« 

psod  to  tiie  nearest  station, 

*    •    . 

for  a  Month's  Truil  at  her 
own  home. 


If  the  Machme  is  not  ap- 
proved, it  is  relnumed  to  us 
at  the  end  of  a  monl^ ;  and 
no  charge  wkitever  is  made 
under  any  circmnstanees, 
not  even  in  13^  rtae  ease  of 
injury  to  the  machine. 


P^tyment  n^iy  be  made^  at  the  option  of  tliepuirbasert 
either  in  advance,  or  at  the  expiration  of  the-tiial,  or  by 
moiiQ^jr  instalments  o(£i,  five  per  cent,  bein^  added  to 
all  amouttts  for  which  credit  is  given  Atyoml  ike 
month. 

Machines  lOF  other  makmis  taken  in  esDchange. 

Futl'paftiadars  and  niustraled  Price  list  free. 

IVilicox  &  GiMs  Seum^  Machine  Co 

15a,  CHEAPSIDE/E.C.  I      r  oNnaN 

135,  KECaSNT  STREET,  W.  j      i-^^^^^i^- 

16,  CROSS  ST.,  Royal  Exchange,  MANCHESTER. 


UVBitPOOL— OxiON  At  Co.,  114,  Bold  Stveet. 

BIRMINGHAM— T.  S.  Tongvs«  3,  Bidl  Street. 

BRISTOIr— B.  G.  Boom,  6 i.  Park  Street 

CAWTERBURY— T.  Warr  4:  Co.,  15,  Mercery  Lane. 

CORK— ^Atkins  Bro$.,  The  London  House. 

GLASGOW— M.  Brown,  ioj,  Saucbiehall  Street. 

BAmsTATUH-^W.  H.  Heuwm ;  Bblfabt— Kiddd  &  €0. ;  CaiLTSHRAv— 
J.  Steel  ftCo. ;  Ipswich— -J.  Meadows;  Leickst£A—- H.  Gee ;  Rros— M.  H. 
Gellmg;  Southampton— bled  k  Co.;  Trowb&idgs— J.  BJsoa&CQ«\  ^kso 
MINSTER-  Baker  Bros. ;  and  in  many  otlicr  Tovms. 


"THE  BRIGHTON  MTSTERT"  UNRAVELED. 


'*  It  is  BO  osLfj  to  work,  so  simplo  in  construction^  so  beautiAilly  fitted* 
workn  so  silently,  and  sews  so  well,  that  I  think  I  have  never  seen  ODt  tU 
so  fully  answers  the  promiseB  of  its  makers.*' — ^The  Bey.  S.  W.  Youva,  V> 
Ure  Bank-terrace,  Ripon. 

* '  Mine  has  never  been  out  of  order.  I  have  had  much  pleasure  in  thoM^ 
and  recommending  it  to  many  friends." — ^Mrs.  Mabia  Subbow,  Hsmjlnaij 
Vit'Aragc,  S.W. 

**  The  Sc'wing  Machine  has  been  in  constant  use  since  January,  and 
not  been  out  of  order,  nor  has  a  needle  been  broken.    It  is  frequently 
during  I'oading  aloud,  and  is  no  interruption.'* — ^Mrs.  SlocxsR,  Hon 
Parsonagf*,  Ijeeds. 

"  I  am  perfectly  satisfied  with  the  Sewing  Machine  you  sent  for  tiiil 
think  it  is  the  easiest,  pleasantest,  and  quietest  one  I  ^ve  ever  tned."— ] 
l*olo,  Templeton  Bector}%  Tiverton. 

*'  Mrs.  Stokes  finds  the  machine  the  first  she  oould  work  with  the: 
It  is  BO  caKily  done  that  she  does  not  require  the  hand  attschnient  at  alL"? 
Lensficld  Cottage,  Cambridge. 

*'  I  have  had  one  of  your  Sewing  Machines  two  years  and  a  balfi  11^ 
has  never  l)eon  out  of  order,  end  answers  per^wtly  in  every  w«j.*'*'lif%i 
WoKTiiiNGToN,  Shuokbui-gh  Vicarage,  Daventry.  ^  ^  U 

**  I  fiiid  your  machine  works  beautifully  on  all  materials,  withont  nf 
trouble.  Having  used  a  sewing  machine  for  nineyears,  I  can  appzeciats  flt 
simplicity  of  yours.'* — The  lloiible.  Mrs.  Yonoe,  iiton  College. 

'*  The  Sowing  Machine  hns  boen  used  by  my  children  about  nine  moiifti 
with  comi))nto  satisfaction.** — ^Tho  Ilev.  H.  P0WEi*L  Edwabds,  OudMi 
Vicai*ago,  Newport,  Mon. 

*'  After  trviiig  six  or  seven  of  the  Sowing  Machines  of  the  best  miken^  I  •! 

f  refer  the  'VV^illcox  and  Oibbs.     I  have  tiscd  it  for  all  materials,  from  fbck  '] 
nvemess  capes  for  my  boy    to  thin  mudin  dresses  for  my  g^ls."— Ifo* 
PuLLiNO,  Eiistuor  Rectory,  I^bury. 

*'  Mrs.  Johnston  is  quite  an  f nit  in  use  of  some  of  the  principal  Sevitt 
Machines,  but  much  prefers  yours  to  any  other,  bofli  in  the  simplicity  of  ni 
constniction  and  in  the  character  of  the  work  done." — The  Bev.  HjdtbT  & 
JoKNSTUN.  Brompton  Ralph  Rectorv,  Wiveliscombe,  Somerset. 

"  I  have  had  one  of  vour  Sowing  Machines  in  use  since  1862,  and  haveiKa 
highest  opinion  of  it.    It  is  certainly  a  beautiful  Sewing  Machine,  and  dow 
its  work  admirably.  I  shall  have  much  pleasure  in  bpeuking  from  ezpeiienoa. 
of  itsperfoction.'  — Mrs.  Turxotjr,  EUenhall  Vicarage,  EocloshalL 

'*  The  Sewing  Machine  is  thoroughly  efficient,  ancf  pleases  all  our  friends 
to  whom  it  has  been  shown.  Its  silence,  simplicity,  and  beautiful  workman- 
ship have  secured  the  unanimous  verdict  that  it  is  the  best  <rf  Sewing 
Machines." — ^ITie  Rev.  J.  IlErTON,  Bishop  Auckland. 

**  It  irt  only  fair  to  infurm  you  of  my  people*8  success  with  our  olqnnt 
Sewing  X(achino.  which  has  been  as  pleasant  as  it  seems  marvellous.  They 
had  never  used  one,  and  knew  nothing  whatever  of  its  mechanism ;  yet  within 
an  hour  ur  so  of  its  arrival  they  wore  all  quite  fieimiiiar  with  its  mode  (tf  woo- 
ing, and  in  a  day  or  two  could  stitch  away  at  a  suipriaing  ni^  I  have 
much  pleasure  in  stating  that  your  Sowing  Machine  fullils  everything  you 
promise.  I  regard  tho  silence  and  the  perfect  ease  and  freedom  from  firague 
with  which  it  is  werkod,  as  also  the  movement  of  the  work  frt>m  front  to 
back,  instead  of  from  side  to  side — thereby  obviating  the  necessity  of  stooping 
or  leaning  over  it — as  so  many  highly  important  desiderata,  if  only  in  the 
matter  ot  hygiene,  to  say  nothing  of  the  comfort." — Samitel  Babkbr,  M.D*, 
14,  Eaton-place,  Brighton, 


Off, 


mils  on;:,,,,"'-  'l'<sth..l  ,"''■''"•  ni 


JT  was  a  oil. 
■ithlis 


/\ji  nail 


ova  ew} 


ffis 

l^^ed.    All  :?; 

^Wwhici  ij-ni.^ngsooa  receivi 

fc  common,"  as 

*  t&afnoyd,  whan  Mrs,  H*BH^;A-^  -        ,,^ 
*l<ia»Wgratitade  bea^f  V  ^^.w^^" 
•'eito-^heir  precious  ffiil.  J^^^^ia^e*^*^  „v^•(^  a*'"  «tolio» 

^tarwas  a  Chpiatmaa/^         ,  ■„  *«  ^\-et  W*  ^„a*i>»  %,\ttoV 
««5S»mdanoe,buth,d-'       -"**  -.^r  °-<=^^,6S°^«.»  "...„. 

eBaatings,  a  lady  U^'f^il  ^Ite^SV ^  ^'>*t V^' 

f  Jerval,  of  ™la:^*„to=  »°  tw  ''S-''''^T.^-''\.  f^^^Z^^ 
S,and  1k.,1  implo';  ^,i»  s»1,.^,o  **  ^lis©  °J  »oi  °^  Vti<'>'"%A  B*??'^ 


,rhioh  a  lady  ia>°l*8»'  v!  '!>^°T1  ^''^ifoS  »  !f.  6^6  °«X^ 
est  TTorked  si 
tlicir  garmen 


which  a  lady  is  '•'•~^\'i%''  v..  -p^f""  io  *"""',«  oS  » ifl  ftve  "'^Joy"!? 


tlicir  garments  ah^  ^^^i 
slie  carOjthanks  f 


„sa* 


"THE  BRIGHTON  MYSTERY"  UNRAVELED. 


'*  It  is  BO  oafty  to  work,  80  aimplo  in  construction^  so  beautifully  fitted, 
workn  so  silently,  end  sews  so  well,  that  I  think  I  have  never  seen  one  that 
BO  fully  answers*  tho  promises  of  its  makers." — The  Bey.  S.  W.  Youso,  4» 
Uro  Bonk-torrace,  Ripon. 

* '  Mine  has  nover  been  out  of  order.  I  hare  had  much  pleasure  in  showing 
and  recommending  it  to  many  friends.'*— :Mrs.  Mabia  ^XTRROWy  Hampton 
Vi.mragc,  S.W. 

**  The  ^H^wing  Machine  has  been  in  consinnt  use  sinoe  January,  and  has 
not  been  out  of  order,  nor  has  a  needle  been  broken.  It  is  frequently  used 
during  I'oading  aloud,  and  is  no  interruption.'* — ^Mrs.  SIOOXBR,  Horsforth 
ParRonago,  Ijee<l8. 

"  I  am  perfectly  satisfied  with  the  Sewing  Machine  you  sent  ibr  trial  I 
think  it  is  the  easiest,  pleasantest,  and  quietest  one  I  haye  ever  tried." — Mxa* 
I'olo,  Tompleton  Rectory,  Tiverton. 

*'  Mrs.  Stokes  finds  the  machine  the  first  she  could  work  with  the  foot. 
It  is  BO  ooMily  done  that  she  does  not  require  the  hand  attadhment  at  alL" — 
Lensficld  Cottage,  Cambridge. 

'*  I  havo  had  one  of  your  Sewing  Machines  two  years  and  a  half.  It 
has  never  l)een  out  of  order,  nnd  answers  pei^BCtly  m  every  way." — Mrs. 
WoKTI]I^TlTo^',  Shuck  burgh  Vicarage,  Daventry. 

**  I  fiud  your  machine  works  beautifully  on  all  materials,  without  any 
trouble.  Having  used  a  sewing  machine  for  nineyears,  I  can  appreciate  the 
simplicity  of  ^^ours." — The  llunble.  Mrs.  YoNOE,  iiton  College. 

"  Tho  Se\(iiig  Machine  hns  bi^en  used  by  my  children  about  nine  months 
with  coin])1pto  satinfuction.*' — ^Tho  Bev.  "H.  Powbll  Edwabbs,  Caerleon 
Vicamgo,  Newport,  Mon. 

**  After  trving  six  or  seven  of  the  Sewing  Machines  of  the  best  makers,  I 
prefer  the  Willcox  and  Oibba.  I  have  iiscd  it  for  aU  materials,  fh>m  thick 
Inverness  capes  for  my  boy  to  thin  muslin  dresses  for  my  girls." — Mzs. 
PuLiJNO,  E;ist!ior  Rectory,  Ledburj'. 

**  Mrs.  Johnston  in  quite  au/ait  in  use  of  some  of  the  principal  Sewing 
Machines,  but  much  prefers  yours  to  any  other,  both  in  the  simplicity  of  its 
construction  and  in  the  character  of  tho  work  done." — The  Bev.  fijSKBT  GL 
JoirNSTON,  Brompton  Balph  Rectorv,  WiveUscombe,  Somerset. 

"I  hnvo  had  one  of  vour  Sewing  Machines  in  use  since  1862,  and  have  the 
highest  opinion  of  it.  It  is  certainly  a  beautiful  Sewing  Machine,  and  does 
its  work  admirably.  I  shall  havo  much  pleasure  in  bpeuking  from  experienoa 
of  itsperfection.'  — Mrs.  Tuknour,  EUenhall  Vicarage,  £c»leshalL 

'*  The  Sewing  Machine  is  thorou^^hly  efficient,  and  pleases  all  our  friends 
to  whom  it  has  been  shown.  Its  silence,  simplicity,  and  beautiful  workman- 
ship havo  secured  the  unanimous  verdict  that  it  is  the  best  of  Sewing 
Machines." — The  Bev.  J.  IlErTON,  Bishop  Auckland. 

*'  It  ifl  only  fair  to  iiifurm  you  of  my  people's  success  with  our  elegant 
Sowing  Machine,  which  has  been  as  pleasant  as  it  seems  marvellous.  &ey 
had  never  used  one,  and  knew  nothing  whatever  of  its  mechamsm ;  yet  within 
an  hour  or  so  of  its  arrival  they  wore  all  quite  fiuniliar  with  its  mode  of  mA- 
iug,  and  in  a  day  or  two  could  stitch  away  at  a  suxpriang  nie.  1  have 
much  })Ieasuro  in  stating  that  your  Sowing  Machine  lullils  everything  you 
promise.  I  regard  tho  silence  and  the  perfect  easo  and  freedom  tram  fatigue 
with  which  it  is  worked,  as  also  the  movement  of  the  work  from  front  to 
back,  instead  uf  from  side  to  side — thereby  obviating  the  neoessihr  of  stooping 
or  leaning  over  it — as  so  many  highly  important  deBideraiay  if  only  in  the 
matter  of  hygiene,  to  say  nothing  of  the  comfort." — Samuel  Babkeb,  M.D*, 
14,  Eaton-placs,  Biighlou, 


OH,    INDEED! 


IT  was  a  clear,  cold  evening  in  December,  and  after  a  frolic 
with  his  children,  Mr.  Hastings  sat  down  in  his  own  easy 
chair,  in  his  own  comer  by  the  fire,  to  enjov  an  hour's  rest. 

His  sermons  for  the  coming  Sunday  liea  been  carefully 
prepared.  All  through  the  week  his  ministrations  had 
brought  balm  and  comfort  to.  the  sick  and  afBicted  among 
his  flock,  and  he  had  most  fairly  earned  the  right  to  bask, 
with  relas;ed  muscle^,  and  the  smile  of  broad  good 
humour  which  irradiated  his  features,  before  the  glowing 
fire. 

Mr.  Hastings'  was  still  in  the  prime  of  life,  and  thougk 
he  had  beenxwelve  years  pastor  over  liis  people,  not  once* 
had  it  heei^  necessary  to  send  him  to  the  South  of  France 
for  bronoiiiitis,  or  any  other  of  the  numerous  ills  to  which . 
Revereiad  flesh  is  heir.  His  laugh  was  frequent  and  joyous, , 
and  hii  voice  so  deep  and  musical  that  it  was  a  pleasure 
to  hefer  him  say  the  simplest  thing ;  how  much  more  im- 
pressive, then,  were  the  sacred  teachings  from  his  lips ! — 
so  ft«ee  from  conventionalism  or  cant ! 

is  people  loved  him,  young  and  old,  and  did  their  best 
to  ^how  it ;  the  old  ladies  knitted  him  imnumbered  pairs  ■ 
of  tetockings,  and  the  younger  ones  embroidered  slippers, 
until  at  last  he  piteously  asked  his  wife  if  wicked  genii 
h^d  transformed  him  in  their  eyes — so  that  he  took  liis  • 

alks  abroad  in  the  semblance  of  a  reverend  centipede  ? 

/His  wife  sat  on  the  other  side  of  the  fire  on  this  winter 
evening  in  her  arm  chair,  but  not  dreamily  enjoying  her 
'(ood  gifts,  oh,  no ;  her  week's  work  was  by  no  means  done. 
gi*eat  basket  of  clean  linen  was  at  her  side,  and  its  con- 
dition betokened  that  her  five  healthy,  boisterous  boys  had 
good  times;  and  evinced  their  satisfaction  therbat  by 
I'cnding — not  tlieir  hearts — but  tlicir  garments,  after  thje 
fashion  of  the  Israehtes  of  old. 

And,  therefore,  it  will  not  seem  improbable  to  mothers 
of  large  families,  whea  I  say  that  while  the  sweet  face  of 
the  minister's  \vife  showed  refinement  and  cultivation,  it 
was  also  pale,  thin,  and  careworn.  Plain  Sewing  was  the 
complaint  from  which  she  sufifered,  and  had  suffered  for 
several  years ;  and,  like  many  other  fell  diseases,  it  was  ac* 


f   A 


"THE  BRIGHTON  MYSTERY"  UNRAVELED. 


'*  It  is  80  oofty  to  work,  so  Bimplc  in  construction,  bo  beautifully  fitted, 
workM  so  silently,  and  sews  so  woU,  that  I  think  I  have  never  seen  one  thit 
so  fully  answers  the  promises  of  its  makers." — The  Bey.  8.  W.  Youso,  4^ 
Ure  Bank-torrace,  Ripon. 

**  Mine  has  never  been  out  of  order.  I  have  had  much  pleasure  in  ahowing 
and  reoommending  it  to  many  frienda." — ^Mrs.  Mabia  Bubbow,  Hampton 
Vioarage,  S.W. 

**  The  Stowing  Machine  has  been  in  constant  use  since  January,  and  haa 
not  been  out  of  order,  nor  has  a  needle  been  broken.  It  is  frequently  used 
during  ityading  aloud,  and  is  no  interruption." — ^Mrs.  Stogxer,  Horsforth 
Parsonago,  Ijeeds. 

*'  I  am  perfectly  satisfied  with  the  Sewing  ^lachine  you  sent  for  triaL  I 
think  it  is  the  easiest,  pleasantest,  and  quietest  one  I  have  ever  tcied.*' — Mrs. 
Pole,  Templeton  Rectory,  Tiverton. 

**  Mrs.  ^^tokes  finds  the  machine  the  first  she  oould  work  with  the  foot. 
It  is  so  easily  done  that  she  docs  not  require  the  hand  attaohment  at  dL" — 
Lensficld  Cottage,  Cambridge. 

"  I  have  had  one  of  your  Sewing  Machines  two  years  and  a  half.  It 
has  nevrr  been  out  of  onlor,  and  answers  perfectly  in  every  iray." — ^Mrs. 
WoRTiiiNdTox,  Shuck  burgh  Vicarage,  Daventry. 

*'  I  fiud  your  machine  works  beautifully  on  all  materials,  without  any 
trouble.  Having  used  a  sewing  machine  for  nineyears,  I  can  appreciate  the 
simplicity  of  jours." — The  Hunble.  Mrs.  Yonge,  £ton  College. 

'*  The  Sewing  Machine  hnn  been  used  by  my  children  about  nine  months 
with  coTii]>]eto  satisfiiction." — The  Rev.  H.  Powell  Edwabdb,  Cserleon 
Vicurago,  Newport,  Mon. 

*'  After  trying  six  or  seven  of  the  Sewing  Machines  of  the  best  maken,  I 

f  refer  the  Willcox  and  Gibbs.     I  have  used  it  for  aU  materials,  fh>m  thick 
nvemess  capes  for  my  boy    to  thin  muslin  dresses  fbr  my  girls." — Mzs. 
Pulling,  Eastuor  Rectory,  Ledbury. 

*'  Mrs.  Johnston  is  quite  aufait  in  use  of  some  of  the  principal  Sewing 
Machines,  but  much  ])rcfers  yours  to  any  other,  both  in  the  simplicity  of  its 
construction  and  in  the  character  of  the  work  done." — The  Rev.  fisiniT  Q; 
Johnston.  Dromptou  Ralph  Rectorv*  Wiveliscombe,  Somerset. 

**  I  have  had  one  of  your  Sewing  Machines  in  use  since  1862,  and  have  the 
highest  opinion  of  it.  It  is  certainly  a  beautiful  Sewiuff  Machine,  and  does 
its  work  admirably.  I  shall  have  much  pleasure  in  bpeuSing  from  experienoa 
of  itspcrfoction.'  —Mrs.  TuKXOUR,  Ellenhall  Vicarage,  EocleshalL 

'*  The  Sewing  Machine  is  thoroughly  efficient,  and  pleases  aU  our  friends 
to  whom  it  has  been  shown.  Its  silence,  simplicity,  and  beautafdl  workman- 
ship have  secured  the  unanimous  verdict  that  it  is  the  best  oi  Sewing 
Machines." — The  Rev.  J.  Hki'ton,  Bishop  Auckland. 

*'  It  is  only  fair  to  inform  you  of  my  people's  success  with  our  el^eant 
Sowing  Machine,  which  has  been  as  pleasant  as  it  seems  marvellous.  They 
had  never  used  one,  and  know  nothing  whatever  of  its  mechanism ;  yet  within 
an  hour  or  so  of  its  arrival  they  were  all  quite  fiuniliar  with  its  mode  of  work- 
ing, and  in  a  day  or  two  could  stitch  away  at  a  surprising  n^.  I  have 
much  ]i]ca8uro  in  stating  that  your  Sewing  Machine  niUils  everything  you 
promise.  I  regard  the  silence  and  the  perfect  eaao  and  freedom  firom  fatigue 
with  which  it  is  werked,  as  also  the  movement  of  the  work  from  front  to 
back,  instead  of  from  side  to  side— thereby  obviating  the  necessi^  of  stooping 
or  leaning  over  it— as  so  many  highly  important  denderaiay  if  only  in  the 
matter  of  hygiene,  to  say  nothing  of  the  comfort" — Samuel  Babxer,  M.D., 
li,  Eaton-place,  Urightoii, 


OH,    INDEED! 


IT  was  a  clear,  cold  evening  in  December,  and  after  a  frolic 
with  his  children,  Mr.  Hastings  sat  down  in  his  own  easy 
chair,  in  his  own  corner  by  the  fire,  to  enjov  an  hour's  rest. 

His  sermons  for  the  coming  Sunday  Ima  been  carefully 
prepared.  All  through  the  week  his  ministrations  had 
brought  balm  and  comfort  to  the  sick  and  afflicted  among 
liis  flock,  and  he  had  most  fairly  earned  the  right  to  bask, 
with  relaxed  muscle^,  and  the  smile  of  broad  good 
humour  which  irradiated  his  features,  before  the  glowing 
fire. 

Mr.  Hastinggi'  was  still  in  the  prime  of  life,  and  thougk 
he  had  been^-elve  years  pastor  over  his  people,  not  once- 
had  it  beeiv' necessary  to  send  him  to  the  South  of  France 
for  bronchitis,  or  any  other  of  the  numerous  ills  to  which . 
Revereafd  flesh  is  heir.   His  laugh  was  frequent  and  joyous,  .. 
and  h?&  voice  so  deep  and  musical  that  it  was  a  pleasure  • 
to  hefer  him  say  the  simplest  thing ;  how  much  more  im- 
presfeive,  then,  were  the  sacred  teachings  from  his  lips  ! — 
so  ft«ee  from  conventionaUsm  or  cant  1 

is  people  loved  him,  young  and  old,  and  did  their  best 
to  fchow  it ;  the  old  ladies  knitted  him  unnumbered  pairs  • 
of  tetockings,  and  the  younger  ones  embroidered  slippers, 
until  at  last  he  piteously  asked  his  wife  if  wicked  genii 
hafd  transformed  him  in  their  eyes — so  that  he  took  fiis  • 
walks  abroad  in  the  semblance  of  a  reverend  centipede  ? 

/[  His  wife  sat  on  the  other  side  of  the  fire  on  this  winter 
crening  in  licr  arm  chair,  but  not  dreamily  enjoying  her 
y  good  gifts,  oh,  no ;  licr  week's  work  was  by  no  means  done. 
^  A  gi'oat  basket  of  clean  linen  was  at  her  side,  and  its  con- 
dition l)otokeiied  that  her  five  healthy,  boisterous  boys  had 
good  times;  and  evinced  their  satisfaction  therfeat  by 
rending — not  tlieir  hearts — l^ut  tlieir  garments,  after  thje 
fashion  of  the  Israelites  of  old. 

And,  therefore,  it  will  not  seem  improbable  to  mothers 
of  largo  families,  when  I  say  that  while  the  sweet  face  of 
the  minister's  wife  showed  refinement  and  cultivation,  it 
was  also  pale,  thin,  and  careworn.  Flain  Sewing  was  the 
complaint  from  which  she  suffered,  and  had  suffered  for 
several  years ;  and,  like  many  other  fell  diseases,  it  was  ac» 


coTnr.:niioa  by  indigestion  anl  a  cougli,  symptoms  which 
pcrvoil  ns  excuses  Wlicu  kind  old  ladies  called  to  take  her 
for  ri  drive  in  tlioir  comfort:ii>le  cjirriacros. 

T'r.i.s  t^.vS-  s:it;  lio  dreaniin;.^,  rslio  stitcliincr,  till  a  church 
boll  rr\:::r  ^^^^  ^  ^ear  nr.d  sv/ct  in  tlie  frosty  air,  whereon  tlie 


dear/' v/iUi  :i  de.^p.iirin-r. '-^'i^vnee  at  the  heap  of  torn  little 
gann'-:!.-;.  Vv  heilier  f^lie  loo;^;sl  paler  than  u^iual  on  enter. 
ing  t^.i-  elnireh,  or  ^]^.etl:.;r  t^fiiN^ooa  people  noticed  it 
QSi)eei:i;!v  li.is  cvoiiin^s  1.  Imovr  noTsi^nt  certain  it  is  tnat 


aeiuy,  y.ir:-.  iia.'^iiiig.s  ^.ii.  uuvrii  i«i  uer  ■>:;.• -cf^i.-    (ji    i"^ ^ 

savinur,  "  Prav  excuse  my  sew-inir.  ''ivo  ([q?cv  li:.r!:»  ^;t  '^.^^^ 
keep  me  so  A'crv  l")usv  tluit  J  roallv  iliink  i  r.iia!;  ibj*  -r-  , 
to  read,  and   I    souietimo:;   (h-^'id  lt\<t.  ]  may  \y^.  <a)  hl^ 
drive!!  .-ts  \o  liik«^  tinir;  -'p-m  mv  iViviVv^r.^*."'  , 

TL'"'  ^-v^r.  t  was  oui  !     vlcovl  li^l:!(^  .Mrs.  Lo?:/-  ;ir(]  jj. ,( 
I  (!'•:!. Ii"r  L  oi:   Ii»*r   0v\'n  (•::•  iiot'ii::.:;  a  bridi.int  iilv;/^ 
?e  ij«'-i:i;:'(!  into  !ier  lio.'i  l,'^v]lif'.h  ?.lio  •::v)e'^iNl.'d   to  f: ' 
:,  on  \uv  w:i\v  liome,  '»v  .•'.ivijiif  to  lies*   li'.i>))..Tiil,  *-  ^ 
dear,  1  \y',v.'.(.  von  ro  ^ive  -no  a  ';;ui3:-.M  ii^Kne.i;:i:c'lv." 
*•  Oh,  indv'cd  I ''  said  ]\i\ 

** -Vnd  Vm  rovAi);  round  amonq;  our  frion  "Is   to-morrov. 
to  c-et  five  niorr'  I  "  ^ 

"  OIj,  indeed!"  said  ]?dr.  Lcmg.  ■ 

"And  then  I'm  GfoiiuT  to  wt  a  Sevfimx  ^T'lcliino  I  "  1 

^'  Jiir^t  ?o  !  "  said  lie. 


ten  c 

one 

out 


at  said  o\vnoi\s'  lii)era1ii  v. 

A  letter  enclosing  (lie  .six  .''(uin:\-is  to  ^r.\*'.*  rs. 'Vii.t/n  ;a  and 
GiDiis  hroviglit,  vritlicut  delay,  abeautiiii;  S'wiiig  'dacldne, 
cairiai^-/.  paid, to  Mrs,  Lov.g.witli  the  n/i.il^jje  of  krcping 


it  for  a  month  on  trial,  and  a  guaranty  on  the  inyoice  that 
the  money  would  be  refunded  in  full,  should  the  machine  be 
returned  at  the  end  of  a  month  I  A  book  of  ample  instrud- 
tions  accompanied  it,  and  in  a  very  short  time  Mrs.  Long 
was  working  away  merrily.  It  was  then  carefiilly  re- 
packed, together  with  an  elegant  box  of  pretty  articles  for 
the  children  (Mrs.  Long's  private  present), and  forwarded 
to  Mrs.  Hastings,  with  a  neatly  written  note  on  behalf  of  the 
six  contributors.  Ten  children  had  not  crushed  out 
sentiment  in  her  loving  heart,  and  certainly  her  scnti- 
menftalities  seem  worthy  of  imitation,  as  well  as  her  more 
practical  ideas.  And  this  is  the  way  the  good  people  who 
aided  Mrs.  Long  soon  received  a  glow  of  happiness  "quite 
out  of  the  common,"  as  some  of  them  not  very  elegantly 
obBcnred,  when  Mrs.  Ilastings  invited  them  to  her  house, 
and  with  gratitude  beaming  in  her  eyes,  thanked  them 
for  their  precious  gift. 

It  is  May.    The  Sewing  Machine,  which  you  will  remem- 
ber was  a  Cliristmas  present,  had  not  only  made  clothes  in 
abundance,  but  had  wrought  health  and  happiness  to  pale, 
careworn  Mrs.  Hastings.     It  did  all,  and  more,  than  the 
lest  wardrobe-keeper  could  do,  and  in  consequence,  Mrs. 
J3^astings,  a  lady  in  tastes  and  position,  was  not  compelled 
lotoil  like  a  slave;  while,  as  hard-working,  in  her  sphere, 
«s  her  husband,  she  was  able,  like  him,  to  enjoy  her  in- 
tervals of  relaxation;  she  read  tlie  new  books  and  serials, 
Bxid  had  ample  time  to  enjoy  some  of  those  nice  drives  cre- 
^s^Jiile  regretfully  declined,  and  to  receive  and  pay  those 
among  her  friends  which  hold  so  important  a  place 
the  social  economy  of  womankind ;  in  brief,  her  Sowing 
chine  provided  her  with  that  elegant  leisure  without 
ixdoh  a  lady  is  infinitely  more  to  be  pitied  than  the  hard- 
worked  scn'in^  maid.     Her  five  dear  little  bovs  rend 
'^eiir  garments  as  vigorously  as  over,  but  not  a  whit  does 
*^^  care,  thanks  to  the  six  guineas  of  the  six  real  Christians 
V     her   husband's  congregation;  thanks  to  the  Sewing 
^«lchinc,  and  thanks  above  all  to  good,  active  little  Mrs. 
Hg.    It  came  to  pass  about  this  t  ime,  that  coniing  home 
Hi  prayers  one  evening,  I\Ir.  Long  remarked  to  his  wife, 
ih  an  ah'  of  surpriKSc,  **  Vv  liy,  my  dear,  it  never  struck  mo 
X)re  that  our  minister's  wilo.  v.as  so  very  handsome  ?'* 
'*  Oh,  indeed !  "  said  Mr.^.  Long. 
**  She  is  growing  absolute  iy  si  our  and  rosy,"  contimiedlaa. 


"  Oh,  indeed  1 "  replied  she. 

"  And  I  veril;  believe  it  is  all  becauu  of  that  Sewing 
Machine  you  got  for  her ! " 
"  Just  so  1     said  Mrs.  Long. 

(Apst  Fakst.) 

TheWILLCOX&GIBBS 

Genuine  American-made 

SILENT  SEWING  MACHINE, 

IS    SENT,    OABEIAGE    PAID,    FOE 

A  MOITH'S    FEBE  TEIAL  AT   HOME. 


[Thi*  ModAUioD  u  embedded  tu  thv  Frame  of  trery  genniiM  Uachtne.]  ~ 
Btuan  qf  Bptiriou*  MMMnf$,  and  0/  unauthorited  paHUt  daiming  to  h 

AgtiiU  of  thii  Cojiip^ini]. 
iF  Every  Acent  for  the  Saie  of  the  Genuine  Uachine  hold!  a  OartlficiM  j 
of  the  Company  for  the  current  yur.  j 


givtn  ;  but  7iiniiy  prr/tr  to  pn;/  ri 
the  mnnet/  piM  in  ndrnact  11  jirt • 
ht  TttarHtii  lit  thr  -I,'!  nf  tht  iri. 


{dig  refunded  I'n  fiiU.  ihould  the  JlfaMna  I 
iiioii'h. — Tha  ftbuTfl  EiMTKnteo  tppwuj 


Blacbinea  of  other  makers  taken  in  exchange.  Easy  Terms,  Ac. 

•,'  Send  for  the  IllustmtoJ  Priw  List;  ".lecta  B\iitabla  style  of  Machine, 
•ndtheoh&ptorcntitlod  "  Tcrm^,  &c., '  «u  pa^je  12,  Trill  giro  full  particnlua. 


Willcox  £f  Gribbs  Sewing  Machine  Co, 

150,    CHEAPSIDE,    E.G.  U  nwnnw 

Gib.      135,    REGENT    STREET,   -w.  pONUOiS. 
CAnil.  16,    CROSS  ST.,  EoyalEx^hans.,  MANCHESTER. 


ynBSTioM  :— Wh«t  will  make  ghosts  of  hoati  ? 
Answer  :— The  letter  G. 

—American  RiddU. 


3  HE  absurd  riddle  and  repl^  which  I 
^  have  chosen  as  the  heading  to  my 
letter  was  asked  me  by  a  young 
I  friend  who  reads  many  American 
papers.  Of  course  I  puzzled  over  it ; 
of  course  I  said  "Yes"  to  her  tri- 
umphant "  Do  you  give  it  up  ?  "  but 
I  did  feel  just  a  little  vexed  at  not 
guessing  it,  especially  when  she  said,  "  Dear 
Silkworm,  you  are  standing  by  it — /fe  kUer  G  " 

"  Indeed  it  is  distressing 
That  I  should  be  so  vety  bad  at  guessing." 

But  even  then  I  looked  about  for  a  tangible  letter 
G.  However,  my  lady  proved  herself  right  by 
pointing  to  her  sewing-machine,  which  is  certainly 
in  the  shape  of  the  letter  G;  yes,  right  in  her 
riddle,  and  correct  in  her  application,  and  she 
proved  it  in  a  fanciful  way  by  showing  me  the 
piles  of  work — /lash  she  truly  called  it,  of  which 
she  had  made  ghosts,  or  nothing,  by  the  aid  of  the 
marvellous  Letter  G  sewing-machine. 

ri::haps  I  don't  like  being  proved  stupid,  per- 
haps riddles  irritate  my  "nerves,"  but  anyhow  I 
(juestioned  somewhat  captiously  the  justness  of 
her  remark;  yet,  on  examination  of  the  work  in 
extent  and  quality,  I  could  not  but  own  that  the 
dear  girl  was  right,  and  that  she  had,  with  her 


I 


famous  letter  G,  made  ghosts  of  the  hosts  of  wori: 
that  would  have  conquered  her  without  its  aid. 
She  had,  single-handed,  made  an  entire  outfit  of 
under-clothing,  and  made  it  beautifully  too.  She 
had  finished  three  dozen  chemises,  nightdresses, 
an'd  drawers,  two  dozen  petticoats,  four  long  train 
jupons,  six  flannel  petticoats,  two  dozen  cami- 
soles, and  six  high  petticoat  bodices;  each  article 
beautifully  made  and  trimmed,  one  half  with  frills 
hemmed  by  the  machine,  and  the  remainder  with 
beautiful  embroidcrj'  and  lace.  She  says  she  has 
thoroughly  enjoyed  making  this  outfit;  that  .she 
has  arranged  and  basted  the  embroidered  tops 
and  bands,  &c.,  in  the  evening,  and  worked  the 
machine  about  three  hours  a  day;  but  having 
been  often  interrupted  by  her  household  duties, 
visiting  with  her  mother,   and  idling  with  her 


WILLCOX&  GIBBS 

Genuine  American-made 

SILENT  SEWING   MACHINE, 

IS  SENT,  CAHRIAGE  PAID,  FOE 

A  MONTH'S  FEEE  TEIAL  AT  H0M3. 


[Thii  Uedallion  ia  smbeddcd  in  the  Fmine  of  evarj  gramina  Muci  '.ua,'} 
BttBote  qf  SpHrimu  Muchinu.  and  of  vnautherimd  partU*  claiming 

to  be  AyciiU  of  thii  Company. 

If  £7mT  Agvai  tor  the  Bala  of  the  Oeanine  Hschina  boldfl  a 

Oeitificftte  ol  t'b^  Oom.'OBiLY  tor  the  cnirent  year. 


futur  in  the  garden,  she  cannot  give  me  the 
length  of  time  .this  work  has  taken  her.  Her 
Letter  G,  famous  ally  and  true  friend,  has  cost  her 
£t  6s.  She  speaks  lightly  of  the  pile  of  work, 
and  is  now  attacking  a  vast  **  Val^rien  "  of  house 
linen,  meaning  to  buy  her  dressing-gowns  and 
morning  dresses  in  the  latest  style,  as  her  wedding 
does  not  take  place  till  November.  Letter  G  of 
course  goes  with  her,  as  it  is  her  "very  own.'* 

Among  other  marvellous  performances  of  the 
Letter  G,  I  was  delighted  with  the  crossway  hem- 
ming and  felling.  We  all  know  the  difficulty  of 
crossway  or  bias  work,  even  when  executed  by 
hand.  Imagine,  then,  dear  readers,  the  very 
narrowest  hem,  less  than  the  eighth  of  an  inch  in 
width,  stitched  and  felled  "  on  the  cross.*'  It  is 
impossible   to    describe    the    delicately- stitched 


No  payment  need  he  made  until  after  tJu  trial,  if  aatis/aetory  refer' 
encea  are  given  ;  hut  many  prefer  to  pay  rather  than  refer  to  their 
friends:  in  such  cases  the  money  paid  in  advance  is  promptly 
refunded  in  full,  should  the  Machine  he  returned  at  the  end  of  the 
triaj  month, — A  guarantee  to  thia  effect  stamped  on  every 
inyoice. 


Machines  of  other  makers  taken  in  exchange.    Easy 

Terms,  &c. 

*»*  Send  for  the  Illustrated  Price  List ;  select  a  suitable  style  of 
Kachina,  and  the  chapter  entitled  "Terms,  fto.,"  on  pi^  12,  will 
giye  full  particulars. 


Willcox  &  Gibbs  Sewing  Machine  Co. 


LONDON. 


150,  CHEAPSIDE,  B.C. 
135,  REGENT  STREET,  W. 

16,  CROSS  ST.,  KoyaiExd-n*,.  MANCHESTER. 


tucks,  the  fine  cordings,  the  beautiful  taut  tiiscmbk 
of  the  work  executed  by  this  clever,  rapid  little 
machine,  which  silently  sews  in  the  most  perfect 
manner.  In  the  Willcox  and  Gibbs  machine  the 
mechanism  employed  is  most  simple,  and,  from 
the  perfection  of  its  construction,  it  is  certain  in 
operation.  Each  loop  receives  an  important  twist 
in  passing  through  the  loop  immediately  preced- 
ing at  the  moment  of  fastening  the  stitch,  by 
which  the  strength  and  elasticity  of  the  seams 
are  increased,  and  a  strong,  elastic,  and  durable 
seam  is  produced  by  easily  worked  and  reliable 
mechanism. 

Another  advantage  afforded  with  the  Letter  G 
is  the  free  trial  at  home.  The  trial  is  perfectly 
free^  involves  no  risk,  loss,  or  expense,  as  I  can 
personally  testify;  for  a  lady,  who  only  knew  me 
through  these  pages,  wrote  asking  me  to  arrange 
for  trial  of  the  machine,  giving  me  vouchers  of 
her  respectability.  I  selected  a  machine,  and  the 
conclusion  of  the  matter  was  to  have  been  the 
retaining  .of  the  ''treasure,"  as  she  called  it, 
when,  within  a  few  days  of  the  expiration  of  the 
month's  trial,  she  was  summoned  to  the  Cape 
unexpectedly,  and  therefore  returned  the  machine. 
She  offered  to  pay  for  the  month  during  which 
she  had  used  the  machine  constantly;  indeed, 
was  most  anxious  to  do  so,  as  she  had  no  fault  to 
find  with  the  machine ;  but  the  Willcox  and  Gibbs 
Company  would  not  hear  of  it,  and  removed  the 
machine  at  their  own  expense.  I  was  so  struck 
with  this  adherence  to  their  notices  respecting 
free  trials,  that  I  resolved  to  mention  it  to  my 
readers,  as  I  believe  many  ladies  are  prevented 
by  timidity  from  making  use  of  the  privilege  thus 
offered.  I  give  the  address  in  full :  Willcox  and" 
Gibbs  Sewing  Machine  Co.,  150,  Cheapside,  E.G. 
and  135,  Regent  Street,  W. — The  Silkworm,  in 
the  Englislnvoman\  Domestic  Magaziiic. 


Ye  Ancient  and  Ri^ht  Merrie  Fable  of 

f^m  ©ous^t  tftat  ^K^  mum," 

YE   TRUE  INTERPRETATION  THEREOF. 


®Jis  fs  se  l^oase  tjat  gjaA  baflt.  [77^^ 

(RSjVA  ii  to  say —  |  tjs  Rfe«i 

These  premises — would  it  surprise  you  to  learn? 
For  Willcox  and  Gibbs'  vast  business-concern 
Have  been  by  an  architect  crack  built ! 


^ts  fs  Qc  iVlalt 

^l^ai  las  fn  S^  l^ousi  li^t  ^^adt  built. 

Which  is  lo  say — 
This  is  the  famed  "  Silent  Sewing  Machine," 
Approved  by  all  ladies,  down  from  the  Queen, 
And  stored  in  the  premises  which,  as  you  learn, 
For  Willcox  &  Gibbs'  vast  business-concern 
Have  been  by  an  architect  crack  built. 


III. 


1S^i%  fs  ge  -filat  r"^^!^ 

®|iai  ate  ge  iWalt  ' 

CTftat  lap  fn  pt  |^use  tfiat  ^arit  bnnt 

Which  is  lo  say — 
These  are  the  systems  conspiring  to  prey 
Cn  the  public,  and  anxious  to  weaken  the  sway 
Of  the  Willcox  &  Gibbs  Silent  Sewing  Machine, 


«6*«  to  Bf  ®at  |si«JH«dl 

®twt  ikilltti  ge  Kat  I  ^S*~-  \ 

V|Bt  alt,  &L  «n. 

Wht'cA  is  to  say — 
This  is  the  System  'tis  best  to  employ — 
Entitled  the  Silent,  and  siue  to  destroy 
The  various  ^sterns  conspiring  to  pi^,  9a. 


^at  iDOirteb  Qt  (iTat 
eitat  IttHcfrse  3Rat,  Src  Sn. 

IWifA  M  lo  say — 
This  is  the  obsolete  system  absurd 
Known  as  the  old  chain-stitch,  from,  iriucb 

'twas  inferred 
That  no  single-thread  system  deserved  s  good 

word; 
Which  is  wronging  the  System  'tis  b«at  to 

employ,  &c. 

VI. 

%W  is  SI  Cob)  fDftft  a  aumpUft  iontt 
^(at  tosuli  sc  309  \^ 

®6ai  toornttr  at  <ffat,  8rc.  8ft.  — 

Wtich  is  to  say — 
This  is  Public  Opinion,  which,  sitting'  as  judge 
On  the  question,  declared  the  old  chain-stitch. 

was  fudge, 
Pronouncing  that  obsolete  system  absurd 
Known  as  the  old  chain-stitch,  &c. 


VII. 

1Bi)i%  is  ge  iyiatbEn,  all  foilom, 
mhat  miltua  ge  (Saio,  Set.  Src. 

WAicA  is  ie  say — 
These  are  the  Women  of  England,  in  vain 
Enthralled  in  the  fetters  of  "lock"  and  of 

"chain," 
WbOi  the  name  of  the  best  of  machines  to  obtain, 
Saug^C  Public  Opinion,whlch,  sitting,  as  judg^ 


'^ 


van 

tSlK  ft  gi  .#>ra;  alt  um«  a 
Si«  iwoa  Bt  ^fojtia,  all  foilani,  f 
Zt^mmastVitt,»a.ML         lFft-.i<W^I 

Wiui  u  /0  sajr — . 
This  is  the  firm  of  Willcoz  &  Gibbs, 
About  wbom  jealous  rivals  told,  bootlessly,  fi1)S, 
And  wfaa  lesoied  the  Women  of  England,  &c. 

IX. 

f:iito  is  B*  $tfc»^  all  slabn  mTuSiam, 
Vlat  )Baiia&4tc  inn,  Sn.  trr.       p^ 

W&uh  is  to  ioy —  

This  is  the  method  of  business,  designed 
To  impress  all  the  various  virtues  combined 
In  these  Sewing*  Machines  on  the  popnlac  noind. 
As  jiKiTEaed  by  ths  ficoi-.crf  WiU£ax,&  Gibbs,  &c. 


^bis  is  ge  <Sadk  t&at  nobetr  fn  ge  mom, 
Sflli  Isifer  BF  Vitiestr  bH  s^abtn  antr  g]^, 

i>^>  ^  Which  a  to  sajH-  ^SSs 

This  is  Hie  notice,  attention  to  call         i — }f^i?±- — ! 
To  the  excellent  system  of  "  Trial  for  all, 
At  home,  and  cost  free  I" — an  advantage  not 

small — 
Which  forms  the  first  rule  of  the  business, 

designed 
To  impress  all  the  various  virtues  combined 
In  these  Sewing  Machines  cm  the  popular  mind. 
As  pursued  by  the  firm  of  Willcox  &  Gibbs, 
About  whom  jealous  rivals  told,  bootlessly,  fibs. 
And  who  rescued  ths  Woifteu  of  England,  in  vain 
Enthralled   in  the  fetters  of  "  lock"  and  of 

"  chain," 
Who,  the  name  of  the  best  of  Machines  to  obtain,. 
Sought  Public  Opinion,  which,  sitting  as  judge 
On  the  question,  declared  the  old  chain-stitck 

was  nidge, 
Pronouncing  that  obsolete  system  absord 
Known  as  the  old  chain>fititch,  from  which 

'twas  inferred 
That  no  single-thread  system  deserved  a  good 

word ; 
Which  is  wronging  tjbe  qrstem  'tis  best  to 

employ — • 
VAtitlW.thftSileiikAnd  aiDttto  deattar 


The  ^■a^^ous  systems  conspiring  to  prtj 

On  the  public,  and  anxious  to  weaken  the  ntf 

Of  llie  Willcox  &  Gibbs  Silent  Sewing  Machine^ 
Approved  by  all  ladies  down  from  the  Queen, 
And  stored  in  the  premises  which,  as  you  leant 
For  Willcox  &  Gibbs'  vast  business  concern 
Have  been  bv  an  architect  crack  built. 


'L! 


And  now  has  been  told,  as  here  yon  behold. 
The  true  meaning  of  this  merrj-  Fable  of  Old. 

TeeWILLCOX&GIBBS 

Genuine  American-made 

SILENT  SEWING  MACHINE, 

IS    SENT,    CARRIAGE    PAID,    FOR 


A  MONTH'S  FREE  TRIAL  AT  HOME. 


»fif  at  lilt  enTTf  the  trial  »i 


1^ 


[Tlii?  llcJallion  is  cmbedJi'd  in  iIil-  l-'rjiiii;  oi  everj-  genuine  Machine.] 

Ii,"..:'.vc  of  Slurioiis  Mudiiiifs.  ami  cf  tiviu!ht'riu.i  parties  claiming  to  b 

Agails  of  this  Company. 

fSr  Every  Aqeni  for  tlio  Snls  of  iho  Ooniiino  Mnchine  holds  •  Cav- 
lificiito  or  (he  Compnny  r-jr  tiio  current  year. 

Ko  f'ltyment  mvd  bemaife  ur.til  iifli'rthe  trial,  if  satisfactory  rcftrcncts  are  givn; 
but  many  prefer  to  pay  rather  than  refer  to  their  friciiils  :  in  suck  casts  tkt 
wnney  f'liid  in  advance  is  promptly  rtfiinded  in  full,  should  Ike  Machine  ht 


Hachines  of  other  makers  ttiken  in  exchange.    Easy  Terms,  ha. 

,«,  Scnci  for  the   Illuslmlpd  Price  IM  ;  select  a  sUJl.iHe  stylo  ofMaijiiDe,  Bid 
tJic  chapter  entitled  ''Term*,  S;c.,"  on  page  il,  «nU  give  full  jiLirticulars. 


Willcox  &  Gibhs   Sewing  Machine  Co., 

150,    CIIEAPSIDE,    E.G.  KnmnnM      ■• 

r35,    REGENT    STREET,    w.  i'""'^""'''      " 
16,    CROSS    SI.,  •B.o-.ix  ■sx&M.^.,,  •a.isnHEsrEB. 


Part  189.  JAITOAKY  31,  18JI.  PriccM. 


M 1 1 


CO  3Sr  TE  M"  TS . 

No.  %.^.— LIFK  IX  l.ill!lST. 
BUO,— PlKST.  liKST, 
070,— TIIK  lAlST  SIl.VEl;  I'IKfK. 
PD.-TIIK  lll'liN  nHXTALV. 


PASSMORE  &  ALABASTER,  18,  PATEENOSTER  ROW.      ^cg 

AND   31,   LITTLE    BHITAIN. 
G.  GiLLIR,  Duelmnan  Htrei:!.  Glapgow  ;  nna  all  Kuokwllen. 

Entsritd  a 


ADVEUribKMENTS. 


500,000    SAMPLE    FAGKEE8 


CSTABfiait. 


LCHOOOLATE 


^»^»fe-*ifc?^- 


gyTNnRiwnKTPvcBs 
VRDMTNi  fwicr 

TRADi  MARK 


(Each  sufficient  to  make  a  Cup)  ofthit 

CHOCOLATE  POWDEE 

Were  Given  Away  at  the         ,  ^  ^^ 

International  EihibitioB   of  1S62» 

Aiitl  TliouBanJs  are  now  using  it,  pronouncing  it  to  be  nn- 
equalkd  in  quality  and  excellence. 

It  is  Bocommended  by  the  Faculty,  Baily. 

One  Cup  or  Twenty  made  in  One  Minute. 

i  MILK  OR  SCGAR  XOT  REQUIRED. 

Sold  by  all  Grocers,  One  Shilling  per  Pound. 

By  Her  Majesty's  Boyal  Letters  Patent. 

Comniercial  Steam  Mills,  LondoE. 


STEAM  DYEING  AND 
SCOURING  WOBKS,  37, 
Thornton  Street,  Dockhead, 


DAINTREE  &  CO. 

Bermoudsey,  S.E. ;  44,  Leicester  Square,  W.C. ;  and  98,   Mount  Street, 

Orosvenor  Square,  W 

Laflios*  and  fJentli-nien's  Dress  of  I'very  description,  Damasks  and  Furnitures  of  all 
kinds,  rUancd  or  Dyed.  ('ariK-ts  or  heddinp:  Cleaned,  Chintz  Furniture,  in  any  form, 
Cleaned  and  (!la/(>d.  All  orders  will  receive  prompt  attention  ;  a  trial  is  solicitC'i. 
Cart  to  all  parts.  Trice  Lists  sent  and  Estimates  furnished.  •'French  Patent  Metallic 
Trinting"  in  every  variety. 

A'./;.— I).  5t  Co.  Dye  Blacks  Daily. 

TO  LADIES  AND  THE  PUBLIC.     FASHIONS  FOR  SPRING. 

7(;,    77,    c^'    7S.    ST.    PAUL'S    CHURCHYARD, 

l»«if  p.'<ijMM»t fully  to  inform  tln-ir iiatriin«J and  tlu;  public,  that  thi*ir 

STOci-^    OIF   s  x>I^I  nsTG-  .3:sro-\rjE2Xi  OTiES 

Is  ii<»w  rt»adv  for  nikiHvticn,  oynsistinic  of 
BLACK  AND  COLOURED  SILKS  ut  w.ir  pruv*.. 

MANTLES  AND  JACKETS.    The  latoi  d.'siffii!>  in  rejd  Seal  5?kiii,  Uoavor  Cloih  .s:ik  Vr'v.t. 
an<l  Watvri'iHhi!'.  •      »    • 

FANCY  DRESSES  in  all  the  New  Materials  and  ]>ei.iirns. 

Skirts,  Flannels.  Linens,  Towellings,  Hosiery,  Oloyes,  Lace,  Trimming's,  Fancy  Goods  Ae 

Heads  of  F;iiii:li'.j«.  Si-hyi-ls.  Piiblu'  Inslituti^•ll^  and  IIottl-Kwimrs,  liberally  trcatc-il  with     Carriair 

l'ai«l  on  l*aro«.lK  of  £5^ 

JAMES  SPENCE  &  Co.,  76777.  &  78,    ST.  PAULS    CHTmCHTABD. 


BORWICK'S  COLD   MEDAL 
BAKING    POWDER. 


Makes  DeUcious  Bread.  Plum  Puddings,  and  aUkin^ig  of  Pastry  light, 
sweet,  and  digestible.    Sold  everywhere  in  Id.,  2d.,  4d.,  and  Gd.  packets, 

ani  64.,  Um  as.  6d.,  and  6s.  boxes. 

TWO  GOLT>  TKEBfcXa  v«iax^«^^^^'^  vjj^tws^  ^^^^sS^^^ 


ADVERTISEMENTS.  ;J 


THE    BEST    REMEDY    FOR    INDIGESTION. 

"KTOBTOirS  CAMOMILE  PILLS  are  confidently  recommended  aa  a 
simple  InU  certain  remedy /or  Indigestion^  which  is  the  cause  of  nearly  all 
the  diseases  to  which  we  are  subject^  being  a  medicine  so  uniformly  grateful 
and  beneficial^  that  it  is  with  justice  called  the  "  Natural  Strengthener  oj 
the  Human  Stomach.**  "  Norton's  Pills  **  act  as  a  powerful  tonic  and 
gentle  aperient ;  are  mild  in  their  operation,  sc^e  under  any  circumstances^ 
and  thousands  of  persons  can  now  bear  testimony  to  the  benefits  to  be 
derived  from  their  use,  as  they  have  been  a  never-failing  Ihmily  Friend 
fir  upwards  of  80  years.  Sold  in  Bottles  at  Is.  l^d.,  2s.  9d.,  and  lis. 
each,  in  every  Town  in  the  Kingdom. 
CA  UTION.—Be  sure  to  ash  for  "  NORTON^S  PILLS;*  and  do  not 

he  persuaded  to  purchase  an  imitation . 

Uno  Hundred  and  Twenty  Two  Editions  luivo  been  issued  or 

MR.  GEORGE  THOMAS  CONGREVE'S  CELEBRATED  TREATISE 

03iT    003iTS"aiv^I=^TZ03Sr, 

ASTHMA,   CHRONIC    BRONCHITIS,    COUGH,  etc. 

Post-free  fur  5  stamps,  from  the  Author,  Coombe  Lodge,  Peckhax. 

Xr.  COKOREYE  may  be  seen  at  his  residence  on  thensnal  morninn  (Taesday,  Tharsday, 

and  Saturday),  nntil  12  o'clock. 

EXTRACT  of  LETTER  from  QBEAT  Yi^RMOUTH. 

31  r.  W.  BUETT,  of  20,  Hill  Street,  Mrrit«*s  me  as  follows:— 

"Wu  Imvc  had  it  very  bad  case  under  our  notice  of  a  Mr.  Axdkews— He  was  given  up  by  two 
jiUMlical  nii'ii  ttsi  im>ur:iuli> ;  but.  after  taking  your  mcdidnc  for  some  time,  he  so  far  recovered  as 
to  follow  his  ri'f^ikir  employment. 

CASE  of  a  LAD7  at  WOKING. 

TJn'«  c:l*jc  vra»  hntWAht  under  my  notice  in  Juno,  1870.— The  n:uue  of  the  imtient— ^Irs.  Hart,  Ivv 
lIorsK,  "Woking.  Stutoment  of  lier  daughter  (who consulted  mc  for  her  mother,  by  recommenda- 
tion of  a  friend) : — 

"  Illnetis  ocHunienced  with  a  severe  cold  several  months  Ijefore.  Cough  vers  ^^^'  Fuarflil  puins  in 
the  head.  Green  cxftectoration.  Pains  in  the  side.  Breathing  constantly  affected.  Apr>etite  bad 
(patient  fancying  nothing) .    Hect ic  fever.    Body  much  wasted.    8t  rength  failing  for  three  montlis." 

\  tkdvised  tiy  letterH,  through  June  and  July.    In  August  she  was  recovered  so  a4  to  lay  asido 
medicine.    In  t^ptemlier,  her  daughter  writes  me : 
•*  I  am  very  tlvmkful  to  tell  you,  tluit  by  Uod's  blessing,  and  perseverance  with  your  treatment, 

my  mother  is  ftilly  restored  to  health.    We  are  very  thankful  to  you  for  your  advice.    You  csm  mako 

wiiat  use  you  please  of  my  testimony. Yours  jeo,.  .\.  8.  HART." 

FOURTH  EDITION  (MAKING  90,000 !) 
ii  ^^  -^-«    ■^jw    ^=«  ^i^  -^-a  ^9    ^^.  ^n-p  ^^      " 


TWOPENCE;  to  Schools,  Vl^  Cil.  per  hundred;  Is.  6d.  i»er  doa. 
IN  FEBRUARY  WILL  BE  PUBLISHED,  FOR  ONE  SHILLING. 

"GhEMiS    O^    SONGh    MiXJSIC" 

A  MARVEL  OF  CHEAPNESS  AND  BEAUTY. 

CompUed  by  G.  T.  CONGREVE,  Pcckham;  pablished  by  £.  STOCK,  62,  Fatemoiter  Bow. 


SMITH'S  TASTELESS  DANDELION  ANTIBILTOUS  PILLS, 
priee  lB.14d.  and  28.9d.  per  box,  have  been  for  twenty-two  yeare  a  moat  Bucceasful 
Biibstitute  for  calomel.  They  clear  the  liver,  stomach,  heatl,  and  kidneys — free  the  skin 
of  humours  and  purify  the  blood— they  are  taateleu,  never  give  cold,  may  be  taken  at 
all  times  by  either  sex,  and  regulate  the  bowels  with  comfort  and  safety.  Tkey  greatly  aid 
in  rhati^  of  life. 

Sold  l^  aU  chemists  and  by  the  maker.  TV.  F.  SMITH,  M.P.S..  280,  Walworth  Road,  pro- 
prietor ef  Fowler's  Com,  Bunion,  and  Chilblain  Plasters,  who  will  send  a  box  of  cither  free 
by  post  for  15  stamps,  or  3U  staini>8. 

HOLLGWAY'S  OINTMENT  has  now  a  reputation  both  at  home  and 
abroad  for  the  facility  \vith  wluch  it  removes  cutaneous  eruptions,  repairs  ulcer- 
ations, and  remedies  abscesses,  fistulas,  and  other  painful  afTections.  It  effectively  ex 
tirpaies  all  neglected  or  wrongly  treated  complaints. 


Entire  Wheat  Fl( 


Hiflhly  rri-.omm^nJM!  hv  tlir  faculiy 


iiwi«J  rood  fir  infants,  children,  and  inTaUd&J 

Jm^bI**  make*   il  laraliialili!  (luring  leutliit,;;      '"  '  ' 

lottfulibx  fwitl  fur  fh'Mnn,  and  I*  an  csci-ll  ' 
n  die  ■tiimicli  wliru  Atniwtotit,  Cpm-Buur. 

Tbc  ri>IIii«iD{(  ti  a  •aounarr  of  Uiechicr  ^.  " 

htira  WhcAt  ia.iut  :— 

1. — Por  Infanta  and  Chlldron,    it  u  in»»iiioiilc ' 

Urn  and  foll'l  (itoivtli  of  (lio  Tloncj  and  Ttetli,  and  in  malrtiallj  * 
mocM  nf  doniSiion.  ibiu  iiTKiilingDiany  of  the  ailmwitsuTyonngm 

2.— For  DoUcsto  Persona,  Ladies,  &o.    Aj  the  ^|«wj»*||| 

■ii»j  •lijji-dian  «nd  aulmUniioB,  it  materialiy  uatvU  oalui'-  m  lisi^  Ti"!^n*-"* 
FLi^rn!  Iipftllli.     Il  ihimid  jJirajrs  be  tiiec!  to  ihc  jj".  "  ' 

For    Adults,       It  momotn  lliO  growlli  m 
r-,  .MrroQltimn  ihe  nlioU  fTDoitt,  aod  proTcotn  H- 

...     I'rinn  Uu  y»vii/  nufiii'iiiivjr  fivttfki,  il  provutiU    -; ,  ,    , 

luu  lualifrDmcKbautioDbf  ibepii^uc^jw^vK  or  avut-iiULUon  ul  Uie»^ 

TESTIMONIALS.  'l 

Wir  lr.i«  it  »ni  U\»  Ibn  plue  n(  tt>e  jrawly  sUreliJ  compound*  »ow  In  i«r.  liolfc  I 
be  ewr  »f  I'Uil'It*!)  Mid  nlulii. 

/■«!■  iW".-  .irniri.i)  f.cs.,  r^fai-«  ^  r>wi.cW  £»«••.*/»*€ ue 

S,Wri>  1/  C/«Bt  Britium.  4re. 

luriehtirii  ill  .,^.nial«i*l,  ""''''■**'*»  pnoapluvti-f  W hoP«» 

Mdl>rnnmua>a  „  .*f7»iil"»'*fi"»d,e<prei»U7  rotchtldren.   IH 

nconbatablj  i -,  .  ■■    iVrit-tto*"  and  olficr  fonJi*  of  •!*«»,  *lw 

MitribuU'  lint  litili'  i"  lt>c  ri'rmalinii  otboBt  o<  bhbl-Ic. 

ftwm  StrXTOy  sn/LUmS.  £m,.  FJt.C.S.,  Smmm  M  (Ac  Orwif  AVtfc»«  tt9*4 
n«/J  fbxnJriaf  A'aifMn  to  (**  i'.i*(  Z*™''-  HMpttal  /or  CA.'W^nt 

I  buTI^  l-I.'Ill   I'lri ^  til  .^--lirvil"  1l>  It  I'  :"'"<    '-•''"'•"it    iliat    1  IlllVI>  MIIBuiMAMI 

hen.  '  ;  ■  i.r  fntxl  fHr  CUndftr*    Il» 

nyr.  linff  ai  it  itn-i (&•  oaliflil 

roprit.  ">  Ce  a  fr^i)  effnU  TllK 


Odaado  jfones  fc  Co., 

"  18,  lUIUtcr  StraM, 

Invtolon  anil  Unnuf-""""  of  m™^| 

Rice  St<tfc^«     fl 


^B  »WMd«d  to  Ot\«ida  3«M»  "^        •  »^«™- 


FEBSITABY  28,  187t  Frira  6d. 


OO  lQ"TBlSrT3 . 
I.  973.— THE  POWER  OF  CHRIST  ILLUSTRATED  BY  THE 
RESURRECTION, 
874.— COMPASSION  FOR  SOULS. 
»76,— THE  PARABLE  OF  THE  WEDDING  FBA8T, 
678.— THE  WEDDING  GARMENT. 

B77.— THE   MASTER'S   PROFESSION— THE   DISCIPLES 
PURSUIT. 


PASSMOBB  ft  ALABASTER,  18.  FATEENOSTES  ROW, 

Ain>  81,  IiITTIiB    BBITAIV. 
I  O.  OiLLia,  BncbanMi  Stnat,  Glugow ;  and  all  Bookisllcn, 


2 


ADVERTISEMENTS. 


500,000 


FACKEI8 


UTAMISII. 


TRADi  MARK 


(Eai*h  ■iifBcieot  to  make  a  Cup)  of  thia 

CHOCOLATE  POWDEE 

Weie  Given  Away  at  the 

Internatioial  ExhibitiM  tf  18ftt, 

And  Thuuianda  are  now  uiinff  it,  pronouncing  it  to  be  u- 
equalled  in  quality  and  ezoellenoe. 

It  is  Beoommendod  by  the  Faculty,  Daily. 

One  Cup  or  Twenty  made  in  One  Uinutn. 

MILK  OR  SUGAR  NOT  REQUIRED. 
Sold  by  all  Grocers,  One  Shilling  per  Pound. 

By  Her  Majesty^s  Boyal  Letters  Patent. 

Commercial  Steam  Mlls^  Loudon 


DAINTREE  &  GO. 


STEAM    DTEIHO   AHD 
SCOURING  WORKS,  S7. 
Thornton  Street,  Dockhead, 
Bermoudsey,  8.E. ;  44,  Leicester  Square,  W.C. ;  and  98.  Mount  Street, 

Orosvenor  Square,  W. 

Indies*  and  Oentlomen's  Dress  of  every  deirription.  Damasks  and  Furnitures  of  all 
kinds,  (^loaiu'd  (»r  Ihed.  (-arihas  or  l»ed«liiii;rk'ani>d.  Chintz  Furniture,  in  any  form, 
('leaned  and  Ghized.  All  orders  will  receive  prompt  attention  ;  a  trial  is  tolicited. 
(\irt  to  all  piirt9.  Vrwvt  Livts  sent  and  Estimates  furnished.  **  French  Patent  MetaUie 
J*rintuig**  in  every  variety. 

'iV./?.— D.  &  Co.  Dye  Blacks  Daily. 

SPECIAL   TO    LADIES. 


von  THE  sriuNiJ  fasiiioxs. 

JAMES  SPENCE  &  Co.     For  Silkn— Ntw.  V»vU\l  cheap. 

JAMES  SPENCE  &  Co.  For  M.%ntleB-Th»?  l/*tMt  Dcsiirn^. 
JAMES  SPENCE  &  Co.     F«»r  Culunu-i*  and  SkirU  in  all  th«!  Xowe5»t  Ma:eriaN. 

JAMES  SPENCE  &  Co.  l'''>r  Hmwihi.M  Lineus-Bost  Makes. 

JAMES  SPENCE  &  Co.  y**^  Kil»lM»n>».  Cllovts, Hosiery,  Laoe,  Trimmlnga,  Fancy.  Acc. 

JAMES  SPENCE  &  Co.  For  Family  and  C«»m])limcnlary  Mouniinj^. 

JAMES  SPENCE  &  Co-  7'\,  77,  and  78,  St.  r.anr.s  Churchyard.  LoncI<»n. 


BORWICK'S  GOLD  MEDAL 
S  BAKING    POWDER. 


Makes  Delicious  Bread,  Plum  Puddings,  and  all  kinds  of  Pastry  light 
sweet,  and  digestible.    Sold  everywhere  in  Id.,  2d.,  4d.,  and  6d.  packets. 

and  6d.,  Is.,  2s.  Sd.,  and  5s.  boxes. 

TWO  QOLD  USfihlS  wuw^^^Vsi  ««:^wss^  ^%^c^s\. 


HABCE_31,  187L 


Plica  ed. 


No-  973,— ALL   FULNESS  IN  CBBIST. 
B79.-FAITH  AKD  REGENEKATION. 
980.— HIDDEN  MANNA. 
9aL— CAKBIED  BV"  FOUR. 
983.-TI1E  ASCENSION  OF  CHRIST. 


^  PASSUORE  ±  ALASA8TEB,  IB,  FAT£fiVOSTXB  BOW, 

AND  81,  I.ITTI3   BBITAHT. 

O.  Gaiui,  Bncbuum  Sb«ri,  Gla^ow ;  and  all  BookadUn. 


ADTKBTlSKiOrrrS. 


500,000    SAMPLE    PM 

CHOCOLATE  T'O'WDEIi 

lateru(i«MaJ  EiWiMU««    vf  \%Ct 

_  And  TliMM«i<l«  *r.<  r,..»  u-ina   U.  (.rnnoaTian«  It  to  \w  a 
It  iJi  Boooinmondod     by  H^o  Faculty    Tk^lW 

lOne  Cap  or  Twenty-  made  in  0n6  IcSiti 


"iHOOOLATC 


Sou  V  ■"  Or««.-_n«  S.„i|i^  pj^^^ 

CommmcmlJte_amMiJls.Londoii 


BTBIHS    AH 


""  "8.   Koont  Slnsl^ 


.1:^1':^  ■*•> 


DAINTREE  &  GO. 

Mermnittj,  8£ ;  44,  Leiaettfi-  SqDue,  V 

OruTcaor  Sqiure,  V. 
lAdiat*  wd  Gentleam'i  Dtom  of  tnn'  dMcripthw.  D»n)aa\- 
klMd*,  OeftiiBd  or  Orod.   OuiicUiir  MdiuClataBl.   Chuits  p, 
OlMaBd  Md  OIuinL    AU  DfiliM  vLU  neri**  pnMp*  Mtcntlon 
Out  u  all  pan*.    PtIm  Lbu  wai  Hd  bU«utM  hmlabLil.     -  ^ 
PUatlai"  w  rrerr  vurUtr. 

I^.«.-D.  ft  O*.  n7«  Ol*<i«  n«ii,. 
'  SPECIAL  TO    LADIES. 

FOB  TBE  aPBLHQ  PASOIONS. 
JAKB8  BFEKCE  *  Co.   r.ir  SDki-Now.  Ow(>i^  <itM>p. 

1  GuliiBM  tho  DriM.    rMtonu  P<*t  f™*- 

7AMBS  8PEVCB  ft  Co.   FotM^ii«-Ti-N««rt  M»fa,ri^^j 

IAXB8  SPEHOS  ft  Co.    f-  c«i«uu-  »<<  »!« i"  .U  th,  n^^^  V^^^ZIT' 

f  AXES  BPEHOB  *  Co.    Vo«ninwdMU  LUm»— Bon  U»k.a 

JAKB8  SPEVCB  ft  Co.   '•'B'M— ■0'*"*«'*'"7  t.«*.Trfn>^i_„  _ 
JAKES  SPBirCB  ft  Co.    »«  P«»«r  «"*  O-^pU-^nUrT  M.umln* 
JAMBS  8POTCE  ft  Co.   ?«.  77,  wJ  ?'.  ^*  ^'''  Cha^ch,,^^  Condon. 

TAtiTI.Ef.BSS    DANUEUON    A-NT IBlUOTTs     m 


SMrni's    . 
pnt*  li.    I  Id.   mit  1«.   ru,   p.ii    -'■.  . 
•shiUtnt*  kc  alumni.     Tfaif  dur  1^  Itn 


*IM.  -«,  nd  iiiia.lB  th.  fc.*.!.  "illi  if-Blan  ud  wM/.        xit,  'TT!"  "  ."  »«« 
Ajnift  of  UTt  "»r»tl.t  u*  ti 

I  tor  15  Anp.  w  Is  Mkmft-  ^^^^1 


AFSIL  30,  1871 


Price  6d. 


Bfi  H. 


^^"§nl0.  "** 


%> 


GOISTTEISTTS. 

No.  983,— MOAB   IS  MY  WASHPOT. 

S8*,— THE  CHURCH  AS  SHE  SHOULD  BE. 
985.-THE  TOUCHSTONE  OF  GODLY  SINCERITY. 
988— VICTOR  EMMANUEL,  EMANCIPATOR. 
BSr.-MARAH  ;  OB,  THE  BITTER  WATERS  SWEETENED. 


PASBKOEE  A  ALABASTEB,  18,  PATERHOSTEB  ROW, 

AND   91,  I>ITTI.a    BBITAIB. 
I  G.  Gallic,  Budunui  Street,  GlaegDv ;  uul  all  Bcwkirllcn. 


MAT  31.  1871 


f#  iuljjit  \ 


No.  988.— THE  PASrOli'^  [MltriNli  BLEiSSI  VU. 
989.— A  LAST  LOOK  OCT. 
flSa.-SELl'.HDMBMNO.  AND  SELF-SE ARCHING. 
S9l.— THE  FOURFOLD  BLESSING. 
in— A.  NEW  OROEa  OF  PRIESly  AND  LEVITES. 


PAISIIOBE  ft  ALABASTEB^  18,  P&TEEITOSTEB  BOW, 

'  AND   8J,   LITTLa    BKITAIN. 

1  O.  GiiJJK.  BnchMiiiii  Strml,  GlMgow  ;  uil  all  BookHllvi. 

i-HalL 


ADVERTISEMENTS. 


500,000    SAMPLE    PACT5EI 

(E«.-h  iiiffluirai  to  make  »  Copl  <!**J»»      _, 

CHOCOLATE  POWD^ 

Were  Gl»«i  A««v  n  »h« 

litrriiUoial   EihibitioK   of  Im1| 

And  TliuuMiid*  uv  now  using   It,  pronouncing  It  V> 
rqiMlM  in  nunlity  »nd  exc-Uenve. 

It  ia  Recommended  by  the  Faculty,  IM 

ne  Cup  or  Twenty  made   in  One  al; 

MILK  US  aCOAR  KOT  REQUIRED. 
Bold  by  til  Gmxri.  Uoe  SliilliDg  per  PuudA. 

J  By  Her  Majesty's  Boyal  Lettera  Pa 

Commercial  Steam  Mills,  Loi 


BORWICK'S  COLD    MEDi 
BAKING    POWDER. 


Has  been  awarded  TWO  GOLD  MEDALS  for  iti  BUperiorit?  over  all 

Hai-es  DelicioDs  Bread,  Plum  Pnddinffi,  and  aU  kinds  of  Paatxi 

Bwect,  and  digestible.    Sold  everywhere  in  Id..  2d.,  4d.,  and  60.  j 

and  6d..  li..  2s.  6d..  and  fle.  boxw. 


Slt.T.ST  FEED 

AND 
tOCK  STITCH 


SINGER" 


SIMPLICJ 
OOMBTKB 


FAMILV     SE'^riM 


Is  the  EASIEST  TO  LEAHN.  and  the  most   practical  f 
all  general  PAMILY    SEWIS3.  EMBROIDERY,     bRESSMA] 
SHIRf  and  COLLAB.  work,  &o, 

IM,U.STl£ATKi>    CAT.U/Hil'E.    I'OST     FUEi:. 

PRICE,  FROM    4D^   -   l^d    HAND  OR  TR 


BRANCB     DEPOTS 


SCOTI.AXI". 


rtl94. 


JUKE  30,  187L 


Pric 


'  sMons  ml  H.  sriu 


No.  SSS^THB  NORTHBRN  IRON  AND  THB  STEEL. 
Ml.— THE  PRAYER  OF  JABEZ. 
8BS.-  THB  SHEEP   AND   THEIR  SHEPHERD. 
nt^THK   A.LAKUU. 
M7.— PROSPBRirr  UNDER  PEBSEUUTIOK. 


APVnTlftnEHTfl. 


500,000    SAMPLE    PilCXEIS 


CHOCOLATE  POWDER 

UlenaUnal  BiUbitU*  tf  IBW, 

And  TIiu««iii]i  Me  DD*  nMuK  ^^  ptoncKtnciB(  U  is  t*  I 
II  iB  BBOOtnniKidad  by  tho  Taaulty,  IHUy, 

One  Cap  (a  Twont;  made  in  O&o  Vmniui 

iilLX  VKSCUAK  *for  RFHUIRf.D. 
BoU  br  tU  Cruaen.  One  BhtUlng  |»«r  FuimA. 

By  Her  Majesty's  Royal  X«tten  P&teot 

Commercial  Steam  Mills,  Londi 


BORWICK'S  COLD   MEDAL 
BAKING    POWDCR 


KatiM  Dtlieioni  Bniili  Plan  Poddins..  ud  1>\X   Jaii.Zf^.TS 
nroet,  md  dl««niMi>.    Sold  .TtrywhOT  m  Id,  2d     4d    .»/.!J^iS> 


i<icx»TiTcn 


"SINGER^ 


mzuoALUv  mi 

"iKPinrr  or 


FAMILir     SCWINO 


Ii  lie  K4SIK8I  III  lEARS,  .n.l  ihi   matt  i,™.,i„,  , 
•U  jeneral  PAMILT    SBWISO.  EMBaOIOBaY'.    baj.«Sl.^^ 
SHIBT  ud  001LA&  Work,  to.     "*"'»«*mtO. 

ILLrSTRATLI)  VaTALOIJUK.    I'OST    PKEE 

«llCE,niOIII    iJPe   -   3LO>    HAMDORTKEAMI 

(7/?/£'f   OFFICE    IN  EUROI'S . 

147.     OB:BA:gSII3B,     Xid3iTX303Sr, 


JULY  31,  1871 


^^6\to.%     i 


No.  OBS.-   MOKE  AKD  MORE. 

Itpp.-THE  TVITHEBING  WORK  0¥  THE  SPIKIT. 
1,000.— KL'MBEE   ONE  THOUSAND  ;   OB.   "BREAD 
ENOVOH  AKD  TO  fcPARE." 

i.i'H— altO(;etiier  lovej.v. 

l,0f>2.— NOW,  AND  THEN. 


•  » 


A 1  >  V  KKTISEMENTS. 


] 


500,000    SAMPLE    FAGEE^ 


CSTABflSIt* 


.CHOCOLATE 


'•(PAR  CD' 
flimiEIRIWTDnPflOC6!i 
nuM  TNI  rmi  rr 


«*c<-.%«*«:3lyo« 


Hi-  . 


TRADE  MARSC 


(E:i'*h  Biifficii-nt  lo  make  a  OviX'')  of  thif 

CHOCOLATE  POWDI 

Were  Given  Away  at  the 

iRternaiioiial   Exhibition   of  1863^ 

ArnI  ThousaiiiI«  an.*  no\v^  u<tins{  it,  pronoiincingr  it  to  bl 
I'qiinlkMl  in  qiinlity  atiti  exrellence. 

It  is  HGCoramcnded  by  the  Faculty,  Dailj 

One  Cup  or  Twenty  made  in  One  Min 

Mll.K  OR  SUCAR  SuT  REQUIRED. 
S*old  b\  all  Grocers,  One  bhilling  per  Pound. 

By  Her  Majesty's  Boyal  Letters  Pate: 

Commercial  Steam  Mills,  Loud 


^ORWrCK'S  COLD  ME  DA 
BAKING.  POWDCR. 


Has  been  awarded  TWO  GOLD  MEDALS  for  its  superiorityx^ver  all  o1 
Makes  Delicious  Bread,  Plum  Puddings,  and  all  kinds  or  Pastry  J 
sweet,  and  dig^estible.  Sold  everywhere  in  Id.,  2d.,  4d.,  and  6d.  pai 
and  6d..  Is.,  2s.  6d.,  and  58.  boxes. 

CHARLES  GRIFFIN  &  COMPANY'S  li 

I  \\\.  si>i:x(m:r  Thomsons  domestic  MHDiciVfii.  Vy, 

«  '  aiy  «'f  I*.»iii«*>»tii'  MtMliiiiio  .'in*!  Il«»n<'.-li<'l'.l  S-.ir^tjrv,  iiivalu;il»le  to  lVl«jt\i-w. 
a<Miii"i».'tl  «'Ji'i|»!' p  oil  til"  Maii:i;r«.'iinut  <«f  the  ^ii'k  J»«M>iii. 


i;^AI)IK'S     COX(M)Rl)A\rK     TO     TirK      IIDLY      ^VIUPT 

Vj     On   tin*  hi\A<  of  ('nnlcn.     With  an  Intr(>iliu'ti.»ii    l,y    fi,,^    r»   J      11      xr 
r.  Kadif,  J>.1>. 

•I^ICTIONAl.'Y  OF  THK  HOLY  IJIIUJ-:.      1  ).'sicrnc"i' S/e/ir  / 

■^^    u.«v  cif  N  .Miner  r»r*ons.     T?v  J>r.  Kadik.     ^^iiJ»  inmnroii*;  Tlin^tMfr  .«^ 

'LAsSII'lhl)      HlHMi:      jiii     Annlvtfis      of       tho      Unh-    *^^rin 

^     Wy  Dr.   KADin.  II!ustr.»'.<l   >%ith  Mapr».  -       *^^"P 

"Ucl:»vo  r.nly  to  .nld  our  uminaliflfd  conimeijilatlon  oi"   sk  work   .»f  »,«!  ^-^  n^-..    . 


London;  CwxiiA.Ya  0«iYt"v^  ««.  v:i>.,  v>,^VjL\;vMvvv>a:  XX^jCWl^^ssN.. 


^^^< 


rt  196.  AU01TST  31.  187L 


.    \ 


I  Hill  BI C.  H.  SPlGEi. 


No.  l.OiiS.-  -■'VOIK  OWN  SALVATIOX." 
l.OM.— •■  IMU'OHT  %YITH  A  rURlC 
l.OOS.— I-KS.SIJ.VS  I-l!OM  NAXrUK, 
1,(101].— tun  1ST  [S  ALL. 
I,0(i7.-SOI{TH  AND  SfHTII. 


500,000"^AMPLE~^ACirj!7 

^^  CHOCOLATE  P5wb£l 

11  if  Bocommonddd  by  ?I!L"'i;' "•"*•- 

One  Cup  or  Twonty  iajj  ('""'w-  ?«iir. 
I  By  Her  Majesty's  Hoyaj  r„,,„      „ 


H*ib8«n  BwardodTWO  BOLD  KEDALS  tit  iti  moarinr-,.  ^^^^^^ 
MateiDoHoiOMBroaa,  Plcm  Puddln?!.  Md  Ml  kVnd^r  «"'^^-^'" 
tweet,  and  digenible.    Bald  •vorywlnni  in  Id.  ad_    4d    *"    J"''7  ' 


rorywlmni  in  Id,.  ZA     aa'  ""    :. 
and  6d-  U.  g*^  6iL.  and  S»,  bc"^  —    '  ^^  ^ 


OHABLES  GRIFFIN  ."i:  COBIBaKY^U^ 


jR.  BPENOUFt  TllOi! 


LlilMuSd 


A      BIBLB    CYCLOI'.i 


ih 


EADIEa    (K)N'  ■ 
On   Uw  twit  I'T  rrii.(.n,     Wnl,  . 
Vr.  lUiUL  U  O- 

r*dl/1k  Siiilio*.  taiall  Sn.  . — , 

Dictiokary  op  the  holy  kiuub:. 
_  tu>  "I  YuoDir  runiini 


«.t 


dirt,  r 


HOLY 

"  ^y  tt.. 

LASSIKJED     BllihE:     a-     AniUv^U     of     the      lil^  "S    - 

Bt  tir.   KtOTi,  1II.»U»1«I    •ill.  Mm«-  .    .  't^viy     fic^pn 

Ka  •«»  imlr  )•  aM  ow  ohimUCkI  cmbib 


nniiB  ALfAR  OF  THK  fluu3iinot.a 


or  it^  , 


tl97. 


SEFTEKBEB  30,  187L 


THE  C^S£^]> 

I),  H.  S 


1 4 


% 


OOITTBITTS. 

No.  1,008.- LOVE'S  LOGIC. 

1,009.— TRAVAILIKG  FOR  SOULS. 

1,(110.— LIGHT  FOlt  THOSE  WHO  SIT  IN  DAUKNESS. 

1,0U.— JOB'S  REGRET  AND  OUR  OWN. 

1,012.— THE  UNBELlEVKRt)  UNHAPPY  CONDITION. 


Utl98. 


OCTOBGB  31,  1871. 


J^' 


I  SEIIli  BY  t.  H,  nSEON. 


GOJSr  TE3SrTS . 

Xu.  l,0i:t.-OUli  WATCHWOUD. 
1.011.— "NL"NC  DlMlTTIf*." 
1,015.— THK  ONE  TllINtt  NEEDFUL. 
1,016— BEAVTY  FOK  A.SIJES. 
1,0I7.~TIIE  TALKINr;  jnum. 


^  PA.SSHOB.E  &  AtABASTEH,  18,  PATEHITOSTEE  EOW 

I 


[<»mcjB 


500,000  sAttff XE^^-^ 


It  u  Bacotir 


"">•    of   l§f^ 

-  '"nijacina  It  t    " 

toe  Cup  01  Txanty   m^J  ^'{gi  ^ 
sal  i.r  di  o™m_Oo^si,iu.»,  ,4i'^,.. 
By  HorJbjtBty-a-aoyiil  Letters  PaN 

Oommercial  Steam  TttiUg  Icmii 


11 


FBORWICICSl 


iECI3EE[   QEEZEHaH 


SrtTtt, ».-,.,.      j»ri„  jj^^' 


H.     i^pmunojt. 


nilE  SWOKI)   AND  -rap.  TBOWEL:    a  afun,>,i,  « ^ 

2PirU(;i;oS-3    MORNTNfJ    AMD    EVEJ^NQ     RFinixr.,.  , 


With 


PortrniL 


JPURGEON'S  TWEIiVB  SEUXI0N8. 
ling-  


AlmmOMk  lu!.l««U^  m-.tsluy.  t.:iiipniuau,^  lOd" iJiJ);i„    1*"'^   f'"'"  ' 
am-eoer.     li  will  b.  .  h.«.HW  wll6  m.rtrin*  m«.,  ^ J  ft^-";.':*.''' •  _* 


JOHN   PI-OUailMA.VS  SUERT  At.MAN. 

■Met 


VOVEIIBIB  30,  187L 


3  C/  ooiiTAnn:<a  i^r 


No!  1,018—  PLEADING. 

1,019,— HOUSEHOLD  SALVATION. 
1,020,— "THE  Sl-'N  OF  HIGIITEOUKNESS." 
1,021.— HEAVEN'S  NURSE  CUILUKEN. 
1,022.— SLEEP  NOT. 


FASSUOItE  &  ALABASTER,  18,  FATEBSOSTER  BOW, 

I  Am  All,  BOOKBBLI.EM. 


■It  iM9.  DECEMBER  31,  187L  Frica  7d. 


1    _^^6Vxtan  t^_    m 


^ 


I  SERIIfll  B!  f.  n.  muEi 


? 


No.  1.(123..   PRAISES  AND  VOWS  ACCEPTKD  IN  ZfON. 

1,021.— "THR  THRONE  OF  GRACK." 

I.n25.-A  VISIT  Tt)  THB  HAKVKST  FIELD. 

l.nSK,— JOY  HORN  AT  BETHLKHEM. 

I,0i7.— THE  joy  OF  THE  LORD  THK  STnENOTll 
OK  HIS  I'KOF'LR. 
TITt.E.  CONTKNTS,  AND  INDEX  OF  St'llII'TURE  TEXTS 

Ti)  VOL.  XVII. 


^  PASSHOKE  ft  AUBASTEB,  18,  PATEKROBTEE  HOW, 


Sntorad  M  BtaUnten'  E«U. 


ADVERTISKMKNTS. 


,  DR.    CHAMBERLAIN'S 

OPHTHALMIC     OINTMENT 

FOB  THE  ODBB   OF 

INFLAMMATIONS,  SPECKS,  FILMS, 

AND  AU» 

EXTERNAL  DISORDERS  OF  THE  EYES  AND  EYELIDS, 

.  hM  proved  itself  a  most  invaluable  medicine  for  the  ipeedy  and  permanent  cure  of  Diaeaset 
of  tibe  Eye,  and,  in  conjunction  with  Dr.  Chamberlain's  Analiftio  PiLUB,  has  been  known 
to  effect  ruiuarkable  cures. 

Bold  in  Pots,  One  Shilling  and  Three  Halfpence  each 

of  all  Chemists.    Forwarded  by  the  Proprietor,  Post  Free,  on  receipt  of  Sixteen  Postage 
Stamps 

4,  Hanover  Terrace,  Peckham . 

SMITH'S  TASTELESS  DANDELION  ANTIBILIOUS  PILLS, 
price  lB.14d.  and  2ii.9d.  per  box,  have  been  fiw  twenty-two  years  a  most  successful 
substitute  for  calomeL  They  clear  the  liver,  stomach,  head,  and  kidneys — ^free  the  skin 
of  humours  and  purify  the  blood  —they  are  taNteleSR,  never  give  cold,  may  be  taken  at 
all  times  by  either  sex,  and  regulate  the  bowels  with  comfort  and  safety.  Tkey  greatly  aid 
t»  ^atige  vf  life. 

Sole  maker,  \V.  F.  SMITH.  M.P.S.,2S0.  Walworth  Road,  and  2F1,  Brixton  Koad,  anJ 
proprietor  of  Fowler's  Com.  Bunion,  and  OhilhUin  Platers,  who  « ill  send  a  box  of  either 
free  by  post  fur  15  or  3ti  stamps.     To  be  had  of  ail  Chemists. 

H0LL0WAY*8  PILLS.  MERIT  REWARDED!  This  famous 
family  medicine  has  withstood  the  test  cf  time,  and  the  most  unrelenting 
opposition,  lliese  fills  promote  digestion  and  are  a  direct  pmifier  of  the  blood,  and  all 
the  other  fluids  of  the  human  body. 

ONE    HUNDRED    AND    THIRTY-FIRST    THOUSAND. 

One  Hundred  and  Thirty  One  Editkms  have  been  issued  of 

MB.  eEOME  THOMAS  GO]}&&£T£'S  CELEBRATE])  TREATISft 


9 

ASTHMA,   CHaONXO    BRONCHITIS,   COUGH,,  etc. 

Post-free  tor  6  stamps,  from  the  Author,  Coomm  Lodom,  Fsckham. 

MR.  COHOSEVE  may  be  leen  at  hii  residence  on  the  nsoal  morning^, 
(Tnetday,  Thursday,  and  Saturday,)  until  12  o'clock. 

RECEHT  ISTEItESTIBft  TESTIMOJJIAIS  AUD  CASES. 

LETTER  from  Miss  Ji  E.  P— .,  of  Sandiacre,  nr.  Nottingham,  Oct  11, 1871. 

"  Dbab  Mr.  CovoRiTi— Let  me  add  »y  testimony  also  to  the  beneficial  effects  of  your 
medicine.  /  oirc  Mjr  rettored  htalth,  under  GimPm  bUsting  to  gou.  Let  me  express  grati- 
tude for  yoar  kindness  and  promptitude,  and  to  the  Oiver  of  all  Good.  I  shall  recommend 
yonr  treatment  to  all  sufiering  from  diseased  chest  or  lungs.** 

V.B. — This  was  a  most  decided  can  of  Broooho-pbthisis  ;  Dropiieal  Swellings  Lai  set 
in  ;  sleepless  nightp,  for  which  she  liad  been  put  under  the  influence  of  mor|4da.  But  this 
Udy  persevered,  and  corresponded  with  me  at  intervala  during  several  yean. 

CASE    OF    MISS    JAMES,    YARMOUTH, 

Twe  yean  ago  this  patient  came  under  my  care— Every  ■jrmptom  of  confirmed 
Phthisie  were  preaent.  Two  dortors  ai  Yarmumtk  rtpmiwd  kar  tolmm  diop  dmmmpiiim, 
and  aaid  the  camld  tmlg  ltv§  a  verg  tkori  tim§.  Her  mother,  who  then,  in  sad  trouble, 
corresponded  wiih  me  for  her,  writes  me  in  a  letter  dated  Dae.  1,  1S71 :  *'  I  owe  you 


1870.     Sha  was  restored  to  health,  and  ooutimMa  in  %Mit  nauaSl  «Ba<^j^ivnMR\.  '%£««r«  t« 
»Mja,  Sha  is  a  Livimg  fVamder.  Make  what  u»e  \on  irVriM  <A  vox  MBMr  •— 4«^&.  \ml^ 
7#  iVuped  Fhca,  Saath  Towm,  Y  AR^iOUTlL 


^K4^ 


Il 


