
Full text of "Plain account of Christian perfection"
See other formats
Theology at Clare 


a l tit 











Historical Society 


Southern California-Arizona 
Conference 


: 
| 
L 











Theology Library 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 
California 





PLAIN ACCOUNT 


iY eg OF 
a) fs 


CHRISTIAN PERFECTION. 


RY 


REV. JOHN WESLEY, /722 
ti/ k 


BOSTON: 


THE CHRISTIAN WITNESS CO., PuB.isHERs, 
36 BROMFIELD STREET. 








WISTORICAL LIBRARY 





PLAIN ACCOUNT OF CHRISTIAN PERFECTION: 


‘AS BELIEVED AND TAUGHT 
EY THE REV. MR. JOHN. WESLEY, 


From THE YEAR 1725 TO THE YEAR 1777. 


1. Wuar I purpose in the following papers, is, to give a 
plain and distinct account of the steps by which I was led, 
during a course of many years, to embrace the doctrine of 
Christian perfection. This I owe to the serious part of 
mankind, those who desire to know all “the truth as it is in 
Jesus.” And these only are concerned in questions of this 
kind. To these I would nakedly declare the thing as it is, 
endeavoring all along to show, from one period to another, 
both what I thought, and why I thought so. 

2. In the year 1725, being in the twenty-third year of 
my age, I met with Bishop Taylor’s “Rule and Exercises 
of Holy Living and Dying.” In reading several puits of 
this book, I was exceedingly affected; that part in particular 
which relates to purity of intention. Instantly I resolved 
to dedicate all my life to God, all my thoughts, and words, 
and actions; being thoroughly convinced, there was no 
medium ; but that every part of my life (not some only) 

Foor-noTe. — Without making any changes in “The Plain Account,” as 


originally published in Mr. Wesley’s works, we have taken the liberty of divid 
ing it by headings, which we think makes it more readable, 


4 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


must either be a sacrifice to God, or myself, that is, in effect, 
to the devil. 

Can any serious person doubt of this, or find a medium 
between serving God and serving the devil ? 

8. Inthe year 1726, I met with Kempis’s “ Christian’s 
Pattern.” The nature and extent of inward religion, the 
religion of the heart, now appeared to me in a stronger 
light than ever it had done before. I saw, that giving even 
all my life to God (supposing it possible to do this, and go 
no farther) would profit me nothing, unless I gave my heart, 
yea, all my heart to Him. 

I saw, that “simplicity of intention, and purity of affec- 
tion,” one design in all we speak or do, and one desire ruling 
all our tempers, are indeed “the wings of the soul,” without 
which she can never ascend to the mount of God. 

4. <A year or two after, Mr. Law’s “Christian Perfec- 
tion” and “Serious Call” were put into my hands. These 
convinced me, more than ever, of the absolute impossibility 
of being half a Christian; and I determined, through His 
grace (the absolute necessity of which I was deeply sensi- 
ble of), to be all devoted to God, to give Him all my soul, 
my body, and my substance. 

Will any considerate man say, that this is carrying mat- 
ters too far? or that anything less is due to Him who has 
given Himself for us, than to give Him ourselves, all we 
have, and all we are. 

5. In the year 1729, I began not only to read, but to 
study, the Bible as the one, the only standard of truth, and 
the only model of pure religion. Hence I saw, in a clearer 
and clearer light, the indispensable necessity of having “the 
mind which was in Christ,” and of “walking as Christ also 
walked;” even of having, not some part only, but all the 
mind which was in Him; and of walking as he walked, not 
only in many or in most respects, but in all things. And 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 5, 


this was the light, wherein at this time I generally con- 
sidered religion, as a uniform following of Christ, an entire 
inward and outward conformity to our Master. Nor was I 
afraid of anything more, than of bending this rule to the 
experience of myself or of other men; of allowing myself 
in any the least disconformity to our grand Exemplar. 


SERMON ON “THE CIRCUMCISION OF THE HEART,” BEFORE THE 
UNIVERSITY AT OXFORD. 

6. On January 1, 1733, I preached before the university, 
in St. Mary’s Church, on “the Circumcision of the Heart ; ” 
an account of which I gave in these words: “It is that 
habitual disposition of soul which, in the sacred writings, 
is termed holiness; and which directly implies, the being 
cleansed from sin, ‘from all filthiness both of flesh and 
spirit ;” and, by consequence, the being endued with those 
virtues which were in Christ Jesus; the being so ‘renewed 
in the image of our mind,’ as to be ‘perfect as our Father 
in heaven is perfect.’ — Vol. i. p. 148. 

In the same sermon I observed, “‘ Love is the fulfilling — 
of the law, the end of the commandment.’ It is not only 
‘the first and great’ command, but all the commandments, 
in one. ‘Whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are 
pure, if there be any virtue, if there be any praise,’ they 
are all comprised in this one word, love. In this is perfec- 
tion, and glory, and happiness: the royal law of heaven and 
earth is this, “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all 
thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and 
with all thy strength.’ The one perfect good shall be your 
one ultimate end. One thing’ shall ye desire for its own 
sake, — the fruition of Him who is all in all. One happi- 
ness shall ye propose to your souls, even a union with Him 
that made them, the having ‘ fellowship with the Father and 
the Son,’ the being ‘joined to the Lord in one Spirit.’ One 


6 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


design ye are to pursue to the end of time, —the enjoyment 
of God in time and in eternity. Desire other things, so far 
as they tend to this; love the creature, as it leads to the 
Creator. But in every step you take, be this the glorious 
point that terminates your view. Let every affection, and 
thought, and word, and action, be subordinate to this. 
Whatever ye desire or fear, whatever ye seek or shun, what- 
ever ye think, speak, or do, be it in order to your happiness 
in God, the sole end, as well as source, of your being.” — 
Ib. pp. 150, 151. 


I concluded in these words: “ Here is the sum of the per: 
fect law, the circumcision of the heart. Let the spirit 
return to God that gave it, with the whole train of its affec- 
tions. Other sacrifices from us He would not, but the living 
sacrifice of the heart hath He chosen. Let it be continu- 
ally offered up to God through Christ, in flames of holy 
love. And let no creature be suffered to share with Him; 
for He is a jealous God. His throne will He not divide 
with another; He will reign without a rival. Beno design, 
no desire admitted there, but what has Him for its ultimate 
object. This is the way wherein those children of God 
once walked, who being dead still speak to us: ‘ Desire not 
to live but to praise His name; let all your thoughts, words, 
and works tend to His glory.’ ‘ Let your soul be filled with so 
entire a love to Him, that you may love nothing but for His 
sake.’ ‘Have a pure intention of heart,.a steadfast regard 
to His glory in all our actions,’ ‘For then, and not till 
then, is that mind in us, which was also in Christ Jesus, — 
when in every motion of our heart, in every word of our 
tongue, in every work of our hands, we pursue nothing but 
in relation to Him, and in subordination to His pleasure ; ’ 
when we too neither think, nor speak, nor act, to fulfil ‘our 
own will, but the will of Him that sent us ;’ when, ‘ whether 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. v 


we eat or drink, or whatever we do,’ we do it all ‘to the 
glory of God.’” — Jb. p. 153. 


It may be observed, this sermon was composed the first of 
all my writings which have been published. This was the 
view of religion I then had, which even then I scrupled not 
to term perfection. This is the view I have of it now, with- 
“out any material addition or diminuition. And what is 
there here, which any man of understanding, who believes 
the Bible, can object to? What can he deny, without flatly 
contradicting the Scripture? What retrench, without tak- 
ing from the Word of God ? 

In the same sentiment did my brother and I remain (with 
all those young gentlemen in derision termed Methodists) 
till we embarked for America, in the latter end of 1735. 
It was the next year, while I was at Savannah, that I wrote 
the following lines : — 


Is there a thing beneath the sun, 

That strives with thee my heart to share? 
Ah ! tear it thence, and reign alone, 

The Lord of every motion there ! 


In the beginning of the year 1738, as I was returning 
from thence, the cry of my heart was, 


O grant that nothing in my soul 

May dwell, but Thy pure love alone! 
O may Thy love possess me whole, 

My joy, my treasure, and my crown 
Strange fires far from my heart remove 

My every act, word, thought, be love J 


I never heard that anyone objected to this. And, indeed, 
who can object? Is not this the language, not only of every 
believer, but of everyone that is truly awakened? But 


8 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


what have I wrote, to this day, which is either stronger or 
plainer. 


8. In August following, I had a long conversation with 
Arvid Gradin, in Germany. After he had given me an ac- 
count of his experience, I desired him to give me, in writ- 
ing, a definition of “the full assurance of faith,” which he 
did in the following words : — 


Requies in sanguine Christi; firma fiducia in Deum, et persuasio 
de gratia Divina; tranquillitas mentis summa, atque serenitas et 
pax; eum plisenidie omnis desiderti carnalis, et cessatione peccatorum 
etiam internorum. 


“Repose in the blood of Christ ; a firm confidence in Ged, and 
persuasion of His favor ; the highest tranquility, serenity, and peace 
of mind, with a deliverance from every,fleshly desire, and a cessation 
of all, even inward sins.” 


This was the first account I ever heard from any living 
man, of what I had before learned myself from the oracles 
of God, and had been praying for (with the little company 
of my friends), and expecting, for several years. 

9. In 1739, my brother and I published a volume of 
“Hymns and Sacred Poems.” In many of these we de- 


clared our sentiments strongly and explicitly. So, page - 
7) ae 


Turn the full stream of nature’s tide; 
Let all our actions tend 

To Thee, their source ; Thy love the guide, 
Thy glory be the end. 


Earth then a scale to heaven shall be; 

_ Sense shall point out the road; 

The creatures all shall lead to Thee, 
And all we taste be God, 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 9 


Again, — 
Lord, arm me with Thy Spirit’s might, 
Since I am call'd by Thy great name ° 
In Thee my wand’ring thoughts unite, 
Of all my works be Thou the aim ; 
Thy love attend me all my days, 
And my sole business be Thy praise. (p. 122.) 
Again, — 
Eager for Thee I ask and pant, 
So strong the principle Divine, 
Carries me out with sweet constraint, 
Till all my hallow’d soul be Thine; 
Plunged in the Godhead’s deepest sea, 
And lost in Thine immensity! (p. 125.) 


Once more, — 


Heavenly Adam, life Divine, 

Change my nature into Thine; 

Move and spread throughout my soul, 
Actuate and fill the whole. (p. 153.) 


It would be easy to cite many more passages to the same 
effect. But these are sufficient to show, beyond contradic- 
tion, what our sentiments then were. 


Tux First TRACT HE WROTE ON CHRISTIAN PERFECTION. 

10. The first tract I ever wrote expressly on this subject 
was published in the latter end of this year. That none 
might be prejudiced before they read it, I gave it the indif- 
ferent title of “The Character of a Methodist.” In this I 
described a perfect Christian, placing in the front, “ Not as 
though I had already attained.” Part of it I subjoin with- 
out any alteration : — 


“ A Methodist is one who loves the Lord his God with all 
his heart, with all his soul, with all his mind, and with all 
his strength. God is the joy of his heart, and the desire of 


10 JHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


his soul, which is continually crying, ‘Whom have I in 
heaven but Thee ? and there is none upon earth whom I de- 
sire besides thee.? My God and my all! ‘Thou art the 
strength of my heart, and my portion forever.’ He is there- 
fore happy in God; yea, always happy, as having in him a 
well of water springing up into everlasting life, and over- 
flowing his soul with peace and joy. Perfect love having 
now cast out fear, he rejoices evermore. Yea, his joy is 
full, and all his bones ery out, ‘Blessed be the God and 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who, according to His 
abundant mercy, hath begotten me again unto a living hope 
of an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, reserved in 
heaven for me.’ 

“ And he who hath this hope, thus full of immortality, in 
every thing giveth thanks, as knowing this (whatsoever it 
is) is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning him. 
From Him, therefore, he cheerfully receives all, saying, 
‘Good is the will of the Lord;’ and whether He giveth or 
taketh away, equally blessing the name of the Lord. 
Whether in ease or pain, whether in sickness or health, 
whether in life or death, he giveth thanks from the ground 
of the heart to Him who orders it for good: into whose 
hands he hath wholly committed his body and soul, ‘as inte 
the hands of a faithful Creator.’ He is, therefore, anxiously 
‘careful for nothing,’ as having ‘cast all his care on Him 
that careth for him;’ and ‘in all things’ resting on Him, 
after ‘making’ his ‘request known to Him with thanks. 
giving.’ 

“For, indeed, he ‘prays without ceasing;’ at all times 
the language of his heart is this, ‘Unto Thee is my mouth, 
though without a voice; and my silence speaketh unto’ 
Thee.’ His heart is lifted up to God at all times, and in all 
places. In this he is never hindered, much less interrupted, 
by any person or thing. In retirement or company, in 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 11 


leisure, business, or conversation, his heart is ever with. the 
Lord. Whether he lie down, or rise up, ‘God is in all his 
thoughts:’ he walks with God continually; having the 
loving eye of his soul fixed on Him, and everywhere ‘ seeing 
Him that is invisible.’ 

“And loving God, he ‘loves his neighbor as himself ;’ he 
_ loves every man as his own soul. He loves his enemies, 
yea, and the enemies of God. And if it be not in his power 
* to ‘do good to them that hate’ him, yet he ceases not to 
¢pray for them,’ though they spurn his love, and still ‘ de- 
’ spitefully use him, and persecute him.’ 

“For he is ‘pure in heart.’ Love has purified his heart 

from envy, malice, wrath, and every unkind temper. It has 
_ tleansed him from pride, whereof ‘only cometh contention ;’ 
and he hath now ‘put on bowels of mercies, kindness, 
. bumbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering.’ And, in- 
deed, all possible ground for contention, on his part, is cut 
. off. For none can take from him what he desires, seeing 
he ‘loves not the world, nor any of the things of the world;’ 
. but ‘all his desire is unto God, and to the remembrance of 
_ His name.’ 
“ Agreeable to this his one desire, is the one design of his 
’ life; namely, ‘to do not his own will, but the will of Him 
- that sent him.’ His one intention at, all times and in all 
places is, not to please himself, but Him whom his soul 
- loveth. He hath a single eye; and because his ‘eye is 
' single, his whole body is full of light. The whole is light, 
as when the bright shining of a candle doth enlighten the 
_house.’? God reigns alone; all that is in the soul is ‘ holi- 
ness to the Lord.’ There is not a motion in his heart but 
is according to His will. Every thought that arises points 
to Him, and is in ‘obedience to the law of Christ.’ 

“ And the tree is known by its fruits. For, as he loves 
God, so he ‘keeps His commandments ;’ not only some, or 


12 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


most of them, but all, from the least to the greatest. He 
is not content to ‘keep the whole law and offend in one 
point,’ but has in all points ‘a conscience void of offense 
toward God and toward man.’ Whatever God has forbid- 
den, he avoids; whatever God has enjoined, he does. ‘He 
runs the way of God’s commandments,’ now He hath set his 
heart at liberty. It is his glory and joy so to do; it is his 
daily crown of rejoieings to ‘do the will of God on earth, 
as it is done in heaven.” 

“All the commandments of God he accordingly ieee 
and that with all his might; for his obedience is in propor- 
tion to his love, the source from whence it flows. And 
therefore, loving God with all his heart, he serves Him with 
all his strength; he continually presents his soul and ‘body 
a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God;’ entirely and 
without reserve devoting himself, all he has, all he is, to 
His glory. All the talents he has, he constantly employs 
according to his Master’s will; every power and faculty of 
his soul, every member of his body. 

“By consequence, ‘whatsoever he doeth, it is all to the 
glory of God.’ In all his employments of every kind, he 
not only aims at this, which is implied in having a single 
eye, but actually attains it; his business and his. refresh- 
ments, as well as his prayers, all serve to this great end. 
Whether he ‘sit in the house, or walk by the way,’ whether 
he lie down, or rise up, he is promoting, in all he speaks or 
does, the one business of his life. Whether he put on his 
apparel, or labor, or eat and drink, or divert himself from 
too wasting labor, it all tends to advance the glory of God, 
by peace and good will among men. His one invariable rule 
is this: ‘Whatsoever ye do, in word or deed, do it all in the : 
name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God, even the 
Father through Him,’ 

“Nor do the customs of the world at all hinder his ‘ run 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. Age 


ning the race which is set before him.’ He cannot, therefore, 
‘lay up treasures upon earth,’ no more than he can take fire 
into his bosom. He cannot speak evil of his neighbor, any 
more than he can lie either for God or man. He cannot 
utter an unkind word of anyone; for love keeps the door of 
his lips. He cannot ‘speak idle words; no corrupt conver- 
‘sation’ ever ‘comes out of his mouth;’ as is all that is not 
‘good to the use of edifying,’ not fit to ‘minister grace to 
the hearers.’ But ‘ whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever 
things are lovely, whatsoever things are’ justly ‘of good 
report,’ he thinks, speaks, and acts, ‘adorning the doctrine 
- of God our Saviour in all things.’” 


These are the very words wherein I largely declared, for 
the first time, my sentiments of Christian perfection. And, 
is it not easy to see, (1.) That this is the very point at 
which I aimed all along from the year 1725; and more de- 
terminately from the year 1730, when I began to be homo 
unius libri, “a man of one book,” regarding none, compara- 
tively, but the Bible? Is it not easy to see, (2.) That this 
is the very same doctrine which I believe and teach at this 
day; not adding one point, either to that inward or outward 
holiness which I maintained eight-and-thirty years ago? 
And it is the same which, by the grace of God, I have con- 
tinued to teach from that time till now; as will appear to 
every impartial person from the extracts subjoined below. 

11. 1 do not know that any writer has made any objec- 
tion against that tract to this day; and for some time, I did 
not find much opposition upon the head, at least, not from 
serious persons. \ But after a time, a cry arose, and, what 
a little surprised me, among religious men, who affirmed, 
not that I stated perfection wrong, but that, ‘there is no 
perfection on earth;”’ nay, and fell vehemently on my 
brother and me for affirming the contrary. We scarce ex- 


14 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


pected so rough an attack from these ; especially as we were 
clear on justification by faith, and careful to ascribe the 
whole salvation to the mere grace of God. But what most 
surprised us, was, that we were said to “ dishonor Christ,” by 
asserting that He “saveth to the uttermost;” by maintain- 


ing He will reign in our hearts alone, and subdue all things 


to Himself. 


His SERMON ON CHRISTIAN PERFECTION. 


12. I think it was in the latter end of the year 1740, that 


I had a conversation with Dr. Gibson, then bishop of Lon ! 
don, at Whitehall. He asked me what I meant by perfec- . 
tion. I told him without any disguise or reserve. WhenI . 


ceased speaking, he said, “Mr. Wesley, if this be all you 
mean, publish it to all the world. If anyone then can con- 
fute what you say, he may have free leave.” I answered, 


eC iced 


eS 


“My lord, I will;” and accordingly wrote and published, — 


the sermon on Christian perfection. | 
In this I endeavored to show, (1.) In what sense Chris 
tians are not, (2.) In what sense they are, perfect. 


“(1.) In what sense they are not. They are not perfect . 


in knowledge. They are not free from ignorance, no, nor © 


from mistake. We are no more to expect any living man 
to be infallible, than to be omniscient. They are not free 
from infirmities, such as weakness or slowness of under- 
standing, irregular quickness or heaviness of imagination. 


Such in another kind are impropriety of language, ungrace- 


fulness of pronunciation; to which one might add a thou- 
sand nameless defects, either in conversation or behavior. 


From such infirmities as these none are perfectly freed till. 


their spirits return to God; neither can we expect till then 
to be wholly freed from temptation ; for ‘the servant is not 
above his master.’ But neither in this sense is there any 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 15 


absolute perfection on earth. There is nu perfection of 
degrees, none which does not admit of a continual increase. 

“(2.) In what sense then are they perfect? Observe, we 
are not now speaking of babes in Christ, but adult Christians. 
But even babes in Christ are so far perfect as not to com- 
mit sin. This St. John affirms expressly; and it cannot be 
disproved by the examples of the Old Testament. For 
what if the holiest of the ancient Jews did sometimes 
commit sin? We cannot infer from hence, that, ‘all Chris 
tians do and must commit sin as long as they live.’ 

“But does not the Scriptures say, ‘A just man sinneth 
seven times a day?’ It does not. Indeed, it says, ‘A just 
man falleth seven times.’ But this is quite another thing; 
for, First, the words, a day, are not in the text. Secondly, 
here is no mention of falling into sin at all. What-is here 
mentioned, is falling into temporal affliction. 

“ But elsewhere Solomon says, ‘ There is no man that sin- 
neth not.’ Doubtless thus it was in the days of Solomon; 
yea, and from Solomon to Christ there was then no man 
that sinned not. But whatever was the case of those under 
the law, we may safely affirm, with St. John, that, since the 
Gospel was given, ‘he that is born of God sinneth not.’ 

“The privileges of Christians are in no wise to be meas: 
ured by what the Old Testament records concerning those 
who were under the Jewish dispensation; seeing the fulness 
of time is now come, the Holy Ghost is now given, the 
great salvation of God is now brought to men by the reve- 
lation of Jesus Christ. The kingdom of heaven is now set 
up on earth, concerning which the Spirit of God declared of 
old time (so far is David from being the pattern or standard 
of Christian perfection), ‘He that is feeble among them, at 
that day, shall be as David, and the house of David shall 
be as the angel of the Lord before them,’ Zech. xii. 8. 

“ But the Apostles themselves committed sin; Peter by 


16 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


dissembling, Paul by his sharp contention with Barnabas, 
Suppose they did, will you argue thus: ‘If two of the 
Apostles once committed sin, then all other Christians in all 
ages, do and must commit sin as long as they live?’ Nay, 
God forbid we should thus speak. No necessity of sin was 
laid upon them; the grace of God was surely snfficient for 
them. And it is sufficient for us at this day. 

“But St. James says, ‘In many things we offend all.’ 
True: but who are the persons here spoken of? Why, 
those many masters or teachers whom God had not sent; 
not the apostle himself, nor any real Christian. That in the 
word we, used by a figure of speech, common in all other as 
well as the inspired writings, the apostle could not possibly 
include himself, or any other true believer, appears, First, 
from the ninth verse, ‘ Therewith bless we God, and there- 
with bless curse we men.’ Surely not we apostles! not we 
believers! Secondly, from the words preceding the text: 
‘My brethren, be not many masters,’ or teachers, ‘knowing 
that we shall receive the greater condemnation. For in 
many things we offend all.’ We/ Who? Not the apostles 
nor true believers, but they who were to ‘ receive the greater 
condemnation,’ because of those many offenses. Nay, 
Thirdly, the verse itself proves, that, ‘we offend all,’ cannot 
be spoken either of all men or all Christians. For in it 
immediately follows the mention of a man who ‘offends 
not,’ as the we first mentioned did; from whom therefore he 
is ee contradistinguished, and pronounced a ey 
fect man.’ 

“But St. John himself says, ‘If we say we have no sin, 
we deceive ourselves ;’ and, ‘If we say we have not sinned, 
we make Him a liar, and His word is not in us.’ 

“T answer, (1.) The tenth verse fixes the sense of ine 
eighth: ‘If we say we have no sin,’ in the former, being ex- 
plained by, ‘If we say we have not sinned,’ in the latter verse. 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. alive 


(2.) The point under consideration is not whether we have 
or have not sinned, heretofore; and neither of these verses 
asserts that we do sin, or commit sin now. (3.) The ninth - 
verse explains both the eighth and tenth: ‘If we confess 
our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and 
to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.’ As if He had said, 
‘I have before affirmed, The blood of Christ cleanseth from 
all sin.’ And no man can say, ‘I need it not; I have nosin 
to be cleansed from. ‘If we say, we have no sin,’ that, ‘we 
have not sinned, we deceive ourselves,’ and make God a liar: 
but, ‘if we confess our sins, He is faithful and just,’ not 
only ‘to forgive us our sins,’ but also ‘to cleanse us from 
all unrighteousness,’ that we may ‘go and sin no more.’ In 
conformity, therefore, both to the doctrine of St. John, and 
the whole tenor of the New Testament, we fix this conclu- 
sion: A Christian is so far perfect, as not to commit sin. 
“This is the glorious privilege of every Christian, yea, 
- though he be but a babe in Christ. But it is only of grown 
Christians it can be affirmed, they are in such a sense per- 
fect, as, Secondly, to be freed from evil thoughts and evil 
tempers. First from evil or sinful thoughts. Indeed, 
whence should they spring? ‘Out of the heart of man,’ 
if at all, ‘proceed evil thoughts.’ If, therefore, the heart 
be no longer evil, then evil thoughts no longer proceed out 
of it: for ‘a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit’ + 
‘And as they are freed from evil thoughts, so likewise 
from evil tempers. Everyone of these can say, with St. 
Paul, ‘I am crucified with Christ; nevertheless I live; yet 
not I, but Christ liveth in me;’— words that manifestly 
describe a deliverance from inward as well as from outward 
sin. This is expressed both negatively, ‘I live not,’ my evil 
nature, the body of sin is destroyed ; and positively, ‘Christ 
liveth in me,’ and, therefore, all that is holy, and just, and 
good. Indeed, both these, ‘Christ liveth in me,’ and, ‘I live 


18 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


not,’ are inseparably connected. For what communion hath 
light with darkness, or Christ with Belial ? 

“He therefore, who liveth in these Christians hath ‘ puri- 
fied their hearts by faith ;’ insomuch that everyone that has 
Christ in him, ‘the hope of glory, purifieth himself even as 
He is pure.’ He is purified from pride; for Christ was low- 
ly in heart; he is pure from desire and self-will ; for Christ 
desired only to do the will of the Father: and he is pure 
from anger, in the common sense of the word, for Christ 
was meek and gentle. I say, im the common sense of the 
word ; for He is angry at sin, while He is grieved for the 
sinner. He feels a displacency at every offense against 
God, but only tender compassion to the offender. 

“Thus doth Jesus save His people from their sins; not 
only from outward sins, but from the sins of their hearts. 
‘True,’ say some, ‘but not till death, not in this world.’ 
Nay, St. John says, ‘Herein is our love made perfect, that 
we may have boldness in the day of judgment; because, as 
He is, so are we in this world.’ The apostle here, beyond 
all contradiction, speaks of himself and other living Chris- 
tians, of whom he flatly affirms, that not only at or after 
death, but ‘in this world,’ they are ‘as their Master.’ 

“Exactly agreeable to this are his words in the first chap- 
ter: ‘God is light, and in Him is no darkness at all. If we 
walk in the light, as He is in the light, we have fellowship 
one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ His Son 
cleanseth us from all sin.’ And again: ‘If we confess our 
sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to 
cleanse us from all unrighteousness.’ Now, it is evident the 
Apostle here speaks of a deliverance wrought in this world: 
for he saith not, The blood of Christ will cleanse (at the 
hour of death, or in the day of judgment), but it ‘ cleanseth,’ 
at the time present, us living Christians ‘from all sin.’ And 
it is equally evident, that if any sin remain, we are not 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 19 


cleansed from all sin. If any unrighteousness remain in the 
soul, it is not cleansed from all unrighteousness. Neither 
let any say that this relates to justification only, or the 
cleansing us from the guilt of sin: first, because this is con- 
founding together what the Apostle clearly distinguishes, 
who mentions, first, ‘to forgive us our sins,’ and then ‘to 
cleanse us from all unrighteousness.’ Secondly, because ~ 
this is asserting justification by works, in the strongest 
sense possible; it is making all inward, as well as all out- 
ward, holiness, necessarily previous to justification. For if 
the cleansing here spoken of is no other than the cleansing 
us from the guilt of sin, then we are not cleansed from guilt, 
that is, not justified, unless on condition of walking ‘in the 
light, as He is in the light.’ It remains, then, that Chris- 
tians are saved in this world from all sin, from all unright- 
eousness; that they are now in such a sense perfect, as not 
to commit sin, and to be freed from evil thoughts and evil 
tempers.” } 


It could not be, but that a discourse of this kind, which 
directly contradicted the favorite opinion of many, mito were 
esteemed by others, and possibly esteemed themselves, some 
of the best of Christians (whereas, if these things were so, 
they were not Christians at all), should give no small of- 
fense. Many answers or animadversions, therefore, were 
expected ; but I was agreeably disappointed. I donot know 
that any appeared; so I went quietly on my way. 


Tur PREFACE OF His SECOND VOLUME OF HYMNS. 


13. Not long after, I think in the spring, 1741, we pub. 
lished a second volume of hymns. As the doctrine was still 
much misunderstood, and consequently misrepresented, I 
judged it needful to explain yet farther upon the head; 
which was done in the preface to it as follows : — 


20 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


“This great gift of God, the salvation of our souls, is no 
other than the image of God fresh stamped on our hearts. 
It is a ‘renewal of believers in the spirit of their minds, 
after the likeness of Him that créated them.’ God hath 
now laid ‘the axe unto the root of the tree, purifying their 
hearts by faith,’ and ‘cleansing all the thoughts of their 
hearts by the inspiration of His Holy Spirit.’ Having this 
hope, that they shall see God as He is, they ‘purify them- 
selves even as He is pure,’ and are ‘holy, as He that hath 
called them is holy, in all manner of conversation.’ Not 
that they have already attained all that they shall attain, 
either are already in this sense perfect. But they daily ‘go 
on from strength to strength, beholding’ now, ‘as in a glass, 
the glory of the Lord, they are changed into the same image, 
from glory to glory, by the Spirit of the Lord.’ 

“‘ And ‘ where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty’; 
such liberty ‘from the law of sin and death,’ as the children 
of this world will not believe, though a man declare it unto 
them. ‘The Son hath made them free, who are thus ‘born 
of God, from that great root of sin and bitterness, pride. 
They feel that all their ‘sufficiency is of God,’ that it is He 
alone who ‘is in all their thoughts,’ and ‘ worketh in them 
both to will and to do of His good pleasure.’ They feel that 
‘it is not they’ that ‘speak, but the Spirit of’ their ‘Father 
who speaketh’ in them, and that whatsoever is done by their 
hands, ‘the Father who is in them, He doeth the works.’ 
So that God is to them all in all, and they are nothing in 
His sight. They are freed from self-will, as desiring noth- 
ing but the holy and perfect will of God: not supplies in 
want, not ease ir pain,* nor life, or death, or any creature; 
but continually crying in their inmost soul, ‘Father, Thy 
will be done.’ They are freed from evil thoughts, so that 


* This is too strong. Our Lord Himself desired easein pain. He asked for 
‘‘, only with resignation: ‘Not as I will,” I desire, “‘ but as Thou wilt.” 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. val 


they cannot enter into them, no, not fora moment. Afore- 
time, when an evil thought came in, they looked up, and it 
vanished away. But now it does not.come in, there being 
no room for this, in a soul which is full of God. They are 
free from wanderings in prayer. Whensoever they pour 
out their hearts in a more immediate manner before God, 
they have no thought of anything past,* or absent, or to 
come, but of God alone. In times past, they had wandering 
thoughts darting in, which yet fled away like smoke; but 
now that smoke does not rise at all. They have no fear or 
doubt, either as to their state in general, or as to any par- 
_ ticular action.— The ‘unction from the Holy One’ teacheth 
them every hour what they shall do, and what they shall 
speak; + nor, therefore, have they any need to reason con- 
cerning it.§ They are in one sense freed from temptations; 
for though numberless temptations fly about them, yet they 
trouble them not.|} At all times their souls are even and 
calm, their hearts are steadfast and unmovable. Their 
peace, flowing as a river, ‘ passeth all understanding,’ and 
they ‘rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory.’ For 
they ‘are sealed by the Spirit unto the day of redemption,’ 
having the witness in themselves, that ‘there is laid up for’ 
them a ‘crown of righteousness, which the Lord will give’ 
them ‘in that day.’ 7 
“ Not that every one is a child of the devil, till he is thus 
renewed in love: on the contrary, whoever has ‘a sure con- 
fidence in God, that, through the merits of Christ, his sins 
are forgiven,’ he is a child of God, and, if he abide in Hin, 
an heir of all the promises. Neither ought he in any wise 


* This is far too strong. See the sermon “ On Wandering Thoughts.” 

+ Frequently this is the case; but only for a time. 

+ For a time it may be so; but not always. 

§ Sometimes they have no need; at other times they have. 

4 Sometimes they do not; at other times they do, and that grievously. 

q Not all who are saved from sin; many of them have not attained it yet 


22 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


to cast away his confidence, or to deny the faith he has re- 
ceived, because it is weak, or because it is ‘tried with fire,’ 
so that his soul is ‘in heaviness through manifold tempta- 
tions,’ 


Nor FuLLYy SAVED AT CONVERSION. 


“Neither dare we affirm,-as some have done, that all this 
salvation is given at once, There is, indeed, an instanta- 
neous, as weli as a gradual, work of God in His children; 
and there wants not, we know, a cloud of witnesses, who have 
received, in one moment, either a clear sense of the forgive- 
ness of their sins, or the abiding witness of the Holy Spirit. 
But we do not know a single instance, in any place, of a 
person’s receiving, in one and the same moment, remissior. 
. of sins, the abiding witness of the Spirit, and a new, a clean 
heart. EHS 

“Tndeed, how God may work, we cannot tell; but the 
general manner wherein He does work, is this: those who 
once trusted in themselves that they were righteous, that 
they were rich, and increased in goods, and had need of 
nothing, are, by the Spirit of God applying His word, con- 
vinced that they are poor and naked. All the things that 
they have done are brought to their remembrance and set in 
array before them, so that they see the wrath of God hang- 
ing over their heads, and feel that they deserve the damna- 
tion of hell. In their trouble they cry unto the Lord, and 
He shows them that He hath taken away their sins, and 
opens the kingdom of Heaven in their hearts, — “righteous- 
ness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.’ Sorrow and 
pain are fled away, and ‘sin has no more dominion over’ 
them. Knowing they are justified freely through faith in 
His blood, they ‘have peace with God through Jesus Christ’; 
they ‘rejoice in hope of the glory of God,’ and ‘the love of 
God is shed abroad in their hearts.’ 


AS TAUGHT*BY JOHN WESLEY. 93 


WHAT COMES SUBSEQUENT TO CONVERSION. 


“In this peace they remain for days, or weeks, or months, 
and commonly suppose they shall not know war any more; 
till some of their old enemies, their bosom sins, or the sin 
which did most easily beset them (perhaps anger or desire), 
assault them again, and thrust sore at them, that they may 
fall. Then arises fear that they shall not endure to the 
end; and often doubt whether God has not forgotten them, 
or whether they did not deceive themselves in thinking 
their sins were forgiven. Under these clouds, especially if 
they reason with the devil, they go mourning all the day 
long.’ But it is seldom long before their Lord answers for 
Himself, sending them the Holy Ghost to comfort them, to 
bear witness continually with their spirits that they are the 
children of God. Then they are, indeed, meek, and gentle, 
and teachable, even as a little child. 


DEPRAVITY IN THE CONVERTED HEART. . 


“ And now first do they see the ground of their heart,* 
which God before would not disclose unto them, lest the 
soul should fail before Him, and the spirit which He had 
made. Now they see all the hidden abominations there, 
the depths of pride, self-will, and hell; yet having the wit- 
ness in themselves, ‘Thou art an heir of God, a joint heir 
with Christ, even in the midst of this fiery trial;’ which 
continually heightens both the strong sense they then have 
of their inability to help themselves, and the inexpressible 
hunger they feel after a full renewal in His image, in 
‘righteousness and true holiness.’ 


; * Is it not astonishing, that while this book is extant, which was published 

four-and-twenty years ago, any one should face me down, that this is a new 
doctrine, and what I never taught before ? —[This note was first published in 
the year 1765. — EDIT.) 


24 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


Tur SECOND BLESSING. 


“Then God is mindful of the desire of them that fear Him, 
and gives them a single eye, and a pure heart; He stamps 
upon them His own image and superscription ; He createth 
them anew in Christ Jesus; He cometh unto them with His 
Son and blessed Spirit, and, fixing His abode in their souls, 
bringeth them into the ‘rest which remaineth for the people 
of God.’” 


Here I cannot but remark, (1.) That this is the ations st 
account we ever gave of Christian perfection, — indeed, too 
strong in more than one particular, as is observed in the 
notes annexed. (2.) That there is nothing which we have 
since advanced upon the subject, either in verse or prose, 
which is not either directly or indirectly contained in this 
preface. So that whether our present doctrine be right or 
wrong, it is, however, the same which we taught from the 
beginning. 

14, I need not give additional proofs of this, by multi- 
plying quotations from the volume itself. It may suffice to 
cite part of one hymn only, the last in that volume ; — 


Lord, I believe a rest remains, 
To all thy people known; 

A rest where pure enjoyment reigns, 
And thou art loved alone; 


A rest where all our soul’s desire 
Is fixed on things above; 

Where doubt and pain and fear expire, 
Cast out by perfect love. 


From every evil motion freed, 
(The Son hath made us free,) 
On all the powcrs of hell we tread, 

In glorious liberty. 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 25 


Safe in the way of life, above 
Death, earth, and hell we rise; 

We find, when perfected in love, 
Our long-sought paradise. 


Oh, that I now the rest might know, 
Believe and enter in | 

Now, Saviour, now the power bestow, 
And let me cease from sin ! 


Remove this hardness from my heart, 
This unbelief remove ; 
To me the rest of faith impart, 
The sabbath of Thy love. 


Come, O my Saviour, come away ! 
Into my soul descend ! 

No longer from Thy creature stay, 
My author and my end. 


The bliss Thou hast for me prepared, 
No longer be delayed: 

Come, my exceeding great reward, 
For whom I first was made. 


Come Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, 
And seal me Thine abode ! 

Let all I am in Thee be lost; 
Let all be lost in God ! 


Can anything be more clear than, (1.) That here, also, is 
as full and high a salvation as we have ever spoken of ? 
(2.) That this is spoken of as receivable by mere faith, and 
as hindered only by unbelief? (3.) That this faith, and 
sonsequently the salvation which it brings, is spoken of as 
given in an instant? (4.) That it is supposed that instant 
may be now? that we need not stay another moment? that 
“now,” the very “now is the accepted time? now is the 
day of” this full “salvation?” And, lastly, that, if any 


26 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


speak otherwise, he is the person that brings new doctrine 
among us ? } 


Tur PEEFACE oF His THIRD VOLUME OF HYMNS. 


15. About a year after, namely, in the year 1742, we 
published another volume of hymns. The dispute being 
now at the height, we spoke upon the head more largely 
than ever before. Accordingly, abundance of the hymns in 
this volume treat expressly on this subject. And so does 
the preface, which, as it is short, it may not be amiss to in- 
sert entire : — 


“(1.) Perhaps the general prejudice against Christian 
perfection may chiefly arise from a misapprehension of the 
nature of it. We willingly allow, and continually declare, 
there is no such perfection in this life, as implies either a 
dispensation from doing good, and attending all the ordi- 
nances of God, or a freedom from ignorance, mistake, temp- 
tation, and a thousand infirmities necessarily connected with 
flesh and blood. 


¥ 


“(2.) First. We not only allow, but earnestly contend, - 


that there is no perfection in this life, which implies any 
dispensation from attending all the ordinances of God, or 
from doing good unto all men while we have time, though 
‘especially unto the household of faith.’ We believe, that 
not only the babes in Christ, who have newly found redemp- 
tion in His blood, but those also who are ‘grown up into 
perfect men,’ are indispensably obliged, as often as they 
have opportunity, ‘to eat bread and drink wine in remem- 
brance of Him,’ and to ‘search the Scriptures ;’ by fasting, 
as well as temperance, to ‘keep their bodies under, and 
bring them into subjection;’ and, above all, to pour out 


their souls in prayer, both secretly, and in the great congre _ 


gation. 


- AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 27 


“(3.) We secondly believe that there is no such perfection 
in this life, as implies an entire deliverance, either from igno- 
vance, or mistake, in things not essential to salvation, or 
from manifold temptations, or from numberless infirmities, 
wherewith the corruptible body more or less presses down 
the soul. We cannot find any ground in Scripture to sup- 
pose, that any inhabitant of a house of clay is wholly exempt 
either from bodily infirmities, or from ignorance of many 
things ; or to imagine any is incapable of mistake, or falling 
7 into divers temptations. 

“(4.) But whom, then, do you mean by ‘one that is per- 
fect’? We mean one in whom is ‘the mind which was in 
Christ,’ and who so ‘ walketh as Christ also walked’; a man 
‘that hath clean hands and a pure heart,’ or that is ‘cleansed 
from all filthiness of flesh and spirit’; one in whom is ‘no 
occasion of stumbling,’ and who, accordingly, ‘does not com- 
mit sin.’ To declare this a little more particularly : we un- 
derstand by that Scriptural expression, ‘a perfect man,’ one 
in whom God hath fulfilled His faithful word, ‘From all 
your filthiness and from all your idols I will cleanse you: 
I will also save you from all your uncleannesses.’ We un- 
derstand, hereby, one whom God hath ‘ sanctified throughout 
in body, soul, and spirit’; one who ‘walketh in the light 
as He is in the light, in whom is no darkness at all; the 
blood of Jesus Christ His Son having cleansed him from all 
sin.’ : 

“(5.) This man can now testify to all mankind, ‘I am 
crucified with Christ: nevertheless I live; yet not I, but 
Christ liveth in me.” He is ‘holy as God who called’ him 
‘igs holy,’ both in heart’and ‘in all manner of conversation.’ 
He ‘loveth the Lord his God with all his heart,’ and serveth 
him ‘ with all his strength.’ He ‘loveth his neighbor,’ every 
man, ‘as himself’; yea, ‘as Christ loveth us’; them, in par- 
ticular, that ‘despitefully use Him and persecute Him, be- 


een cae CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


cause they know not the Son, neither the Father.’ Indeed, 
his soul is all love, filled with ‘bowels of mercies, kindness, 
meekness, gentleness, long-suffering.’ And his life agreeth 
thereto, full of ‘the work of faith, the patience of hope, the 
labor of love.’ ‘And whatsoever’ he ‘doeth either in word 
or deed,’ he ‘ doeth it all-in the name,’ in the love and power, 
‘of the Lord Jesus.’ In a word, he doeth ‘the will of God 
on earth, as it is done in heaven.’ 

“(6.) This it is to be a perfect man, to be ‘sanctified 
throughout ;’ even ‘to have a heart so all-flaming with the 
love of God’ (to use Archbishop Usher’s words), ‘ as contin- 
ually to offer up every thought, word, and work, as a spiritual 
sacrifice, acceptable to God through Christ.’ In every thought 
of our hearts, in every word of our tongues, in every work 
of our hands, to ‘show forth His praise, who hath called us 
out of darkness into His marvellous light.’ O that both 
we, and all who seek the Lord Jesus in sincerity, may thus 
‘be made perfect in one!’ ” 


Her DENIES ANY CHANGE OF HIS VIEWS. 


This is the doctrine which we preached from the begin- 
ning, and which we preach at this day. Indeed, by viewing 
it in every point of light, and comparing it again and again 
with the word of God on the one hand, and the experience 
of the children of God on the other, we saw farther into 
the nature and properties of Christian perfection. But still 
there is no contrariety at all between our first and our last 
sentiments. Our first conception of it was, it is to have 
“the mind which was in Christ,” and to “walk as He 
walked ;” to have all the mind that was in Him, and always 
to walk as He walked: in other words, to be inwardly and 
outwardly devoted to God; all devoted in heart and life.. 
And we have the same conception of it now, without either 
addition or diminution. 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 29 


16. The hymns concerning it in this volume are too 
numerous to transcribe. I shall only cite a part of three : — 


Saviour from sin, I wait to prove 
That Jesus is Thy healing name; 

To lose when perfected in love, 
Whate’er I have, or can, or am; 

I stay me on Thy faithful word, 

“ The servant shall be as his Lord.” 


Answer that gracious end in me 

For which Thy precious life was given; 
Redeem from all iniquity, 

Restore, and make me meet for heaven. 
Unless Thou purge my every stain, 
Thy suffering and my faith is vain. 


e 
Didst Thou not die, that I might live, 
No longer to myself but Thee ? 
Might body, soul, and spirit give 
To Him who gave himself for me ? 
Come then, my Master and my God, 
Take the dear purchase of Thy blood. 


Thy own peculiar servant claim, 

For Thy own truth and mercy’s sake; 
Hallow in me Thy glorious name; 

Me for Thine own this moment take; 
And change and throughly purify; 
Thine only may I live and die. (p. 80.) 


Chose from the world, if now I stand, 
Adorn’d with righteousness Divine; 
If, brought into the promised land, 
I justly call the Saviour mine; 


The sanctifying Spirit pour, 
To quench my thirst and wash me clean, 
Now, Saviour, let the gracious shower 
Descend, and make me pure from sin. 


30 


CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, ~- 


Purge me from every sinful blot: 
My idols all be cast aside: 

Cleanse me from every evil thought, 
From all the filth of self and pride. 


Ihe hatred of the carnal mind 

Out of my flesh at once remove: 
Give me a tender heart, resign’d, 

And pure, and full of faith and love. 


Oh that I now, from sin releas’d, 

Thy word might to the utmost prove, 
Enter into Thy promised rest; 

The Canaan of Thy perfect love ! 


Now let me gain perfection’s height! 
Now let me into nothing fall; e 
Be less than nothing in my sight, 
And feel that Christ is all in all. (p. 258.) 


Lord, I believe, Thy work of grace 
Is perfect in the soul: 

His heart is pure who sees Thy face, 
His spirit is made whole. 


From every sickness, by Thy word, 
From every foul disease, 

Saved, and to perfect health restored, 
To perfect holiness: 


He walks in glorious liberty, 
To sin entirely dead: 

The Truth, the Son hath made him free, 
And he is free indeed. 


Throughout his soul Thy glories shine, 
His soul is all renew’d, 

And deck’d in righteousness Divine, 
And clothed and fill’d with God. 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. Bul 


This is the rest, the life, the peace, 
Which all Thy people prove; 

Love is the bond of perfectness, 
And all their soul is love. 


O joyful sound of Gospel grace! 
Christ shall in me appear; 

I, even I, shall see His face, 
I shall be holy here! 


He visits now the house of clay, 
He shakes his future home; 

O wouldst Thou, Lord, on this glad day, 
Into Thy temple come! 


Come, O my God, Thyself reveal, 
Fill all this mighty void; 

Thou only canst my spirit fill: 
Come, O my God, my God! 


Fulfil, fulfil my large requires, 
Large as infinity! 

Give, give me all my soul desires, 
All, all that isin Thee! (p. 298.) 


Tue Minutes or Hrs First, SECOND, AND THIRD CONFERENCES. 


17. On Monday, June 25, 1744, our first conference 
began; six clergymen and all our preachers being present. 
The next morning we seriously considered the doctrine of 
sanctification, or perfection. The questions asked concern- 
ing it, and the substance of the answers given were as 
follows : — 


“ What is it to be sanctified ? 

“To be renewed in the image of God, ‘in righteousness 
and true holiness.’ 

“ What is implied in being a perfect Christian ? 


CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


“The loving God with all our heart, and mind, and soul 
(Deut. vi. 5). 

“ Does this imply, that all inward sin is taken away ? 

“ Undoubtedly ; or how can we be said to be ‘saved from 
all our uncleannesses ?’ (Ezek. xxxvi. 29).” 


Our second conference began August 1, 1745. The next 
morning we spoke of sanctification as follows : — 


“ When does inward sanctification begin ? 

“In the moment a man is justified. (Yet sin remains.in 
him, yea, the seed of all sin, till he is sanctified through- 
out.) From that time a believer gradually dies to sin, and 
grows in grace. 

“Ts this ordinarily given till a little before death? 

“Tt is not, to those who expect it no sooner. 

“ But may we expect it sooner ? 

“Why not? For, although we grant, (1.) that the gener- 
ality of believers, whom we have hitherto known, were not 
so sanctified till near death; (2.) that few of those to whom 
St. Paul wrote his Epistles were so at that time; nor, (3.) 
he himself at the time of writing his former Epistles; yet 
all this does not prove, that we may not be so to-day. 

“In what manner should we preach sanctification ? 

“Scarce at all to those who are not pressing forward ; to 


those who are, always by way of promise: always drawing, 
rather than driving.” 


Our third conference began Tuesday, May 26, 1746. 
In this we carefully read over the minutes of the two 


preceding conferences, to observe whether anything con- 


tained therein might be retrenched or altered on more ma- 
ture consideration. But we did not see cause to alter in any 
respect what we had agreed upon before. 

Our fonrth conference began on Tuesday, ‘June the 16th, 


—— 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 33 


1747. As several persons were present, who did not believe 
_ the doctrine of perfection, we agreed to examine it from the 
foundation. : 

Tu order to this, it was asked, 


“ How much is allowed by our brethren who differ from us 
with regard to entire sanctification ? 

“They grant, (1.) That every one must be entirely sanc- 
tified in the article of death. (2.) That till then, a believer 
daily grows in grace, comes nearer and nearer to perfection. 
(3.) That we ought to be continually pressing after it, and 
to exhort all others so to do. 

“ What do we allow them ? 

“We grant, (1.) That many of those who have died in the 
faith, yea, the greater part of those we have known, were 
not perfected in love, till a little before their death. (2.) 
That the term sanctified, is continually applied by St. Paul, 
to all that were justified. (3.) That by this term alone, he 
rarely, if ever, means, ‘saved from all sin.’ (4.) That, con- 
sequently, it,is not proper to use it in that sense, without 
adding the word wholly, entirely, or the like. (5.) That the 
inspired writers almost continually speak of, or to, those 
who were justified, but very rarely of, or to, those who were 
wholly sanctified.* (6.) That, consequently, it behooves us 
to speak almost continually of the state of justification; 
Sut more rarely, f ‘at least in full and explicit terms, con- 
cerning entire sanctification.’ 

“ What, then, ts the point where we divide? 

“Tt is this: should we expect to be saved from all sin oe- 
fore the article of death ? 


*That is, unto those alone, exclusive of others; but they speak to them, 
jointly with others, almost continually. 

+ More rarely, I allow; but yet in some places, very frequently, strongly, and 
explicitly. : 


34 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


THE DocTRINE PROVED FROM THE SCRIPTURES 


“Ts there any clear Scripture promise of this,— that Goa 
will save us from all sin? 

“There is: ‘He shall redeem Israel from all his sins,’ 
Psa. cxxx. 8. 

“This is more largely expressed in the prophecy of 
Ezekiel: ‘Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and 
ye shall be clean; from all your filthiness, and from all your 
idols, will I cleanse you; I will also save you from all your 
uncleannesses,’ xxxvi. 25,29. No promise can be more clear. 
_ And to this the Apostle plainly refers in that exhortation: 
‘Having these promises, let us cleanse ourselves from all 
filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear 
of God,’ 2 Cor. vii. 1. Equally clear and express is that 
ancient promise: “The Lord thy God will circumcise thy 
heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God 
with all thy heart and with all thy soul,’ Deut. xxx. 6. 

“ But does any assertion answerable to this, occur in the New 
Testament ? 

“There does, and that laid down in the plainest terms. 
So 1 John iii. 8: ‘For this purpose the Son of God was 
manifested, that He might destroy the works of the devil;’ 
the works of the devil, without any limitation or restriction ; 
but all sin is the work of the devil. Parallel to which, is 
the assertion of St. Paul: ‘Christ loved the Church, and 
gave Himself for it, that He might present it to Himself, a 
glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such 
thing, but that it might be holy and without blemish,’ Eph. 
Vv. 25-27. 

“ And to the same effect is his assertion in the eighth of the 
Romans, verses 3, 4: ‘God sent His Son, that the righteous. 
ness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after 
the flesh, but after the Spirit.’ 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 85 


“ Does the New Testament afford any Larcher ground for 
expecting to be saved from all sin? 

“Undoubtedly it does; both in those prayers and com- 
mands, which are equivalent to the strongest assertions. 

“ What prayers do you mean ? 

“Prayers for entire sanctification; which, were there no 
such thing, would be mere mockery of God. Such, in par- 
ticular, are, (1.) ‘ Deliver us from evil.’ Now, when this is 
done, when we are delivered from all evil, there can be no 
sin remaining. (2.) ‘Neither pray I for these alone, but for 
them also who shall believe on Me through their word; that 
they all may be one; as Thou, Father, art in Me, andI in Thee, 
that they also may be one in us; I in them, and Thou in 
Me, that they may be made perfect in one,’ John xvii. 20-28. 
(3.) ‘I bow my knees unto the God and Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, that He would grant you, that ye, being rooted 
and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend, with all 
saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and 
height, and to know the love of Christ, which passeth knowl- 
edge; that ye may be filled with all the fulness of God,’ 
Eph. iii. 14, ete. (4.) ‘The very God of peace sanctify you 
wholly. And I pray God, your whole spirit, soul, and body, 
may be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord 
Jesus Christ,’ 1 Thess. v. 23. 

“ What command is there to the same effect ? 

“(1.) ‘Be ye perfect, as your Father who is in heaven, is 
perfect,’ Matt. v. 48. (2.) ‘Thou shalt love the Lord thy 
God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all 
thy mind,’ Matt. xxii. 37. But if the love of God fill all the 
heart, there can be no sin therein. 

“ But how does it appear that this is to be done before the 
article of death ? 

“From the very nature of a command, which is not giver 
to the dead, but to the living. Therefore, ‘Thou shalt love 


36 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


God with all thy heart,’ cannot mean ‘Thou shalt do this 
when thou diest,’ but, while thou livest. 

«“(2.) From express texts of Scripture: (i.) ‘The grace 
of God, that bringeth salvation, hath appeared to all men; 
teaching us that, having renounced ungodliness and worldly 
lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this 
present world; looking for the glorious appearing of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, who gave Himself for us, that He might 
redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto Himself a pe- 
culiar people, zealous of good works,’ Titus ii. 11-14. (4i.) 
‘He hath raised up a horn of salvation for us, to perform 
the mercy promised to our fathers; the oath which He 
sware to our father Abraham, that He would grant unto us, 
that we, being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, 
should serve Him without fear, in holiness and righteousness 
before Him, all the days of our life,’ Luke i. 69, ete. 

“Ts there any example in Scripture, of persons who had at- 
tained to this ? 

“Yes; St. John, and all those of whom he says, ‘ Herein 
is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the 
day of judgment; because, as He is, so are we in this world,’ 
1 John iv. 17. 

“Can you show one such example now? Where is he that 
is thus perfect ? 

“To some that make this inquiry, one might answer, If I 
knew one here, I would not tell you; for you do not enquire 
out of love. You are like Herod; you only seek the young 
child to slay it. 

“But more directly we answer: There are many reasons 
why there should be few, if any, indisputable examples. 
What inconveniences would this bring on the person him- 
self, set as a mark for all to shoot at! And how unprofit. 
able would it be to gainsayers! ‘Forif they hear not Moses 
and the Prophets,’ Christ and His Apostles, ‘neither would 
they be persuaded though one rose from the dead.’ 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 837 


“ Are we not apt to have a secret distaste to any who say 
they are saved from all sin ? 

“Tt is very possible we may, and that upon several 
grounds; partly from a concern for the good of souls, who 
may be hurt if these are not what they profess; partly from 
a kind of implicit envy at those who speak of higher attain- 
ments than our own; and partly from our natural slowness 
and unreadiness of heart to believe the works of God. 

“Why may we not continue in the joy of faith, till we are 
perfected in love ? 

“Why indeed ? since holy grief does not quench this joy ; 
since even while we are under the cross, while we deeply 
partake of the sufferings of Christ, we may rejoice with joy 
unspeakable.” 

From these extracts, it undeniably appears, not only what 
was mine and my brother’s judgment, but what was the 
judgment of all the preachers in connection with us, in the 
years 1744, 45, 46, and 47. Nor do I remember that, in any 
one of these conferences, we had one dissenting voice; but 
whatever doubts any one had when we met, they were all re- 
moved before we parted. 


HyMNns PUBLISHED IN 1749. 


In the year 1749, my brother printed two volumes of 
“Hymns and Sacred Poems.” As IJ did not see these before 
they were published, there were some things in them which 
I did not approve of. But I quite approved of the main of 
the hymns on this head; a few verses of which are sub- 
joined : — 

Come, Lord, be manifested here, 
And all the devil’s works destroy; 
Now, without sin, in me appear, 
And fill wlth everlasting joy; 
Thy beatific face display ; 
Thy presence is the perfect day. (Vol. i. p. 208.) 


38 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION. 


Swift to my rescue come, 
Thy own this moment seize; 
Gather my wand’ring spirit home, 
And keep {n perfect peace. 


Suffer’d no more to rove 
O’er all the earth abroad, 
Arrest the pris’ner of Thy love, 
And shut me up in God! (p. 247.) 


Thy pris’ners release, vouchsafe us Thy peace; 

And our sorrows and sins in a moment shall cease. 

That moment be now! Our petition allow, 

Our present Redeemer and Comforter Thou! (Vol. ii. p. 124.] 


From this inbred sin deliver; 
Let the yoke now be broke; 
Make me Thine forever. 


Partner of Thy perfect nature, 
Let me be now in Thee 
A new, sinless creature. (p. 156{ 


Turn me, Lord, and turn me now, 
To Thy yoke my spirit bow; 
Grant me now the pearl to find 

Of a meek and quiet mind. 


Calm, O calm my troubled breast; 
Let me gain that second rest; 
From my works for ever cease, 
Perfected in holiness. (p. 168.) 


Come in this accepted hour, 
Bring Thy heavenly kingdom in! 
Fill us with the glorious power, 
Rooting out the seeds of sin. (p. 162.) 


Come, Thou dear Lamb, for sinners slain, 
Bring in the cleansing flood: 

Apply, to wash out every stain, 
Thine efficacious blood. 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 39 


O let it sink into our soul 
Deep as the inbred sin; 

Make every wounded spirit whole, 
And every leper clean! (p. 171.) 


Pris’ners of hope, arise, 

And see your Lord appear; 
Lo! on the wings of love he flies, 

And brings redemption near. 


Redemption in His blood 

He calls you to receive; 
‘Come unto Me, the pard’ning God; 

Believe,” He cries, ‘‘ believe!” 


Jesus, to Thee we look, 

Till saved from sin’s remains, 
Reject the inbred tyrant’s yoke, 

And cast away his chains, 


Our nature shall no more 
O’er us dominion have; 
By faith we apprehend the power, 
Which shall for ever save. (p. 188.) 


Jesus, our life, in us appear, 
Who daily die Thy death; 

Reveal Thyself the finisher; _ 
Thy quick’ning Spirit breathe! 


Unfold the hidden mystery, 
The second gift impart; 
Reveal Thy glorious self in me, 
In every waiting heart. (p. 195.) 


In Him we have peace, In Him we have power! 
Preserved by His grace Throughout the dark hour 
In all our temptations He keeps us, to prove 

His utmost salvation, His fulness of love. 


Pronounce the glad word, And bid us be free! 

Ah, hast Thou not, Lord, A blessing for me? 

The peace Thou hast given, This moment impart, 

And open Thy heaven, O Love, in my heart! (p. 324.) 


40 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


A second edition of these hymns was published in the 
year 1752; and that without any other alteration, than fc 
of a few isn mistakes. . 

“I have been the more large in these extracts, based 
hence, it appears, beyond all possibility of exception, that 
_ to this day, both my brother and I maintained, (1.) That 
Christian perfection is that love of God and our neighbor, . 
which implies deliverance from all sin. (2.) That this is 
received merely by faith. (8.) That it is given instan- 
taneously, in one moment. (4.) That we are to expect it, 
not at death, but every moment; that now is the accepted 
time, now is the day of this salvation. 


‘“'T HOUGHTS ON CHRISTIAN PERFECTION,’’? PUBLISHED IN 1759. 


19. At the conference in the 1759, perceiving some 
danger that a diversity of sentiments should insensibly steal 
in among us, we again largely considered this doctrine; and 
soon after I published “Thoughts on Christian Perfection,” 
prefaced with the following advertisement : — 

“The following tract is by no means designed to gratify 
the curiosity of any man. It is not intended to prove the 
doctrine at large, in opposition to those who explode and 
ridicule it ; no, nor to answer the numerous objections against 
it, which may be raised, even by serious men. AJl I intend 
here, is, simply to declare what are my sentiments on this 
head; what Christian perfection does, according to my ap- 
prehension, include, and what it does not; and to add a few 
practical observations and directions relative to the subject. 

“As these thoughts were at fizst thrown together, by way 
of question and answer, I let them continue in the same 
form. They are just the same that I have entertained for 
above twenty years. 

“ What is Christian perfection ? 

“The loving God with all our heart, mind, soul, and 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 41 


strength. This implies, that no wrong temper, none con- 
trary to love, remains in the soul; and that all the thoughts, 
words, and actions, are governed by pure love. 

“Do you affirm that this perfection excludes ali infirmities, 
ignorance, and mistake ? 

“T continually affirm quite the contrary, and always have 
done so. 

“ But how can every thought, word, and work, be governed 
by pure love, and the man be subject, at the same time, to ignor- 
ance and mistake ? 

“T see no contradiction here: ‘A man may be filled with 
pure love, and still be liable to mistake.’ Indeed, I do not 
expect to be freed from actual mistakes, till this mortal puts 
on immortality. I believe this to be a natural consequence 
of the soul’s dwelling in flesh and blood. For we cannot 
now think at all, but by the mediation of those bodily 
organs which have suffered equally with the rest of our 
frame. And hence we cannot avoid sometimes thinking 
wrong, till this corruptible shall have put on incorruption. 

“But we may carry this thought farther yet. A mistake 

‘in judgment may possibly occasion a mistake in practice. 
For instance: Mr. De Renty’s mistake touching the nature 
of mortification, arising from prejudice of education, occa- 
sioned that practical mistake, his wearing an iron girdle. 
And a thousand such instances there may be, even in those 
who are in the highest state of grace. Yet, where every 
word and action springs from love, such a mistake is not 
openly asin. However, it cannot bear the rigor of God’s 
justice, but needs the atoning blood. 

“ What was the judgment of all our brethren who met at 
Bristol in August, 1758, on this head? 

“Tt was expressed in these words: (1.) Every one may 
mistake as long as he lives. (2.) A mistake in opinion may 


42 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


occasion a mistake in practice. (3.) Every such mistake is 
a transgression of the perfect law. Therefore, (4.) Every 
such mistake, were it not for the blood of atonement, would 
expose to eternal damnation. (5.) It follows, that the 
most perfect have continual need of the merits of Christ, 
even for their actual transgressions, and may say for them.” 
‘selves, as well as for their brethren, ‘Forgive us our tres- 
passes.’ 

“This easily accounts for what might otherwise seem to 
be utterly unaccountable ; namely, that those who are not 
offended when we speak of the highest degree of love, yet 
will not hear of living without sin. The reason is, they 
know all men are liable to mistake, and that in practice as 
well as in judgment. But they do not know, or do not ob- 
serve, that this is not sin, if love is the sole principle of 
action. 


“ But still, if they live without sin, does not this. exclude 
the necessity of a Mediator? At least, is it not plain that 
they stand no longer in need of Christ in His priestly office? 

“Far from it. None feel their need of Christ like these; 
none so entirely depend upon Him. For Christ does not 
give life to the soul separate from, but in and with, Himself. 
Hence His words are equally true of all men, in whatsoever 
state of grace they are: ‘As the branch cannot bear fruit of 
itself, except it abide in the vine; no more can ye, except 


ye abide in me: without’ (or separate from) ‘me ye can do 
nothing.’ 


THOSE ENTIRELY SANCTIFIED NEED THE ATONEMENT. 


“Tn every state we need Christ in the following respects, 
(1.) Whatever grace we receive, it is a free gift from Him. 
(2.) We receive it as His purchase, merely in consideration of 
the price He paid. (3.) We have this grace, not only from 
Christ, but in Him. For our perfection is not like that of 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 43 


a tree, which flourishes by the sap derived from its own root, 
but, as was said before, like that of a branch which, united 
to the vine, bears fruit ; ; but, severed from it, is dried up and 
withered. (4.) All our blessings, temporal, spiritual, and 
eternal, depend on His intercession for us, which is one 
branch of His priestly office, whereof therefore we have 
always equal need. (5.) The best of men still need Christ 
in His priestly office, to atone for their omissions, their 
short-comings (as some not improperly speak), their mis- 
takes in judgment and practice, and their defects of various 


_ kinds. For these are all deviations from the perfect law, 


and consequently need an atonement. Yet that they are 
not properly sins, we apprehend may appear from the words 
of St. Paul, ‘He that loveth, hath fulfilled the law; for 
love is the fulfilling of the law,’ Rom. xiii. 10. Now, mis- 
takes, and whatever infirmities necessarily flow from the 
corruptible state of the body, are no way contrary to love; | 
nor therefore, in the Scripture sense, sin. 


INVOLUNTARY TRANSGRESSIONS AND SINLESS PERFECTION. 


To explain myself a little farther on this head: (1.) Not 
only sin, properly so called (that is, a voluntary transgres- 
sion of a known law), but sin, improperly so called (that is, 
an involuntary transgression of a Divine law, known or 
anknown), needs atoning blood. (2.) I believe there is no 
such perfection in this life as excludes these involuntary 
transgressions which I apprehend to be naturally consequent 
on the ignorance and mistakes inseparable from mortality. 
(8.) Therefore sinless perfection is a phrase I never use, lest 
I should seem to contradict myself. (4.) I believe, a per- 
gon filled with the love of God is still liable to these invol- 
untary transgressions. (5.) Such transgressions you may 
call sins, if you please: I do not, for the reasons above 


mentioned. 


44 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


“ What advice would you give to those that do, and those 
that do not, call them so? : 

“Let those that do not call them sins, never think that 
themselves or any other persons are in such astate as that 
they can stand before infinite justice without a Mediator. 
This must argue either the deepest ignorance, or the highest 
arrogance and presumption. 

“Let those who do call them so, beware how they con- 
found these defects with sins, properly so called. 

“But how will they avoid it? How will these be distin- 
guished from those, if they are all promiscuously called 
sins? I am much afraid, if we should allow any sins to be 
consistent with perfection, few would confine the idea to 
those defects concerning which only the assertion could be 
true. 


“ But how can a liableness to mistake consist with perfect 
love? Is not a person who is ‘perfected in love every moment 
under its influence? And can any mistake flow from pure 
love ? 

“T answer, (1.) Many mistakes may consist with pure 
love; (2.) Some may accidentally flow from it: I mean, 
love itself may incline us to mistake. The pure love of our 
neighbor, springing from the love cf God, thinketh no evil, 
believeth and hopeth all things. Now, this very temper, 
unsuspicious, ready to believe and hope the best of all men, 
may occasion our thinking some men better than they really 
are. Here then is a manifest mistake, accidentally flowing 
from pure love. 

“ How shall we avoid setting perfection too high or too 
low ? 

“By keeping to the Bible, and setting it just as high as 
the Scripture does. It is nothing higher and nothing lower 
than this, — the pure love of God and man ; the loving God 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 45 


with all our heart and soul, and our neighbor as ourselves. It 
is love governing the heart and life, running though all our 
tempers, words, and actions. 


On PROFESSING HOLINESS. 


“Suppose one had attained to this, would you advise him 
to speak of it? 

At first perhaps he would scarce be able to refrain, the 
fire would be so hot within him; his desire to declare the 
loving-kindness of the Lord carrying him away like a tor- 
rent. But afterward he might; and then it would be advis- 
able, not to speak of it to them that know not God (it is 
most likely, it would only provoke them to contradict and 
blaspheme) ; nor to others, without some particular reason, 
without some good in view. And then he should have 
especial care to avoid all appearance of boasting ; to speak 
with the deepest humility and reverence, giving all the glory 
to God. 

“ But would it not be better to be entirely silent, not to speak 
of ut at all? 

“By silence, he might avoid many crosses, which will 
naturally and necessarily ensue, if he simply declare, even 
among believers, what God has wrought in his soul. If, 
therefore, such a one were to confer with flesh and blood, 
he would be entirely silent. But this could not be done 
' with a clear conscience: for undoubtedly he ought to speak. 
Men do not light a candle to put under a bushel; much less 
does the all-wise God. He does not raise such a monument 
_ of his power and love, to hide it from all mankind. Rather, 
he intends it as a general blessing to those who are simple 
of heart. He designs thereby, not barely the happiness of 
that individual person, but the animating and encouraging 
others to follow after the same blessing. His will is, ‘that 
many shall see it’ and rejoice, ‘and put their trust in the 


46 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


Lord.’ Nor does anything under heaven more quicken the 
desires of those who are justified, than to converse with 
those whom they believe to have experienced a still higher 
salvation. This places that salvation full in their view, and 
increases their hunger and thirst after it; an advantage 
which must have been entirely lost, had the person so saved 
buried himself in silence. 


“ But is there no way to prevent these crosses which usually 
fall on those who speak of being thus saved ? 


“Tt seems they cannot be prevented altogether, while so 
much of nature remains even in believers. But something 
might be done, if the preacher in every place would; (1.) 
Talk freely with all who speak thus; and, (2.) Labor to 
prevent the unjust or unkind treatment of those in favor of 
whom there is reasonable proof. 


THe EvIpENCES oF BEING ENTIRELY SANCTIFIED. 


“ What is reasonable proof? How may we certainly know 
one that is saved from all sin? 


“We cannot infallibly know one that is thus saved (nor 
even one that is justified), unless it should please God 
to endow us with the miraculous discernment of spirits. 
But we apprehend those would be sufficient proofs to any 
reasonable man, and such as would leave little room to 
doubt either the truth or depth of the work: (1.) If we 
had clear evidence of his exemplary behaviour for some 
time before this supposed change. This would give us 
reason to believe, he would not ‘lie for God,’ but speak 
neither more nor less than he felt; (2.) If he gave a dis- 
tinct account of the time and manner wherein the change 
was wrought, with sound speech which could not be re. 
proved; and, (3.) If it appeared that all his subsequent 
words and actions were holy and unblamable. 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. — 47 


“The short of the matter is this: (1.) I have abundant 
reason to believe this person will not lie; (2.) He testifies be- 
fore God, ‘I feel nosin, but all love; I pray, rejoice, and give 
thanks without ceasing; and I have as clear an inward wit: 
ness, that I am fully renewed, as thét I am justified.’ Now, 
if I have nothing to oppose to this plain testimony, I ought 
in reason to believe it. 

“Tt avails nothing to object, ‘But I know several things 
wherein he is quite mistaken.’ For it has been allowed, 
that all who are in the body are liable to mistake ; and that 
a mistake in judgment may sometimes occasion a mistake 
in practice; though great care is to be taken that no ill use 
be made of this concession. For instance: Even one that 
is perfected in love may mistake with regard to another 
person, and may think him, in a particular case, to be more 
or less faulty than he really is. And hence he may speak | 
to him with more or less severity than the truth requires. 
And in this sense (though that be not the primary meaning 
of St. James), ‘in many things we offend all.’ This, there- 
fore, is no proof at all, that the person so speaking is not 
perfect. 


“ But is it not a proof, if he is surprised or fluttered by a 
noise, a fall, or some sudden danger ? 


“Tt is not; for one may start, tremble, change color, or 
be otherwise disordered in. body, while the soul is calmly 
stayed on God, and remains in perfect peace. Nay, the 
mind itself may be deeply distressed, may be exceeding 
sorrowful, may be perplexed and pressed down by heaviness 
and anguish, even to agony, while the heart cleaves to God 
by perfect love, and the will is wholly resigned to Him. 
Was it not so with the Son of God Himself? Does any 
child of man endure the distress, the anguish, the agony 
which He sustained? And yet He knew no sin. 


48 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


“ But can any one who has a pure heart prefer pleasing to 
unpleasing food ; or use any pleasure of sense which is not 
strictly necessary? If so, how do they differ from others ? 


- “The difference between these and others in taking pleas- 
ant food is, (1.) They fleed none of those things to make 
them happy; for they have a spring of happiness within. 
They see and love God. Hence they rejoice evermore, and 
in everything give thanks. (2.) They may use them, but 
they do not seek them. (3.) They use them sparingly, and 
not for the sake of the thing itself. This being premised, we 
answer directly,— ‘Such a onemay use pleasing food without 
the danger which attends those who are not saved from sin. 
He may prefer it to an unpleasing, though equally whole- 
some food, as a means of increasing thankfulness, with a 
single eye to God, who giveth us all things richly to enjoy. 
On the same principle, he may smell to a flower, or eat a 
bunch of grapes, or take any other pleasure which does not 
lessen but increase his delight in God. Therefore, neither 
can we say that one perfected in love would be incapable of 
marriage, and of worldly business; if he were called there- 
to, he would be more capable than ever; as being able to 
do all things without hurry or carefulness, without any dis- 
traction of spirit. 


“ But if two perfect Christians had children, how could they 
be born in sin, since there was none in the parents ? 


It is a possible, but not a probable case. I doubt whether 
it ever was or ever will be. But waiving this, I answer, 
‘Sin is entailed upon me, not by immediate generation, but 
by my first parent.’ ‘In Adam all died; by the disobedi- 
ence of one, all men were made sinners ;’ all men, without 
exception, who were in his loins when he ate the forbidden 
fruit. 


“We have a remarkable case of this in gardening; grafts 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. AS 


on a crab stalk bear excellent fruit; but sow the kernels of 
this fruit, and what will be the event? They produce as 
mere crabs as ever were eaten. 


THE OUTWARD Lirz or THE REGENERATE AND ENTIRELY SANC- 
TIFIED THE SAME. 
bd 
“ But what does the perfect one do more than others? more 
than the commen believers ? 


“Perhaps nothing; so may the providence of God have 
hedged him in by outward circumstances. Perhaps not 
so much; though he desires and longs to spend and be 
spent for God; at least, not externally: he neither speaks 
so many words, nor does so many works.- As neither did 
our Lord Himself speak so many words, or do so many, no, 
nor so great works, as some of His apostles, John xiv. 12. 
But what then? This is no proof that he has not more 
grace; and by this God measures the outward work. Hear 
ye Him: ‘Verily, I say unto you, this poor widow has cast 
‘in more than them all.’ Verily, this poor man, with his few 
broken words, hath spoken more than them all. Verily, 
this poor woman, that hath given a cup of cold water, hath 
done more than them all. Oh, cease to ‘judge according to 
appearance,’ and learn to ‘judge righteous judgment!’ 


“ But is not this a proof against him, —I feel no power 
either in his words or prayer ? 


“Tt is not: for perhaps that is your own fault. You are 
not likely to feel any power therein, if any of these hin- 
drances lie in the way: (1.) Your own deadness of soul. 
The dead Pharisees felt no power even in His words who 
‘spake as never man spake.’ (2.) The guilt of some unre- 
pented sin lying upon the conscience. (3.) Prejudice to- 
ward him of any kind. (4.) Your not believing that state 
to be attainable wherein he professes to be, (5.) Unreadi- 


50 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


ness to think or own he has attained it. (6.) Overvaluing 
or idolizing him. (7.) Overvaluing yourself and your own 
judgment. If any of these is the case, what wonder is it 
that you feel no power in anything he says? But do not 
others feel it? If they do, your argument falls to the 
ground. And if they do not, do none of these hindrances 
lie in their way too? You must be certain of this before 
you can build any argument thereon; and even then your 
argument will prove no more than that grace and gifts do 
not always go together. 

“¢ But he does not come up to my idea of a perfect Chris- 
tian.’ And perhaps no one ever did, or ever will. For 
your idea may go beyond, or at least beside the Scriptural 
account. It may include more thah the Bible includes 
therein, or, however, something which that does not include. 
Scripture perfection is, pure love filling the heart, and 
governing all the words and actions. If your idea includes 
anything more or anything else, it is not Scriptural; and 
then no wonder, that a Scripturally perfect Christian does 
not come up to it. 

“T fear many stumble on this stumbling-block. They 
include as many ingredients as they please not according to 
Scripture but their own imagination, in their idea of one 
that is perfect; and then readily deny anyone to be such 
who does not answer that imaginary idea. 

“The more care should we take to keep the inp, 
Scriptural account continually in our eye. Pure love 
reigning alone in the heart and life, —this is the whole of 
Scriptural perfection. 


THE SPIRIT WITNESSES TO OUR SANCTIFICATION AS CLEARLY AS 
HE DOES TO OUR JUSTIFICATION. 


“When may a person judge himself to: have attained this ? 
“When,: after having been convinced of inbred sin, by a 


4S TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 51 


far deeper and clearer conviction than that he experienced 
before justification, and after having experienced a gradual 
mortification of it, he experiences a total death to sin, and 
an entire renewal in the love and image of God, so as to re- 
joice evermore, to pray without ceasing, and in everything 
to give thanks. Not that ‘to feel all love and no sin’ is a 
sufficient proof. Several have experienced this for a time 
before their souls were fully renewed. None, therefore, 
ought to believe that the work is done, till there is added 
the testimony of the Spirit, witnessing his entire sanctifica- 
tion, as clearly as his justification. 


WE MAY BE DECEIVED. 


“ But whenee is it, that some imagine they are thus sancti- 
fied, when in reality they are not ? 

It is hence; they do not judge by all the preceding marks, 
but either by part of them, or by others that are ambiguous 
But [ know no instance of a person attending to them all, 
and yet deceived in this matter. I believe there can be none 
in the world. If a man be deeply and fully convinced, after 
justification, of inbred sin; if he then experience a gradual 
mortification of sin, and afterward, an entire renewal in 
the image of God; if to this change, immensely greater 
than that wrought when he was justified, bo added a clear, 
direct witness of the renewal; I judge it as impossible this 
man should be deceived herein, as that God should lie. And 
if one whom I know to be a man of veracity, testify these 
things to me, I ought not, without some sufficient reason, to 
reject his testimony. 

GRADUAL OR INSTANTANEOUS ? 
“Ts this death to sim, and renewal in love, gradual or in 


stantaneous ? 
“ A man may be dying for some time; yet he does not, 


x 


4 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


properly speaking, die, till the soul is separated from the 
body; and in that instant, he lives the life of eternity. In 
like manner, he may be dying to sin for some time; yet he 
is not dead to sin, till sin is separated from his soul; and in 
that instant, he lives the full life of love. And as the change . 
undergone, when the body dies, is of a different kind, and 
infinitely greater than any we had known before, yea, such 
as till then, it is impossible to conceive; so the change 
wrought, when the soul dies to sin, is of a different kind, 
and infinitely greater than any before, and than any can con- 
ceive, till he experiences it. Yet he still grows in grace, in 
the knowledge of Christ, in the love and image of God; and 
will do so, not only till death, but to all eternity.) — 


“ How are we to wait for this change? 


“Not in careless indifference, or indolent inactivity ; but 
in vigorous, universal obedience, in a zealous keeping of all 
the commandments, in watchfulness and painfulness, in de- 
nying ourselves, and taking up our cross daily ; as well as 
in earnest prayer and fasting, and a close attendance on all 
the ordinances of God. And if any man dream of attaining 
it any other way (yea, or of keeping it when it is attained, 
when he has received it even in the largest measure), he 
deceiveth his own soul. It is true, we receive it by simple 
faith; but God does not, will not, give that faith, unless 
we seek it with all diligence, in the way which He hat 
ordained. = 

“This consideration may satisfy those who enquire, why 
so few have received the blessing. Enquire how many are 
seeking it in this way ; and you have a sufficient answer. 

“Prayer especially is wanting. Who continues instant 
therein? Who wrestles with God for this very thing? 
So, ‘ye have not, because ye ask not; or because ye ask 
amiss,’ namely, that; you may be renewed before you die. 


- 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 53 


Before youdie/ Willthatcontent you? Nay, but ask that 
it may be done now; to-day, while it is called to-day. Do 
not call this ‘setting God a time’ Certainly, to-day is His 
time, as well as to-morrow. Make haste, man, make haste! 


Let 
Thy soul break out in strong desire 
The perfect bliss to prove; 
Thy longing heart be all on fire 
To be dissolved in love! 


“ But may we not continue in peace and joy, till we are per- 
Sected in love? 

“Certainly we may; for the kingdom of God is not 
divided against itself; therefore, let not believers be dis- 
couraged from ‘rejoicing in the Lord always.’ And yet we 
may be sensibly pained at the sinful nature that still re- 
mains in us. It is good for us to have a piercing sense of 
this, and a vehement desire to be delivered from it. But 
mis should only incite us the more zealously to fly every 
moment to our strong Helper, the more earnestly to ‘ press 
forward to the mark, the prize of our high calling in Christ 
Jesus. And when the sense of our sin most abounds, the 
sense of His love should much more abound, 


How To TREAY THOSE WHO PROFESS HOLINESS. 

“ How should we treat those who think they have attained ? 

“Examine them candidly, and exhort them to pray fer- 
vently, that God would show them all that is in their hearts. 
The most earnest exhortations to abound in every grace, and 
the strongest cautions to avoid all evil, are given throughout 
the New Testament, to those who are in the highest state of 
grace. But this should be done with the utmost tenderness ; 
and without any harshness, sternness, or sourness. We 
should carefully avoid the very appearance of anger, unkind- 
ness, or contempt. Leave it to Satan thus to tempt, and to 


54 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


his children to cry out, ‘Let us examine him with despite. 
fulness and torture, that we may know his meekness, and 
prove his patience.’ If they are faithful to the grace given, 
they are in no danger of perishing thereby; no, not if they 
remain in that mistake till their spirit is returning to God. 


“ But what hurt can it do to deal harshly with them? 

“Tither they are mistaken, or they are not. If they are. 
it may destroy their souls. This is nothing impossible, no, 
nor improbable. It may so enrage or so discourage them, 
that they will sink and rise no more. If they are not 
mistaken, it may grieve those whom God has not grieved, 
and do much hurt unto our own souls. For, undoubtedly, 
he that toucheth them, toucheth, as it were, the apple of 
God’s eye. If they are indeed, full of His Spirit, to behave 
unkindly or contemptuously to them, is doing no little 
despite to the Spirit of grace. Hereby, likewise, we feed and 
increase in ourselves evil surmising, and many wrong tem- 
pers.. To instance only in one: What self-sufficiency is this, 
to set ourselves up for inquisitors-general, for peremptory 
judges in these deep things of God! Are we qualified for 
the office ? . Can we pronounce, in all cases, how far infirm- 
ity reaches ? what may, and what may not, be resolved into 
it? what may, in all circumstances, and what may not, 
consist with perfect love? Can we precisely determine, 
how it will influence the look, the gesture, the tone of the 
voice? If we can, doubtless we are ‘the men, and wisdom 
shall die with us.’ 


“But of they are displeased at our not believing them, is 
not this a full proof against them? 

“ According as that displeasure is. If they are angry, it 
is a proof against them; if they are grieved, it is not. They 
ought to be grieved, if we disbelieve a real work of God, 
and thereby deprive ourselves of the advantage we might 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 55 


_ have received from it. And we may easily mistake this 
grief for anger, as the outward expressions of both are much 
alike. 


“ But is it not well to find out those who fancy they have 
attained, when they have not? 

“Tt is well to do it by mild, loving examination. But it 
is not well to triumph even over these. It is extremely 
wrong, if we find such an instance, to rejoice as if we had 
found great spoils. Ought we not rather to grieve, to be 
deeply concerned, to let our eyes run down with tears? 
Here is one who seemed to be a living proof of God’s power 
to save to the uttermost; but, alas! it is not as we hoped. 
He is weighed in the balance, and found wanting! And is 
this matter of joy? Ought we not to rejoice a thousand 
times more, if we can find nothing but pure love ? 

“<But he is deceived.’ What then? It is a harmless 
mistake, while he feels nothing but love in his heart. It is 
a mistake which generally argues great grace, a high degree 
both of holiness and happiness. This should be a matter of 
real joy to all that are simple of heart; not the mistake it- 
self, but the height of grace which for a time occasions it. 
I rejoice that this soul is always happy in Christ, always 
full of prayer and thanksgiving. I rejoice that he feels no 
unholy temper, but the pure love of God continually. And 
I will rejoice, if sin is suspended till it is totally destroyed. 


“ Ts there no danger then in a man’s being thus deceived ? 

“Not at the time that he feels no sin. There was danger 
before, and there will be again when he comes into fresh 
trials. But so long as he feels nothing but love animating 
all his thoughts, and words, and actions, he is in no danger; ~ 
he is not only happy, but safe, ‘under the shadow of the 
Almighty ;’ and, for God’s sake, let him continue in that 
love as long as he can, Meantime, you may do well to warn 


56 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


him of the danger that will be, if his love grow cold and 
sin revive; even the danger of casting away hope, and sup- 
posing, that because he hath not attained yet, therefore he 
never shall. 


“ But what, if none have attained it yet? What, if all 
who think so are deceived ? ; 


“Convince me of this, and I will preach it more. But 
understand me right; I do not build any doctrine on this or 
that person. This or any other man may be deceived, and 
I am not moved. But, if there are none made perfect yet, 
God has not sent me to preach perfection. 

“Put a parallel case. For many years I have preached, 
‘There is a peace of God which passeth all understanding.’ 
Convince me that this word has fallen to the ground; that 
in all these years none have attained this peace; that there 
is no living witness of it at this day; and I will preach it 
no more. 

“ ¢Qh, but several persons have died in that peace.’ Per- 
haps so; but I want living witnesses. I cannot, indeed, be 
infallibly certain that this or that person is a witness; but 
if I Were certain there are none such, I must have done with 
this doctrine. 

“<«You misunderstand me. I believe some who died in 
this love, enjoyed it long before their death. But I was not 
certain that their former testimony was true till some hours 
before they died.’ 

“You had not an infallible certainty then: and a reason- 

able certainty you might have had before; such a certainty 
as as might have quickened and comforted your own soul, 
‘and answered all other Christian purposes. Such a certainty 
as this any candid person may have, suppose there be any 
living witness, by talking one hour with that person in the 
love and fear of God. 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. On 


“ But what does it signify whether any have attained i@ or 
no, seeing so many scriptures witness for it? 

“Tf I were convinced that none in England had attained 
what has been so clearly and strongly preached by such a 
- number of preachers, in so many places, and for so long a 
time, I should be clearly convinced that we had all mistaken 
the meaning of those Scriptures; and, therefore, for the 
time to come, I too must teach that ‘sin will remain till 
death.’ ” 


FANATICISM WAS MANIFEST IN LONDON IN 1762. 


20. In the year 1762, there was a great increase of the 
work of God in London. Many, who had hitherto cared for 
none of these things, were deeply convinced of their lost es- 
tate; many found redemption in the blood of Christ; not a few 
backsliders were healed ; and a considerable number of per- 
sons believed that God had saved them from allsin. Easily 
foreseeing that Satan would be endeavoring to sow tares 
among the wheat, I took much pains to-apprize them of the 
danger, particularly with regard to pride and enthusiasm. 
And while I stayed in town, I had reason to hope they con- 
tinued both humble and sober-minded. But almost as soon 
as I was gone, enthusiasm broke in. ‘Two or three began to 
take their own imaginations for impressions from God, and 
thence to suppose that they should never die; and these, 
laboring to bring others into the same opinion, occasioned 
much noise and confusion. Soon after, the same persons, 
with a few more, ran into other extravagances; fancying 
they could not be tempted; that they should feel no more 
pain ; and that they had the gift of prophecy, and of dis- 
cerning of spirits. At my return to London, in autumn, 
some of them stood reproved; but others were got above in 
struction. Meantime, a flood of reproach came upon me 
almost from every quarter; from themselves, because I was 


58 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


checking them on.all occasions; and from others, because 
they said, I did not check them. However, the hand of the 
Lord was not stayed, but more and more sinners were con- 
vinced; while some were almost daily converted to God, 
and others enabled to love him with all their heart. 

21. About this time, a friend at some distance from Lon- 
don wrote to me as follows: — 

“ Be not over alarmed that Satan sows tares among the 
wheat of Christ. It ever has been so, especially on any re- 
markable outpouring of His Spirit; and ever will be so, till 
he is chained up for a thousand years. Till then he will 
always ape, and endeavor to counteract, the work of the Spirit 
of Christ. 

“Qne melancholy effect of this has been, that a world 
who is always asleep in the arms of the evil one, has 
ridiculed every work of the Holy Spirit. 

“But what can real Christians do? Why, if they would 
act worthy of themselves, they should, (1.) Pray that every 
deluded soul may be delivered; (2.) Endeavor to reclaim 
them in the spirit of meekness; and, lastly, take the utmost 
care, both by prayer and watchfulness, that the delusion of 
others may not lessen their zeal in seeking after that uni- 
versal holiness of soul, body, and spirit, ‘without which no 
man shall see the Lord.’ 

“Indeed, this complete new creature is mere madness to 
a mad world. But it is, notwithstanding, the will and wis- 
dom of God. May we all seek after it! 

“But some who maintain this doctrine in its full extent 
are too often guilty of limiting the Almighty. He dis- 
penses His gifts just as He pleases; therefore, it is neither 
wise nor modest to affirm that a person must be a believer 
for any length of time before he is capable of receiving a 
a high degree of the Spirit of holiness. 

“ God’s usual method is one thing, but His sovereign penis 


\ 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 59 


ure is another. He has wise reasons both for hastening and 
retarding His work. Sometimes He comes suddenly, and 
unexpected ; sometimes, not till we have long looked for 
Him. 

“Tndeed, it has been my opinion for many years, that one 

- great cause why men make so little improvement in the 

Divine life is their own coldness, negligence, and unbelief. 
And yet I here speak of believers. 

“‘ May the Spirit of Christ give us a right judgment in all 
things, and ‘fill us with all the fulness of God;’ that so 
we may be ‘perfect and entire, wanting nothing.’ 


22. About the same time, five or six honest enthusiasts 
foretold the world was to end on the 28th of February. I 
immediately withstood them, by every possible means, both 
in public and private. I preached expressly upon the sub- 
ject, both at West Street and Spitalfields. I warned the 
society, again and again, and spoke severally to as many as 
I could; and I saw the fruit of my labor. They made ex- 
ceeding few converts. I believe scarce thirty in our whole 
society. N evertheless, they made abundance of noise, gave 
huge occasion of offense to those who took care to improve 
to the uttermost every occasion against me, and greatly in- 
creased hoth the number and courage of those who opposed 
Christian perfection. 


QUERIES TO THOSE WHO DENY PERFECTION ATTAINABLE IN 
THIS LIFE, 


23. Some questions now published by one of these, in. 
duced a plain man to write the following — 

“Queries, humbly proposed to those who deny perfection 
to be attainable in this life. . 


“(1,.) Has there not been a larger measure of the Holy 
Spirit given under the Gospel, than under the J ewish dis- 


60 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


pensation? If not, in what sense was the Spirit not given 
before Christ was glorified? John vii. 39. 

“(2.) Was that ‘glory which followed the sufferings of 
Christ,’ 1 Peter i. 11, an external glory, or an internal, viz., 
the glory of holiness ? 

“(3.) Has God anywhere in Scripture SOR us 
more than He has promised to us ? 

“(4.) Are the promises of God respecting filed to be 
fulfilled in this life, or only in the next? 

“(5.) Is a Christian under any other laws than those 
which God promises to ‘write in our hearts 7? Jer. xxxi. 31, 
etc.; Heb. viii. 10. 

a (6.) In what sense is ‘the righteousness of the law ful- 
filled in those who walk not after the flesh, but after the 
Spirit’? Rom. viii. 4. 

“(7.) Is it impossible for any one in this life to ‘love 
God with all his heart, and mind, and soul, and strength’ ? 
And is the Christian under any law which is not fulfilied in 
this love ? 

- ©(8.) Does the soul’s going out of the body effect its 
purification from indwelling sin? 

“(9.) If so, is it not something else, not ‘the blood of 
Christ, which cleanseth’ it ‘from all sin’ ? 

10.) If His blood cleanseth us from all sin, rae the 
soul and body are united, is it not in this life ? 

“(41.) If when that union ceases, is it not in the next? 
And is not this too late ? 

“(12.) If in the article of death; what situation is the - 
soul in, when it is neither in the body nor out of it ? 

“(13.) Has Christ anywhere taught us to pray for what 
He never designs to give ? 

“(14.) Has He not taught us to pray, ‘Thy will be done 
on earth, as it is done in heaven?’ And is it uot done per- 
fectly in heaven ? 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 61 


“(15.) If so, has He not taught us to pray for perfection 
on earth ? Does He not then design to give it ? 
/ ©(16.) Did not St. Paul pray according to the will of God, 
_ when he prayed that the Thessalonians might be ‘sanctified 
_ wholly, and preserved’ (in this world, not the next, unless | 
he was praying for the dead) ‘blameless in body, soul, and_/ 
spirit, unto the coming of Jesus Christ ?’ 

“(17.) Do you sincerely desire to be freed from indwelling 
sin in this life ? 

“(18.) If you do, did not God give you that desire ? 

“(19.) If so, did He not give it you to mock you, since it 
is impossible it should ever be fulfilled ? 

“(20.) If you have not sincerity enough even to desire it, 
are you not disputing about matters too high for you ? 

“(21.) Do you ever pray God to ‘cleanse the thoughts of 
your heart, that you ‘may perfectly love Him?’ — 

“(22.) If you neither desire what you ask, nor believe it 
attainable, pray you not as a fool prayeth ? 

“God help thee to consider these questions calmly and 
impartially!” 


Some WITNESSES. 


24. In the latter end of this year, God called to Himself 
that burning and shining light, Jane Cooper. As she was 
both a living and a dying witness of Christian perfection, it 
will not be at all foreign to the subject to add a short 
account of her death, with one of her own letters, containing - 

a plain and artless relation of the manner wherein it pleased 
God to work that great change in her soul: — 
May 2, 1761. 

“YT believe, while memory remains in me, gratitude will 
continue. From the time you preached on Gal. v..5, I saw 
clearly the true state of my soul. That sermon described 
my heart, and what it wanted to be; namely, truly happy 


62 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 





You read Mr. M ’s letter, and it described the religion 
which I desired. From that time the prize appeared in 
view, and I was enabled to follow hard after it. I was kept 
watching unto prayer, sometimes in much distress, at other 
times in patient expectation of the blessing. For some days 
before you left London, my soul was stayed on a promise I 
had applied to me in prayer: ‘The Lord whom ye seek shall 
suddenly come to His temple.’ I believed He would, and 
that He would sit there as a refiner’s fire. The Tuesday 
after you went, I thought I could not sleep unless He ful- 
filled His word that night. I never knew, as I did then, the 
force of these words: ‘Be still, and know that I am God.’ 
I became nothing before Him, and enjoyed perfect calmness 
in my soul. I knew not whether He had destroyed my sin; 
but I desired to know, that I might praise Him. YetI soon 
found the return of unbelief, and groaned, being burdened. 
On Wednesday, I went to London, and sought the Lord 
without ceasing. I promised, if He would save me from 
sin, I would praise Him. I could part with all things, so I 
might win Christ. But I found all these pleas to be nothing 
worth; and that if He saved me, it must be freely, for His 
own name’s sake. On Thursday, I was so much tempted 
_ that I thought of destroying myself, or never conversing 
more with the people of God; and yet I had no doubt of 
His pardoning love; but, — 


‘Twas worse than death my God to leve, 
And not my God alone.’ 


On Friday, my distress was deepened. I endeavored to 
pray, and could not. I went to Mrs. D., who prayed for 
me, and told me it was the death of nature. I opened the 
Bible on, ‘ The fearful and unbelieving shall have their part 
in the lake whith burneth with fire and brimstone.’ I could 
not bear it. ba opened again, on Mark xvi. 6, 7: ‘Be not 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 63 


affrighted; ye seek Jesus of Nazareth. Go your way ; tell 
His disciples He goeth before you into Galilee; there ye 
shall see Him.’ I was encouraged, and enabled to pray, be- 
lieving I should see Jesus at home. I returned that night, 
and found Mrs. G. She prayed for me; and the predesti- 
narian had no plea but, ‘ Lord, thou art no respecter of per- 
sons.’ He proved He was not, by blessing me. I was ina 
moment enabled to lay hold on Jesus Christ, and found sal- 
vation by simple faith. He assured me, the Lord, the King, 
was in the midst of me, and that I should see evil no more. 
I now blessed Him who had visited and redeemed me, and 
was become my ‘wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and 
redemption.’ I saw Jesus altogether lovely; and knew He > 
was mine in all His offices. And, glory be to Him, He now 
reigns in my heart without a rival. I find no will but His. 
I feel no pride; nor any affection but what is placed on 
Him. I know it is by faith I stand; and that watching 
unto prayer must be the guard of faith, I am happy in 
God this moment, and I believe for the next. I have often 
read the chapter you mention (1 Cor. xiii.), and compared 
my heart and life with it. In so doing, I feel my short- 
comings, and the need I have of the atoning blood. Yet I 
dare not say I do not feel a measure of the love there de- 
scribed, though I am not all I shall be. I desire to be lost 
in that ‘love which passeth knowledge.’ I see ‘the just 
shall live by faith’; and unto me, who am less than the 
least of all saints, is this grace given. If I were an arch- 
angel, I should veil my face before Him, and let silence 
speak His praise!” 

The following account was given by one who was an eye 
and ear witness of what she relates : — 

“(1,) In the beginning of November, she seemed to have 
a foresight of what was coming upon her, and used fre- 
quently to sing these words : — 


64 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


‘When pain o’er this weak flesh prevails, 
With lamb-like patience arm my breast.’ 


And when she sent to me, to let me know she was ill, she 
wrote in her note, ‘I suffer the will of Jesus; all He sends 
is sweetened by His love. I am as happy as if I heard a 
voice say : — 

‘For me my elder brethren stay, 


And angels beckon me away, 
And Jesus bids me come !’ 


“(2.) Upon my telling her, ‘I cannot choose life or death 
for you,’ she said, ‘I asked the Lord, that, if it was His will, 
I might die first. And He told me, you should survive me, 
and that you should close my eyes.’ When we perceived it 
was the small-pox, I said to her, ‘My dear, you will not be 
frightened if we tell you what is your distemper.’ She 
said, ‘I cannot be frighted at His will.’ 


“(3.) The distemper was soon very heavy upon her; but 
so much the more was her faith strengthened. Tuesday, 
November 16, she said to me, ‘I have been worshipping be 
fore the throne in a glorious manner; my soul was so let 
into God!’ I said, ‘Did the Lord give you any particular 
promise?’ ‘No,’ replied she; ‘it was all 


‘ That sacred awe that dares not move, 
. And all the silent heaven of love.’ 


“(4.) On Thursday, upon my asking, ‘ What have you to 
say to me?’ she said, ‘Nay, nothing but what you know 
already: God is love.’ I asked, ‘Have you any particular 
promise?’ She replied, ‘I do not seem to want any; I can 
live without. I shall die a lump of deformity, but shall meet 
you all glorious : and meantime, I shall still have tne 
with your spirit.’ 


“(5.) Mr. M. asked, wha sne thought the most excellent 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 65 


_ way to walk in, and what were its chief hindrances. She 
answered: ‘The greatest hindrance is generally from the 
natural constitution. It was mine to be reserved, to be very 
quiet, to suffer much, and to say little. Some may think 
one way more excellent, and some another: but the thing is 
to live in the will of God. For some months past, when I 
have been particularly devoted to this, I have felt such a 
guidance of His Spirit, and the unction which I have re- 
ceived from the Holy One has so taught me of all things, 
that I needed not any man should teach me, save as this 
anointing teacheth.’ 


“(6.) On Friday morning she said, ‘I believe I shall die.’ 
She then sat up in her bed and said, ‘ Lord, I bless Thee, that 
Thou art ever with me, and all Thou hast is mine. Thy love 
is greater than my weakness, greater than my helplessness, 
greater than my unworthiness. Lord, Thou sayest éo cor- 
ruption, Thou art my sister! And glory be to Thee, O Jesus, 
Thou art my brother. Let me comprehend, with all saints, 
the length, and breadth, and depth, and height of Thy love! 
Bless these’ (some that were present); ‘let them be every 
moment exercised in all things as Thou wouldest have them 
to be.’ 


*(7.) Some hours after, it seemed as if the agonies of 
death were just coming upon her; but her face was full of 
smiles of triumph, and she clapped her hands for joy. Mrs. 
©. said, ‘My dear, you are more than conqueror through the 
blood of the Lamb.’ She answered, ‘Yes, O yes, sweet 
Jesus! O-death, where is thy sting ?’ She then lay as ina 
doze for some time. Afterward, she strove to speak, but 
could not; however, she ee her love by shaking hands 
with all in the room. 


“(8,) Mr. W. then came. She said, ‘Sir, I did not know 
that I should live to see you. ButI am glad the Lord has 


66 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


given me this opportunity, and likewise power to speak to 
you. Ilove you. You have always preached the strictest 
doctrine; and I loved to follow it. Do so still, whoever is 
pleased or displeased,’ He asked, ‘Do you now believe you 
are saved from sin?’ She said, ‘Yes; I have had no doubt 
of it for many months. That I ever had, was, because I 

_did not abide in the faith. Inow feel I have keptthe faith ; 
and perfect love casteth out all fear. As to you, the Lord 
promised me, your latter works should exceed your former, 
though I do not live to see it. Ihave been a great enthu- 
siast, as they term it, these six months ; but never lived so 
near the heart of Christ in my life. You, sir, desire to 
comfort the hearts of hundreds by following that simplicity 
your soul loves.’ 


“(9.) To one who had received the love of God under her 
prayer, she said, ‘I feel I have not followed a cunningly 
devised fable ; for lam as happy asIcanlive. Do you press 
on, and stop not short of the mark.’ To Miss M——s she 
said, ‘Love Christ; He loves you. I believe I shall.see you 
at the right hand of God: But as one star differs from an- 
other star in glory, so shallit be inthe resurrection. I charge 
you, in the presence of God, meet me in that day all glori- 
ous within. Avoid all conformity to the world. You are 
robbed of many of your privileges. I know I shall be 
found blameless. Do you labor to be found of Him in peace, 
without spot.’ 

“(10.) Saturday morning, she prayed nearly as follows: 
‘I know, my Lord, my life is prolonged only to do Thy will. 
And though I should never eat or drink more’ (she had not 
swallowed anything for near eight-and-twenty hours), ‘Thy 
will be done. I am willing to be kept so a twelve-month : 
Man liveth not by bread alone. I praise Thee that there is 
not a shadow of complaining in our streets. In that sense 
we know not what sickness means, Indeed, Lord, neither 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 67 


life, nor death, nor things present, nor things to come, no, nor 
any creature, shall separate us from Thy love one moment. 
Bless these, that there be no lack in their souls. I believe 
there shall not. JI pray in faith.’ 

“On Sunday and Monday she was light-headed, but sensi- 
ble at times. It then plainly appeared, her heart was still 
in heaven. One said to her, ‘Jesus is our mark.’ She re- 
plied: ‘I have but one mark; I am all spiritual.’ Miss M. 
said to her, ‘You dwell in God.’ She answered: ‘ Alto- 
gether.’ A person asked her, ‘Do you love me?’ She said, 
‘QO, I love Christ; I love my Christ.’ To another she said, 
‘I shall not long be here; Jesus is precious, very precious 
indeed.’ She said to Miss M., ‘The Lord is very good; He 
keeps my soul above all.’ For fifteen hours before she died, 
she was in strong convulsions: her sufferings were extreme. 
One said, ‘You are made perfect through sufferings.’ She 
said, ‘More and more so.’ After lying quiet some time, she 
said, ‘Lord, Thou art strong!’ Then pausing a considerable 
space, she uttered her last words, ‘ Jesus is all in all to me: 
glory be to Him through time and eternity.’ After this, she 
lay still for about half an hour, and then expired without a 
sigh or groan.” 


25. The next year, the number of those who believed 
they were saved from sin still increasing, I judged it need- 
ful to publish, chiefly for their use, 


“FARTHER THOUGHTS ON CHRISTIAN PERFECTION ”:— 


“1. How is ‘ Christ the end of the law for righteousness to 
every one that believeth?’ Rom x. 4. 


In order to understand this, you must understand what 
law is here spoken of; and this, I apprehend, is, (1.) The 
Mosaic law, the whole Mosaic dispensation ; which St. Paul 
continually speaks of as one, though containing three parts, 


68 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


the political, moral, and ceremonial. (2.) The Adamic law, 
that ziven to Adam in innocence, properly called ‘the law 
of works.’ This is in substance the same with the angelic 
law, being common to angelsand men. It required that man 
should use, to the glory of God, all the powers with whith he 
was created. Now, he was created free from any defect, either 
in his understanding or his affections. His body was then 
no clog to the mind; it did not hinder his apprehending all 
things clearly, judging truly concerning them, and reasoning 
justly, if he reasoned at all, I say, if he reasoned ; for 
possibly he did not. Perhaps he had no need of reasoning, 
till his corruptible body pressed down the mind, and im- 
paired its native faculties. Perhaps, till then, the mind saw 
every truth that offered as directly asthe eye now sees the 
light. ; 

“Consequently, this law, proportioned to his original 
powers, required that he should always think, always speak, 
and always act precisely right, in every point whatever. 
He was well able so to do: and God could not but require 
the service he was able to pay. 

“But Adam fell; and his incorruptible body became cor- 
ruptible; and ever mek it is a clog to the soul, and hinders 
its operations. Hence, at preseni, no child of man can at 
all times apprehend clearly, or judge truly. And where 
either the judgment or apprehension is wrong, it is impos- 
sible to reason justly. Therefore, it is as natural for a man 
to mistake as to breathe; and he can no more live without 
the one than without the other: consequently no man is 
able to perform the service which the Adamic law requires. 

“ And no man is obliged to perform it; God does not re- 
quire it of any man: for Christ is the oan of the Adamic, 
as well as the Mosaic, law. By His death He hath put an 
end to both; He hath abolished both the one and the other, 
with regard to man; and the obligation to observe either 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 69 . 


the one or the other is vanished away. Nor is any man 
living bound to observe the Adamic more than the Mosaic 
law. (I mean, it is not the condition either of present or 
future salvation.) 

“In the room of this, Christ hath established another, 
“namely, the law of faith. Not every one that doeth, but 
every one that believeth, now receiveth righteousness, in the 
full sense of the word; that is, he is justified, sanctified 
and glorified. 

“2. Are we then dead to the law? 

“We are ‘dead to the law, by the body of Christ’ given 
for us; Rom. vii. 4; to the Adamic as well as Mosaic law. 
_ We are wholly freed therefrom by His death; that law expir- 
ing with Him. 

“3. How, then, are we ‘not without law to God, but under 
the law to Christ’? 1 Cor. ix. 21. 

“We are without that law; butit does not follow that we 
are without any law; for God hath established another law 
in its place, even the law of faith; and we are all under 
this law to God and to Christ; both our Creator and our 
Redeemer require us to observe it. 


LOVE IS THE FULFILLING OF THE LAW. 

“4, Is love the fulfilling of this law? 

“Unquestionably it is. The whole law under which we 
now are, is fulfilled by love: Rom. xiii. 9, 10. Faith work- 
ing or animated by love is all that God now requires of 
man. He has substituted (not sincerity, but) love, in the 
room of angelic perfection. 

“5. How is ‘love the end of the commandment’? 1 Tim i. 
5. 

“Tt is the end of every commandment of God. It is the 
point aimed at by the whole and every part of the Chris- 


70 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


tian institution. The foundation is faith, purifying the 
heart; the end love, preserving a good conscience. 


“6. What love is this? 

“ The loving the Lord our God with all our heart, mind, 
soul, and strength; and the loving our neighbor, every man 
as ourselves, as our own souls. 


“7. What are the fruits or properties of this love? 

“St. Paul informs us at large, love is long-suffering. It 
suffers all the weaknesses of the children of God, all the 
wickedness of the children of the world; and that not for 
a little time only, but as long as God pleases. In all, it 
sees the hand of God, and willingly submits thereto. Mean- 
‘time, itis kind. In all, and after all, it suffers, it is soft, 
mild, tender, benign. ‘ Love envieth not ;’ it excludes every 
kind and degree of envy out of the heart; ‘love acteth not 
rashly,’ in a violent, headstrong manner, nor passes any rash 
or severe judgment: it ‘doth not behave itself indecently ;’ 
is not rude, does not act out of character: ‘seeketh not her 
own’ ease, pleasure, honor, or profit; ‘is not provoked; 
expels all anger from the heart: ‘thinketh no evil;’ cast- 
eth out all jealousy, suspiciousness, and readiness to believe 
evil: ‘rejoiceth not in iniquity ;’ yea, weeps at the sin or 
folly of its bitterest enemies: ‘but rejoiceth in the truth;’ 
in the holiness and happiness of every child of man. ‘Love 
covereth all things,’ speaks evil of no man; ‘believeth all 
things,’ that tend to the advantage of another’s character. 
It ‘hopeth’ all things,’ whatever may extenuate the faults 
which cannot be denied; and it ‘endureth all things,’ which 
God can permit, or men and devils inflict. This is ‘the 
law of Christ, the perfect law, the law of liberty.’ 

“And this distinction between the ‘law of faith’ (or love) 
and ‘the law of works,’ is neither a subtle nor an unneces- 
sary distinction. It is plain, easy, and intelligible to any 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. fa 


common understanding. And it is absolutely necessary, to 
prevent a thousand doubts and fears, even in those who do 
‘walk in love.’ 


“8. But do we not ‘in many things offend all,’ yea, the best 
of us, even against this law? 

“Tn one sense we do not, while all‘ our tempers, and 
thoughts, and words, and works, spring from love. But in 
another we do, and shall do, more or less, as long as we re- 
main in the body. For neither love nor the ‘ unction of the 
Holy One’ makes us infallible: therefore, through unavoid- 
able defect of understanding, we cannot but mistake in 
many things. And these mistakes will frequently occasion 
something wrong, both in our temper, and words, and 
actions. From mistaking his character, we may love a per- 
son less than he really deserves. And by the same mistake 
- we are unavoidably led to speak or act, with regard to that 
person, in such a manner as is contrary to this law in some 
or other of the preceding instances. 


THE ATONEMENT NEEDED. 

“9, Do we not then need Christ, even on this account ? 

“The holiest of men still need Christ, as their Prophet, 
as ‘the light of the world.’ For He does not give them 
light, but from moment to moment; the instant He with- 
- draws, all is darkness. They still need Christ as their 
King; for God does not give them a stock of holiness. 
But unless they receive a supply every moment, nothing but 
unholiness would remain. They still need Christ as their 
- Priest, to make atonement for their holy things. Even per- 
fect holiness is acceptable to God only through Jesus Christ. 


“10. May not, then, the very best of men adopt the dying 
martyr’s confession: ‘Iam in myself nothing but sin, dark: 
ness hell ; but thou art my light, my holiness, my heaven *h 


72 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


“Not exactly. But the best of men say, ‘Thou art my 
light, my holiness, my heaven. Through my union with 
Thee, I am full of light, of holiness, and happiness. But 
if I were left to myself, I should be nothing but sin, dark 
ness, hell.’ 

“But to proceed: The best of men need Christ as their 
Priest, their Atonement, their Advocate with the Father; 
not only as the continuance of their every blessing depends 
on His death and intercession, but on account of their com- 
ing short of the law of love. For every man living does 
so. You who feel all love, compare yourselves with the 
preceding description. Weigh yourselves in this balance, 
~ and see if you are not wanting in many particulars. 


“11. But ¢f all this be consistent with Christian perfection, 
that perfection is not freedom from all sin ; seeing ‘sin is the 
transgression of the law’: and the perfect transgress the very 
law they are under. Besides, they need the atonement of 
Christ ; and [He is the atonement of nothing but sin. Is, 
then, the term, ‘sinless perfection, proper ? 


“Tt is not worth disputing about. But observe in what 
sense the persons in question need the atonement of Christ. 
They do not need Him to reconcile them to God afresh; for 
they are reconciled. They do not need Him to restore the 
favor of God, but to continue it. He does not procure par- 
don for them anew, but ‘ever liveth to make intercession 
for them ;’ and ‘by one offering He hath perfected forever 
them that are sanctified,’ Heb. x. 14. 

“For want of duly considering this, some deny that they 
need the atonement of Christ. Indeed, exceeding few; I 
do not remember to have found five of them in England. 
Of the two, I would sooner give up perfection. But we 
need not give up either one or the other. The perfection I 
hold, ‘ Love rejoicing exermore, praying without ceasing, and 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. te 


in everything giving thanks,’ is well consistent with ib; i 
any hold a perfection which is not, they must look to it. 


“12. Does then Christian perfection imply any more than 
sincerity ? 

“Not if you mean by that word, love filling the heart, 
expelling pride, anger, desire, self-will; rejoicing evermoré, 
praying without ceasing, and in everything giving thanks. 
But I doubt, few use sincerity in this sense. Therefore, I 
think the old word is best. 

“A person may be sincere who has all his natural tempers, 
pride, anger, lust, self-will. But he is not perfect, till his 
heart is cleansed from these, and all its other corruptions. 

“To clear this point a little farther: I know many that 
love God with all their heart. He is their one desire, their 
one delight, and they are continually happy in Him. They 
love their neighbor as themselves. They feel as sincere, 
fervent, constant a desire for the happiness of every man, 
good or bad, friend or enemy, as for their own. They re- 
joice evermore, pray without ceasing, and in everything give 
thanks. Their souls are continually streaming up to God, 
in holy joy, prayer, and praise. This isa point of fact; and 
this is plain, sound, Scriptural experience. 

“ But even these souls dwell in a shattered body, and are 
so pressed down thereby, that they cannot always exert 
themselves as they would, by thinking, speaking, and acting, 
precisely right. For want of better bodily organs, they 
must at times think, speak, or act wrong; not, indeed, 
through a defect of love, but through a defect of knowledge. 
And while this is the case, notwithstanding that defect, and 
its consequences, they fulfil the law of love. 

“Yet, as even in this case, there is not a full conformity 
to the perfect law, so the moss perfect do, on this very account, 
need the blood of atonement, and may properly for them- 


T4 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION. 


selves, as well as for their brethren, say, ‘Forgive us our 
trespasses.’ : 


“13, But if Christ has put an end to that law, what need 
of any atonement for their transgressing tt? 

“ Observe in what sense He has put an end to it, and the 
difficulty vanishes. Were it not for the abiding merit of 
His death, and His continual intercession for us, the law 
would condemn us'still. These, therefore, we still need for 
every transgression of it. 


~“ 


HOLINESS DOES NOT EXCLUDE TEMPTATION. 
“14, But can one that is saved from sin be tempted ? 
“Yes; for Christ was tempted. 


“15: However what you call temptation, I call the corrup- 
tion of my heart. And how will you distinguish one from the 
other ? 

“In some cases, it is impossible to distinguish, without 
the direct witness of the Spirit. But in general, one may 
distinguish thus : — 

“One commends me. Here isatemptationto pride. But 
instantly my soul is humbled before God. And I feel no 
pride; of which I am as sure, as that pride is not hu- 
mility. ; 

“ A man strikes me. Here isatemptationtoanger. But 
my heart overflows with love. And I feel no anger at all; 
of which I can be as sure, as that love and anger are not the © 
same. 

“ A woman solicits me. Here isatemptation tolust. But 
in an instant, Ishrink back. And I feel no desire or lust at 
all; of which I can be as sure, as that my hand is cold or 
hot. : 

“Thus it is, if I am tempted by a present object; and it 
is the same, if, when it is absent, the devil recalls a com- 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 75 


mendation, an injury, or a woman, to my miud. In the 
instant, the soul repels the temptation, and remains filled 
with pure love. 

“ And the difference is still plainer, when I compare my 
present state with my past, wherein I felt temptation, and 
corruption too. 


How WE mAy KNow THAT WE ARE SANCTIFIED. 


“16. But how do you know that you are sanctified, saved 
from your inbred corruption ? 

“T can know it no otherwise than I know that I am justi- 
fied. ‘Hereby know we that we are of God,’ in either sense, 
‘by the Spirit that He hath given us.’ 

“We know it by the witness and by the fruit of the Spirit. 
And, First, by the witness. As, when we were justified, the 
Spirit bore witness with our spirit, that our sins were for- 
given; so, when we were sanctified, He bore witness that 
they were taken away. Indeed, the witness of sanctification 
is not always clear at first (as neither is that of justifica- 
tion) ; neither is it afterward always the same, but like that 
of justification, sometimes stronger, and sometimes fainter. 
Yea, and sometimes it is withdrawn. Yet, in general, the 
latter testimony of the Spirit, is both as clear and as steady 
as the former. 


“17. But what need is there of rt, seeing sanctification is a 
real change, not a relative only, like justification ? 

“But is the new birth a relative change only? Is not 
- this a real change? Therefore, if we need no witness of our 
sanctification, because it is a real change, for the same 
reason, we should need none, that we are born of, or are, the 

children of God. 
_  &18, But does not sanctification shine by its own light? 
“ And does not the new birth too? Sometimes it does, 


76 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


and so does sanctification; at others, it does not. In the 
hour of temptation, Satan clouds the work of God, and in- 
jects various doubts and reasonings, especially in those who 
have either very weak or very strong understandings. At 
such times, there is absolute need of that witness, without 
which, the work of sanctification not only could not be dis- 
cerned, but could no longer subsist. Were it not for this, 
the soul could not then abide in the love of God; much less 
could it rejoice evermore, and in every thing give thanks. 
In these circumstances, therefore, a direct testimony that 
we are sanctified, is necessary in the highest degree. 

“ But I have no witness that Iam saved from sin. And 
yet I have no doubt of it. Very well; as long as you have 
no doubt, it is enough; when you have, you will need that 
witness. 


SCRIPTURE PROOF OF THE WITNESS OF THE SPIRIT TO SANCTIFI- 
CATION. 
“19. But what scripture makes mention of any such thing, 
or gives any reason to expect it ? 


“That Scripture, ‘We have received, not the spirit that is 
of the world, but the Spirit which is of God; that we may 
know the things which are freely given us of God,’ 1 Cor. 
ii. 12. 

“Now surely sanctificition is one of ‘the things which 
are freely given us of God.’ And no possible reagon can be 
assigned why this should be excepted, when the Apostle 


says, ‘We receive the Spirit’ for this very end, ‘that we. 


may know the things which are thus ‘freely given us.’ 

“Is not the same thing implied in that well-known Serip- 
ture, ‘The Spirit itself witnesses with our spirit, that we are 
the children of God ?’ Rom. viii. 16. Does He witness this 
only to those who are children of God in the lowest sense ? 
Nay, but to those also who are such in the highest sense. 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. T7 


And does He not witness, that they are such in the highest 
sense ? What reason have we to doubt it.? 

“What if a man were to affirm (as, indeed, many do) that 
this witness belongs only to the highest class of Christians ? 
- Would not you answer, ‘The Apostle makes no restriction ; 
therefore, doubtless, it belongs to all the children of God’ ? 
And will not the same answer hold, if any affirm, that it 
belongs only to the lowest class ? 

“Consider likewise 1 John v.19: ‘ We know that we are of 
God.” How? ‘By theSpirit that He hath given us.’ Nay, 
‘hereby we know that He abideth in us.’ And what ground 
have we, either from Scripture or reason, to exclude the wit: 
ness, any more than the fruit, of the Spirit, from being here 
intended? By this, then, also, ‘we know that we are of 
God,’ and in what sense we are so; whether we are babes, 
young men, or fathers, we know in the same manner. 

“Not that I affirm that all young men, or even fathers, 
have this testimony every moment. There may be intermis- 
sions, of the direct testimony that they are thus born of God; 
but these intermissions are fewer and shorter as they grow 
ap in Christ; and some have the testimony both of their 
justification and sanctification, without any intermission 
at all; which I presume, more might have, did they walk 
humbly and closely with God. _ ; 


“20. May not some of them have a testimony from the 
Spirit, that they shall not finally fall from God? 

“They may. And this persuasion, that neither life nor 
death shall separate them from Him, far from being hurt- 
ful, may in some circumstances be extremely useful. These, 
therefore, we should in no wise grieve, but earnestly encour- 
age them to ‘hold the beginning of their confidence stead- 
fast to the end.’ 


“21. But have any a testimony from the Spirit that they 
shall never sin? - 


78 - CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


“We know not what God may vouchsafe to some particu- 
lar persons; but we do not find any general state described 
in Seripture, from which a man cannot draw back to sin. 
If there were any state wherein this was impossible, it would 
be that of these who are sanctified, who are ‘fathers in ~ 
Christ, who rejoice evermore, pray without ceasing, and in 
everything give thanks’; but itis not impossible for these 
to draw back. They who are sanctified yet may fall and 
perish: Heb. x. 29. Even fathers in Christ need that warn- 
ing: ‘ Love not the world,’ 1 Johnii.15. They who ‘rejoice, 
pray,’ and ‘give thanks without ceasing,’ may, nevertheless, 
‘quench the Spirit,’ 1 Thess. v. 16, etc. Nay, even they who 
are ‘sealed unto the day of redemption,’ may yet ‘ grieve the 
Holy Spirit of God,’ Eph. iv. 30. 

“Although, therefore, God may give such a witness to 
some particular persons, yet it is not to be expected by 
Christians in general, there being no Scripture whereon to 
ground such an expectation. 


THE FRUIT OF THE SPIRIT IN SANCTIFICATION. 


“22. By what ‘fruit of the Spirit, may we ‘know that we 
are of God,’ even in the highest sense? 


“By love, joy, peace, always abiding; by invariable long- 
suffering, patience, resignation; by gentleness, triumphing 
over all provocation; by goodness, mildness, sweetness, ten- 
derness of spirit; by fidelity, simplicity, godly sincerity; by 
meekness, calmness, evenness of spirit; by temperance, not 
only in food. and sleep, but in all things natural and spiritual. 


“23. But what great matter is there in this? Have we 
not all this when we are justified ? 


“What! total resignation to the will of God, without any 
mixture of self-will ? gentleness, without any touch of anger, ~ 
even the moment we are provoked? love to God, without 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 79 


the least love to the creature, but in and for God, excluding 
all pride? love to man, excluding all envy, all jealousy, and 
rash judging? meekness, keeping the whole soul inviolably 
calm? and temperance in all things? Deny that any ever 
came up to this, if you please; but do not say all who are 
justified do. 


THE JUSTIFIED FEEL ANGER, PRE, AND SELF-WILL. 


“24. But some who are newly justified do. What then 
will we say to these? 


“Tf they really do, I will say they are sanctified; saved 
from sin in that moment; and that they never need lose 
what God has given, or feel sin any more. 

“But certainly this is an exempt case. It is otherwise 
with the generality of those that are justified: they feel in 
themselves more or less pride, anger, self-will, a heart bent 
to backsliding. And, till they have gradually mortified 
these, they are not fully renewed in love. 


“25. But is not this the case of all that are justified? Do 
they not gradually die to sin and grow in grace, till at, or per- 
haps a little before, death, God perfects them in love? 


“TI believe this is the case of most, but not all. God 
usually gives a considerable time for men to receive light, 
to grow in grace, to do and suffer His will, before they are 
either justified or sanctified ; but He does not invariably ad- 
here to this ; sometimes He ‘cuts short His work’; He does 
the work of many years in a few weeks; perhaps in a week, 
a day, an hour. He justifies or sanctifies both those who 
have done or suffered nothing, and who have not had time 
for a gradual growth either in light or grace. And ‘may He 
not do what He will with His own? Is thine eye evil, be- 


cause He is good ?’ 
“Tt need not, therefore, be affirmed over and over, and 


80 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


proved by forty texts of Scripture, either that most men are 
perfected in love at last, that there is a gradual work of God 
in the soul, or that, generally speaking, it is a long time, 
even many years, before sin is destroyed. All this we know: 
but we know likewise, that God may, with man’s good leave, 
‘cut short His work,’ in whatever degree He pleases, and de 
the usual work of many years ina moment. He does so in 
many instances; and yet there is a gradual work, both be- 
fore and after that moment; so that one may affirm the work 
is gradual; another, it is instantaneous, without any manner ~ 
of contradiction. 


“26. Does St. Paul mean any more by being ‘sealed with. 
the Spirit,’ than being ‘renewed in love’ ? 

“Perhaps in one place (2 Cor. i. 22), he does not mean so 
much; but in another (Eph. i. 13), he seems to include both 
the fruit and the witness; and that in a higher degree than 
we experience even when we are first ‘renewed in love’; 
God ‘sealeth us with the Spirit of promise,’ by giving us ‘the 
full assurance of hope’; such a confidence of receiving all 
the promises of God, as excludes the possibility of doubting; 
with that Holy Spirit, by universal holiness, stamping the 
whole image of God on our hearts. 


“27. But how can those who are thus sealed, ‘grieve the 
Holy Spirit of God’? 

“St. Paul tells you very particularly, (1.) By such conver- 
sation as is not profitable, not to the use of edifying, not apt 
to minister grace to the hearers. (2.) By relapsing into 
bitterness or want of kindness. (3.) By wrath, lasting dis- 
pleasure, or want of tender-heartedness. (4.) By anger, 
however soon it is over; want of instantly forgiving one 
another. (5.) By clamor or bawling, loud, harsh, rough 
speaking. (6.) By evil speaking, whispering, tale-bearing ; 
needlessly mentioning the fault of an absent person, though 
in ever so soft a manner. 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 81 


How HE VizWwepD THOSE IN LONDON WHO WERE SANCTIFIED. 


“28. What do you think of those in London, who seem to 
have been lately ‘renewed in love’ ? 


“There is something very peculiar in the experience of 
the greater part of them. One would expect that a believer 
should first be filled with love, and thereby emptied of sin; 
whereas these were emptied of sin first, and then filled with 
love. Perhaps it pleased God to work in this manner, to ~ 
make His work more plain and undeniable; and to distin- 
guish it more clearly from that overflowing love which is 
often felt even in a justified state. 

“Tt seems likewise most agreeable to the great promise: 
‘From all your filthiness I will cleanse you; a new heart 
also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within 
you,’ Ezek. xxxvi. 25, 26. — 

“But I do not think of them all alike; there is a wide 
difference between some of them and others. I think most 
of them with whom I have spoken, have much faith, love, 
joy, and peace. Some of these I believe are renewed in 
love, and have the direct witness of it; and they manifest 
the fruit above described, in all their words and actions. 
- Now, let any man call this what he will, it is what I call 
perfection. 

“But some who have nck love, peace, and joy, yet have 
not the direct witness; and others who think they have, are, 
nevertheless, manifestly wanting in the fruit. How many I 
will not say; perhaps one in ten; perhaps more or fewer. 
But some are undeniably wanting in long-suffering, Christian 
resignation. They do not see the hand of God in whatever 
occurs, and cheerfully embrace it. They do not in every- 
thing give thanks, and rejoice evermore. They are not 
happy, at least, not always happy; for sometimes they com. 
plain. They say this or that is hard! 


oy Ae CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


“Some are wanting in gentleness. They resist evil, in- 
stead of turning the other cheek. ‘They do not receive re- 
proach with gentleness; no, nor even reproof. Nay, they 
are not able to bear contradiction, without the appearance, 
at least, of resentment. If they are reproved or contradicted, 
though mildly, they do. not take it well; they behave with 
more distance aud reserve than they did before. If they 
are reproved or contradicted harshly, they answer it with 
harshness; with a loud voice, or with an angry tone, or in a 
sharp and surly manner. ‘They speak sharply or roughly, 
when they reprove others; and behave roughly to their 
inferiors. 

“Some are wanting in goodness. They are not kind, mild, 
sweet, amiable, soft, and loving at all times, in their spirit, 
in their words, in their look and air, in the whole tenor of 
their behavior; and that to all, high and low, rich and poor, 
without respect of persons; particularly to them that are 
out of the way, to opposers, and to those of their own 
household. They do not long, study, endeavor, by every 
means, to make all about them happy. They can see them 
uneasy, and not be concerned; perhaps they make them so; 
and then wipe their mouths ead say, ‘Why, they deserve 
it; it is their own fault.’ 

“ Some are wanting in fidelity, a nice regard to truth, 
simplicity, and godly sincerity. Their love is hardly with- 
out dissimulation; something like guile is found in their 
mouth. To.avoid roughness, they lean to the other extreme. 
They are smooth to an excess, so as scarce to avoid a degree 
of fawning, or of seeming to mean what they do not. 

“Some are wanting in meekness, quietness of spirit, com- 
posure, evenness of temper. They are up and down, some- 
times high, sometimes low; their mind is not well balanced. 
Their affections are either not in due proportion; they have 
too much of one, too little of another; or they are not duly 


Bee re sn pili 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 83 


mixed and tempered together, so as to counterpoise each 
other. Hence there is oftena jar. Their soul is out of 
tune, and cannot make the true harmony. 

“Some are wanting in temperance. They do not steadily 
use that kind and degree of food, which they know, or 
might know, would most conduce to the health, strength, 
and vigor, of the body: or they are not temperate in sleep; 
they do not rigorously adhere to what is best both for body 
and mind; otherwise they would constantly go to bed and 
rise early, and ata fixed hour: or they sup late, which is 
neither good for body nor soul: or they use neither fasting 
nor abstinence: or they prefer (which are so many sorts 
of intemperance) that preaching, reading, or conversation, 
which gives them transient joy and comfort, before that 
which brings godly sorrow, or instruction in righteousness. 
Such joy is not sanctified ; it doth not tend to, and termin- 
ate in, the crucifixion of the heart. Such faith doth not 
centre in God, but rather in itself. 

“So far all is plain. I believe you have faith, and love, 
and joy and peace. Yet you who are particularly concerned 
know each for yourself, that you are wanting in the respects 
above mentioned. You are wanting either in long-suffering, 
gentleness, or goodness; either in fidelity, meekness, or 
temperance. Let us not, then, on either hand, fight about 
words. In the thing we clearly agree. 

“You have not what I call perfection; if others will call 
it so, they may. However, hold fast what you have, and 
earnestly pray for what you have not. 


THOSE PERFECT IN LOVE CAN GROW IN GRACE OR THEY CAN 
FALL FROM GRACE. 
“29, Can those who are perfect grow in grace? 


‘Undoubtedly they can; and that not only while they 
are in the body, but to all eternity. 


84 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION 


“30. Can they fall from it? 


“T am well assured they can; matter of fact puts this 
beyond dispute. Formerly we thought, one saved from sin 
could not fall; now we know the contrary. We are sur- 
rounded with instances of those who lately experienced all 
that I mean by perfection. They had both the fruit of the 
Spirit, and the witness; but they have now lost both. 
Neither does any one stand by virtue of anything that is 
implied in the nature of the state. There is no such height 
or strength of holiness as it is impossible to fall from. If 
there be any that cannot fall, this wholly depends on the 
promise of God. 


“31. Can those who fall from this state recover it? 


“Why not? We have many instances of this also. Nay, 
it is an exceeding common thing for persons to lose it more 
than once, before they are established therein. 

“Tt is therefore to guard them who are saved from sin, 
from every occasion of stumbling, that I give the following 
advices. But first I shall speak plainly concerning the 
work itself, : 

“T esteem this late work to be of God; probably the 
greatest now upon earth. Yet, like all others, this also is 
mixed with much human frailty. But these weaknesses are 
far less than might have been expected; and ought to have 
been joyfully borne by all that loved and followed after 
righteousness. That. there have been a few weak, warm- 
headed men, is no reproach to the work itself, no just ground 
for accusing a multitude of sober-minded men, who are 
patterns of strict holiness. Yet (just the contrary to what 
ought to have been) the opposition is great; the helps few. 
Hereby many are hindered from seeking faith and holiness 
by the false zeal of others; and some who at first began to 
run well are turned out of the way. 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 85 


ADVICE TO THOSE SANCTIFIED. 

“32. What is the First advice* that you would give them? 

“Watch and pray continually against pride. If God has 
east it out, see that it enter no more: it is full as dangerous 
as desire. And you may slide back into it unawares ; especi- 
ally if you think there is no danger of it. ‘Nay, but I 
ascribe all I have to God.’ So you may, and be proud never- 

theless. For it is pride, not only to ascribe anything we 
have to ourselves, but to think we have what we really have 
not. Mr. L , for instance, ascribed all the light he had 
to God, and so far he was humble; but then he thought he 
had more light than any man living; and this was palpable 
pride. So you ascribe all the knowledge you have to God; 
and in this respect you are humble. But if you think you 
have more than you really have; or if you think you are sq 
taught of God, as no longer to need man’s teaching; pride 
lieth at the door. Yes, you have need to be taught, not only 
by Mr. Morgan, by one another, by Mr. Maxfield, or me, but 
by the weakest preacher in London; yea, by all men. For 
God sendeth by whom he will send. 

“ Do not therefore say to any who would advise or reprove 
you, ‘You are blind; you cannot teach me.’ Do not say, 
‘This is your, wisdom, your carnal reason;’ but calmly 
weigh the thing before God. . 

«“ Always remember, much grace does not imply much 
light. These do not always go together. As there may be 





* The advices which follow were published in a separate tract in the year 1762, 
under the title of “‘Cautions and Directions given to the Greatest Professors 
in the Methodist Societies,’ with the following motto: — ' 


“ Set the false witnesses aside, 
Yet hold the truth for ever fast.” 


It was evidently intended to guard the people against the mischievous extrava- 
gances of George Bell and his friends, a particular account of whom is given 


in Mr, Wesley’s Journal about that period. — Epir. 


86 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


much light where there is but little love, so there may be 
much love where there is little light. The heart has more 
heat than the eye; yet it cannot see. And God has wisely 
tempered the members of the body together, that none 
may say to another, ‘I have no need of thee.’ 

“To imagine none can teach you, but those who are 
themselves saved from sin, is a very great and dangerous 
mistake. Give not place to it for a moment; it would lead 
you into a thousand other mistakes, and that irrecoverably. 
No; dominion is not founded in grace, as the madmen of 
the last age talked. Obey and regard ‘them that are over 
you in the Lord,’ and do not think you know better than 
them. Know their place and your own; always remember- 
ing, much love does not imply much light. 

“The not observing this has led some into many mistakes, 
and into the appearance, at least, of pride. Oh, beware of 
the appearance, and the thing! Let ‘there be in you that 
lowly mind which was in Christ Jesus.’ And ‘be ye likewise 
clothed with humility.’ Let it not. only fill, but cover you 
all over. Let modesty and self-diffidence appear in all your 
words and actions. Let all you speak and do show that you 
are little, and base, and mean, and vile in your own eyes. 

“As one instance of this, be always ready to own any 
fault you have been in. If you have at any time thought, 
spoke, or acted wrong, be not backward to acknowledge it. 
Never dream that this will hurt the cause of God; no, it 
will farther it. Be, therefore, open, and frank, when you 
are taxed with anything; do not seek either to evade or dis- 
guise it; but let it appear just as it is, and you will thereby 
not hinder, but adorn the Gospel. 

“33. What is the Second advice which you would give 
them? 

“Beware of that daughter of pride, enthusiasm. Oh, 
keep at the utmost distance from it! Give no place toa 


‘aot abe peed eel 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 87 


heated imagination. Do not hastily ascribe things to God. 
- Do not easily suppose dreams, voices, impressions, visions, 
or revelations to be from. God. They may be from Him. 
They may be from nature. They may be from the devil. 
Therefore, ‘believe not every spirit, but try the spirits 
whether they be of God.’ Try all things by the written 
word, and let all bow down before it. You are in danger of 
enthusiasm’ every hour, if you depart ever so little from 
Seripture; yea, or from the plain, literal meaning of any 
text, taken in connection with the context. And so you 
are, if you despise or lightly esteem reason, knowledge, or 
human learning ; every one of which is an excellent gift of 
God, and may serve the noblest purposes. 

“JT advise you, never to use the words, wisdom, reason, or 
knowledge, by way of reproach. On the contrary, pray that 
you yourself may abound in them more and more. If you 
mean worldly wisdom, useless knowledge, false reasoning, 
say so; and throw away the chaff, but not the wheat. 

“One general inlet to enthusiasm is, expecting the end 
without the means; the expecting knowledge, for instance, 
without searching the Scriptures, and consulting the chil- 
dren of God; the expecting spiritual strength without con- 
stant prayer, and steady watchfulness; the expecting any 
blessing without hearing the word of God at every oppor- 
tunity. 

‘Some have been ignorant of this device of Satan. They 
have left off searching the Scriptures. They said, ‘God 
writes all the Scriptures on my heart. Therefore, I have 
no need to read it.’ Others thought they had not so much 
need of hearing, and so grew slack in attending the morn- 
ing preaching. Oh, take warning, you who are concerned 
herein! You have listened to the voice of a stranger. Fly 
back to Christ, and keep in the good old way, which was 
‘once delivered to the saints ;’ the way that even a heathen 


88 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


bore testimony of: ‘That the Christians rose early every 
day to sing hymns to Christ as God.’ 

“The very desire of ‘growing in grace’ may sometimes 
be an inlet of enthusiasm. As it continually leads us to 
seek new grace, it may lead us unawares to seek something 
else new, beside new degrees of love to God and man. So 
it has led some to seek and fancy they had received gifts of 
a new kind, after a new heart, as, (1.) The loving God with 
all our mind: (2.) With all our soul: (8.) With all our 
strength: (4.) Oneness with God: (5.) Oneness w i Christ: 
(6.) Having our life hid with Christ in God: (7.) Being 
dead with Christ: (8.) Rising with Him: (9.) The sitting 
with Him in heavenly places: (10.) The being taken up 
into His throne: (11.) The being in the New Jerusalem: 
(12.) The seeing the tabernacle of God come down among 
men: (13.) The being dead to all works: (14.) The not 
being liable to death, pain, or grief, or tempta‘_on. 

“One ground of many of these mistakes is, the taking 
every fresh, strong application of any of these Scriptures 
to the heart, to be a gift of a new kind; not knowing that 
several of these Scriptures are not fulfilled yet; that most 
of the others are fulfilled when we are justified; the rest, 
the moment we are sanctified. It remains only to experi- 
ence them in higher degrees. This is all we have to expect. 

“ Another ground of these and a thousand mistakes, is, 
the not considering deeply, that love is the highest gift of 
God; humble, gentle, patient love; that all visions, revela- 
tions, manifestations whatever, are little things compared to 
love; and that all the gifts above mentioned are either the 
same with, or infinitely inferior to, it. 

“Tt were well you should be thoroughly sensible of this, 
— the heaven of heavens is love. There is nothing higher 
in religion ; there is, in effect, nothing else; if you look for 
anything but more love, you are looking wide of the mark, 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 89 


you are getting out of the royal way. And when you are 
asking others, ‘ Have you received this or that blessing? if 
you mean anything but more love, you mean wrong; you 
are leading them out of the way, and putting them upon a 
false scent. Settle it then in your heart, that from the mo- 
ment God has saved you from all sin, you are to aim at 
nothing more, but more of that love described in the thir- 
teenth of the Corinthians. You can go no higher than this, 
till you are carried into Abraham’s bosom. 

“T say yet again, beware of enthusiasm. Such is, the 
imagining you have the gift of prophesying, or discerning 
of spirits, which I do not believe one of you has; no nor 
ever had yet. Beware of judging people to be either right 
or wrong by your own feelings. This is no Scriptural way 
of judging. Oh, keep close to ‘the law and to the. testi- 
mony !’ 


34. What is the Third? 


“ Beware of Antinomianism ; ‘making void the law,’ or 
any part of it, ‘through faith.’ Enthusiasm naturally leads 
to this ; indeed, they can scarcely be separated. This may 
steal upon you in a thousand forms, so that you cannot be 
too watchful against it. Take heed of everything, whether 
in principle or practice, which has any tendency thereto. 
Even that great truth, that ‘Christ is the end of the law,’ 
may betray us into it, if we do not consider that He has 
adopted every point of the moral law, and grafted it into 
the law of love. Beware of thinking, ‘ Because I am filled 
with love, I need not have so much holiness. Because I 
pray always, therefore I need no set time for private prayer. 
Because I watch always, therefore I need no particular self- 
examination.’ Let us ‘magnify the law, the whole written 
word, ‘and make it honorable.’ Let this be our voice: ‘I 
prize Thy commandments above gold or precious stones. 


90 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


Oh, what love have I unto Thy law! all the day long is my 


study in it.’ Beware of Antinomian books; particularly 
the works of Dr. Crisp, and Mr. Saltmarsh. They contain 
many excellent things; and this makes them the more 
dangerous. Oh, be warned in time! Do not play with fire. 
Do not put your hand on the hole of a cockatrice’ den. J 
entreat you beware of bigotry. Let not your love or bene 
ficence be confined to Methodists, so-called only; much less 
to that very small part of them who seem to be renewed in 
love; or to those who believe yours and their report. Oh, 
make not this your Shibboleth! Beware of stillness; ceas- 
ing in a wrong sense from your own works. To mention 
one instance out of many: ‘You have received,’ says one, 
‘a great blessing. But you began to talk of it, and to do 
this and that; so you lost it. You should have been still.’ 

“ Beware of self-indulgence; yea, and making a virtue of 
it, laughing at self-denial, and taking up the cross daily, at 
fasting or abstinence. Beware of censoriousness ; thinking 
or calling them, that any ways oppose you, whether in judg- 
ment or practice, blind, dead, fallen, or ‘enemies to the 
work.’ Once more, beware of Solifidianism; crying nothing 
but ‘Believe, believe!’ and condemning those as ignorant 
or legal who speak in a more Scriptural way. At certain 
seasons, indeed, it may be right to treat of nothing but re- 
pentance, or merely of faith, or altogether of holiness; but, 
in general, our call is to declare the whole counsel of God, 
and to prophesy according to the analogy of faith. The 
written word treats of the whole and every particular 
branch of righteousness, descending to its minutest branches ; 
as to be sober, courteous, diligent, patient, to honor all men. 


So, likewise, the Holy Spirit works the same in our hearts, 


not merely creating desires after holiness in general, but 
strongly inclining us to every particular grace, leading us 
to every individual part of ‘whatsoever is lovely.’ And 


aie 
lin els 


a 1 ke 


a lia 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 91 


this with the greatest propriety: for as ‘by works faith is 
made perfect,’ so the completing or destroying the work of 
faith, and enjoying the favor, or suffering the displeasure, 
of God, greatly depends on every single act of obedience or 
disobedience. 


“35. What is the Fourth ? 

“ Beware of sins of omission ; lose no opportunity of doing 
good in any kind. Be zealous of good works; willingly 
omit no work, either of piety or mercy. Do all the good 
you possibly can, to the bodies and souls of men. Particu- 
larly, ‘thou shalt in any wise reprove thy neighbor, and not 
suffer sin upon him.’ Beactive. Give no place to indolence 
or sloth; give no occasion to say, ‘ Ye are idle, ye are idle.’ 
Many will say so still; but let your whole spirit and be- 
havior refute the slander. Be always employed; lose no 
shred of time; gather up the fragments, that nothing be 
lost. And whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with 
thy might. Be ‘slow to speak,’ and wary inspeaking. ‘In 
a multitude of words there wanteth not sin.’ Do not talk 
much; neither long ata time. Few can converse profitably 
above an hour. Keep at the utmost distance from pious 
chit-chat, from religious gossiping. 

“36. What is the Fifth? 

“ Beware of desiring any thing but God. Now you desire 
nothing else; every other desire is driven out; see thatnone 
enter again. ‘Keep thyself pure;’ let your ‘eye’ remain 
‘single, and your whole body shall be full of light.’ Admit 
no desire of pleasing food, or any other pleasure of sense ; 
no desire of pleasing the eye or the imagination, by 
any thing grand, or new, or beautiful; no desire of money, 
of praise, or esteem; of happiness in any creature. You 
may bring these desires back; but you need not; you need 
feel them no more. O stand fast in the liberty wherewith 
Christ hath made you free! 


92 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


“ Be patterns to all of denying yourselves, and taking up 
your cross daily. Let them see that you make no account 
of any pleasure which does not bring you nearer to God, nor 
regard any pain which does; that you simply aim at pleas- 
ing Him, whether by doing or suffering; that the constant 
language of your heart, with regard to pleasure or pain, 
honor or dishonor, riches or poverty, is, 

‘ All’s alike to me, so I 
Ta my Lord may live and die!’ 

“37. What is the Siath? 

“ Beware of schism, of making a rent in the Church of 
Christ. That inward disunion, the members ceasing to have 
a reciprocal love ‘one for another’ (1 Cor. xii. 25), is the 
very root of all contention, and every outward separation. 
Beware of every thing tending thereto. Beware ofa dividing 
spirit; shun whatever has the least aspect that way. There- 
fore, say not, ‘I am of Paul, or of Apollos ;’ the very thing 
which occasioned the schism at Corinth. Say not, ‘This is 
my preacher ; the best preacher in England. Give me him, 
and take all the rest.’ All this tends to breed or foment 
division, to disunite those whom God hath joined. Do not 
despise or run down any preacher; do not exalt any one 
above the rest, lest you hurt both him and the cause of God. 
On the other hand, do not bear hard upon any by reason of 
some incoherency or inaccuracy of expression; no, nor for 
some mistakes, were they really such. 

“Likewise, if you would avoid schism, observe every rule 


of the society, and of the bands, for conscience’ sake. — 


Never omit meeting your class or band; never absent your- 
self from any public meeting. These are the very sinews 
of our society ; and whatever weakens, or tends to weaken, 
our regard for these, or exactness in attending them, strikes 
at the very root of our community. As one saith, ‘That 
part of our economy, the private weekly meetings for prayer, 


Bae he ile nt 


ee 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 93 


examination, and particular exhortation, has been the great- 
est means of deepening and confirming every blessing that 
was received by the word preached, and of diffusing it to 
others, who could not attend the public ministry ; whereas, 
without this religious connection and intercourse, the most 
ardent attempts, by mere preaching, have proved of no last- 
ing use.’ 

“Suffer not one thought of separating from your brethren, 
whether their opinions agree with yours, or not. Do not 
dream that any man sins in not believing you, in not taking 
your word ; or that this or that opinion is essential to the 
work, and both must stand or fall together. Beware of im- 
patience of contradiction. Do not condemn or think hardly 
of those who cannot see just as you see, or who judge it their 
duty to contradict you, whether in a great thing, or a small. 
I fear some of us have thought hardly of others, merely 
because they contradicted what we affirmed. All this tends 
to division; and, by every thing of this kind, we are teach- 
ing them an evil lesson against ourselves. 

“OQ, beware of touchiness, of testiness, not bearing to be 
spoken to; starting at the least word; and flying from those 
who do not implicitly receive mine or another’s sayings ! 

“Expect contradiction and opposition, together with 
crosses of various kinds. Consider the words of St. Paul: 
‘To you it is given, in the behalf of Christ,’— for His sake, 
as a fruit of His death and intercession for you,— ‘not only 
to believe, but also to suffer for His sake,’ Phil. i. 29. I¢ is 
given! God gives you this opposition or reproach; it is a 
fresh token of His love. And will you disown the Giver; 
or spurn His gift, and count it a misfortune? Will you not 
rather say, ‘Father, the hour is come, that Thou shouldest 
be glorified ; now Thou givest Thy child to suffer something 
for Thee; do with me according to Thy will?’ Know that 
these things, far from being hindrances to the work of God, 


94 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION. 


or to your soul, unless, by your own fault, are not only un 
avoidable in the course of providence, but profitable, yea, 
necessary for you. Therefore, receive them from God (not 
from chance), with willingness, with thankfulness.. Receive 
them from men with humility, meekness, yieldingness, gen- 
ileness, sweetness. Why should not even your outward 
appearance and manner be soft? Remember the character 
of Lady Cutts. ‘It was said of the Roman Emperor Titus, 
Never any one came displeased from him. But it might be 
said of her, Never any one went displeased to her; so secure 
were all of the kind and favorable reception which they 
would meet with from her.’ 

“ Beware of tempting others to separate from you. Give 
no offense which .can possibly be avoided; see that your 


practice be in all things suitable to your profession, adorn-_ 


ing the doctrine of God our Saviour. Be particularly care- 
ful in speaking of yourself. You may not, indeed, deny the 
work of God; but speak of it when you are called thereto, 
in the most inoffensive manner possible. Avoid all mag- 
nificent, pompous words; indeed, you need give it no general 
name; neither perfection, sanctification, the second blessing, 
nor the having attained. Rather speak of the particulars 
which God has wrought for you. You may say, ‘At such a 
time, I felt a change which I am not able to express; and 
since that time, I have not felt pride, or self-will, or anger, 


or unbelief; nor any thing but a fulness of love to God and. 


to all mankind.’ And answer any other plain question that 
is asked, with modesty and simplicity. — 


“ And if any of you should at any time fall from what you 


now are, if you should again feel pride or unbelief, or any 
temper from which you are now delivered; do not deny, do 
not hide, do not disguise it at all, at the peril of your 
soul. At all events, go to one in whom you can confide, and 
speak just what you feel. God will enable him to speak a 


49) peed 


Seen ae Ne 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 95 


word in season, which shall be health to your soul. And 
surely He will again lift up your head, and cause the bones 
that have been broken to rejoice. 


“38. What is the last advice that you would give them? 


“Be exemplary in all things; particularly in outward 
things (as in dress), in little things, in the laying out of your 
money (avoiding every needless expense), in deep, steady 
seriousness, and in the solidity and usefulness of all your 
conversation. So shall you be ‘a light shining in a dark 
place.’ So shall you daily ‘ grow in grace,’ till ‘an entrance 
_ be ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting 
kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ.’ 

“Most of the preceding advices are strongly enforced in 
the following reflections, which I recommend to your deep 
and frequent consideration, next to the Holy Scriptures : — 

“(1.) The sea is an excellent figure of the fulness of God, 
and that of the blessed Spirit. For as the rivers all return 
into the sea; so the bodies, the souls, and the good works of 
the righteous, return into God, to live there in His eternal 
repose. 

“ Although all the graces of God arena on His mere 
bounty, yet is He pleased generally to attach them to the 
prayers, the instructions, and the holiness of those with 
whom we are. By strong, though invisible attractions, He 
draws some souls through their intercourse with others. 

“The sympathies formed by grace far surpass those formed 
by nature. 

“The truly devout show that passions as naturally flow 
from true as from false love, so deeply sensible are they of 
the goods and evils of those whom they love for God’s sake. 
But this can only be comprehended by those who understand 
the language of love. 

“The bottom of the soul may be in repose, even while we 


96 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


are in many outward troubles; just as the bottom of the sea 
is calm, while the surface is strongly agitated. 

“The best helps to growth in grace are the ill-usage, the 
affronts, and the losses which befall us. We should receive 
them with all thankfulness, as preferable to all others, were 
it only on this account, —that our will has no part therein. 

“‘The readiest way to escape from our sufferings is to be 
willing they should endure as long as God pleases. © 

“Tf we suffer persecution and affiiction in a right manner, 
we attain a larger measure of conformity to Christ, by a due 
improvement of one of these occasions, than we could have 
done merely by imitating His USE in aes of good 
works. 

‘One of the greatest evidences of God’s love to those that 
love Him is to send them afflictions, with grace to bear them. 

“Even in the greatest afflictions, we ought to testify to 
God, that in receiving them from His hand, we feel pleasure 
in the midst of the pain, from being afflicted by Him who 
loves us, and whom we love. 

“The readiest way which God takes to draw a man to 
Himself is to afflict him in that he loves most, and with 
good reason; and to cause this affliction to arise from some 
good action done with a single eye; because nothing can 
more clearly show him the emptiness of what is most lovely 
and desirable in the world. 

“(2.) True resignation consists in a thorough conformity 
to the whole will of God, who wills and does all (excepting 

-sin) which comes to pass in the world. In order to this we 
have only to embrace all events, good and bad, as His will. 

“In the greatest afflictions which can befall the just, 
either from heaven or earth, they remain immovable in 
peace, and perfectly submissive to God, by an inward, loving 
regard to Him, uniting in one all the powers of their souls. 
~ “We ought quietly to suffer whatever befalls us, to bear 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 97 


the defects of others and our own, to confess them to God 
in secret prayer, or with groans which cannot be uttered ; 
but never to speak a sharp or peevish word, nor to murmur 
or repine but thoroughly willing that God should treat you 
in the manner that pleases Him. We are His lambs, and 
therefore ought to be ready to suffer, even to the death, 
without complaining. 

“We are to bear with those we cannot amend, and to be 
content with offering them to God. This is true resignation. 
And since He has borne our infirmities, we may well bear 
those of each other for His sake. 

“To abandon all, to strip one’s self of all, inorder to seek 
and to follow Jesus Christ naked to Bethlehem, where He 
was born; naked to the hall where He was scourged; and 
naked to Calvary, where He died on the cross, is so great a 
mercy, that neither the thing, nor the knowledge of it, is 
given to any, but through faith in the Son of God. 

“(3.) There is no love of God without patience, and no 
patience without lowliness and sweetness of spirit. 

“Humility and patience are the surest proofs of the in- 
crease of love. 

“ Humility alone unites patience with love, without which 
it is impossible to draw profit from suffering, or, indeed, to 
avoid complaint, especially when we think we have given no 
occasion for what men make us suffer. 

“True humility is a kind of self-annihilation, and this is 
the centre of al] virtues. 

“ A soul returned to God ought to be attentive to every- 
thing which is said to him, on the head of salvation, with a 
desire to profit thereby. 

_ Of the sins which God has pardoned, let nothing remain 
but a deeper humility in the heart, and a stricter regulation 
in our words, in our actions, and in our sufferings. 

“(4.) The bearing men, and suffering evils in meekness 
-and silence, is the sum of a Christian life, 


98 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


“ God is the first object of our love: its next office is, to 
bear the defects of others. And we should begin the prac- 
tice of this amidst our own household. 

“We should chiefly exercise our love toward them who 
most shock either our way of thinking, or our temper, or our 
knowledge, or the desire we have that others should be as 
virtuous as we wish to be ourselves. 

“(5.) God hardly gives His Spirit even to those whom 
He has established in grace, if they do not pray for it on all 
occasions, not only once, but many times. 

“God does nothing but in answer to prayer; and even 
they who have been converted to God, without praying for 
it themselves (which is exceeding rare), were not without 
. the praycrs of others. Every new victory which a soul 
gains is the effect of a new prayer. 

* “On every occasion of uneasiness, we should retire to 
prayer, that we may give place to the grace and light of 
God, and then form our resolutions, without being in any 
pain about what success they may have. 

“Tn the greatest temptations, a single look to Christ, and 
the barely pronouncing His name, suffices to overcome the 
wicked one, so it be done with confidence and calmness of 
spirit. 

‘‘God’s command to ‘ pray without ceasing,’ is founded on 
the necessity we have of His grace to preserve the life of 
God in the soul, which can no more subsist one moment 
without it, than the body can without air. 

“ Whether we think of, or speak to, God, whether we act 
or suffer for Him, all is prayer, when we have no other ob- 
ject than His love, and the desire of pleasing Him. 

“All that a Christian does, even in eating and sleeping, | 
is prayer, when it is done in simplicity, according to the or- 
der of God, without either adding to or diminishing from it 
by his own choice. 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 99 


“ Prayer continues in the desire of the heart, though the 
understanding be employed on outward things. 

“In souls filled with love, the desire to please God is a 
continual prayer. 

“ As the furious hate which the devil bears us is termed 
the roaring of a lion, so our vehement love may be termed 
crying after God. 

“God only requires of His adult children, that their hearts 
be truly purified, and that they offer Him continually the 
wishes and vows that naturally spring from perfect love. 
For these desires, being the genuine fruits of love, are the 
most perfect prayers that can spring from it. 

“(6.) It is scarce conceivable how straight the way is 
wherein God leads them that follow Him; and how depend- 
ent on Him we must be, unless we are raxttinbgci in our faith- 
fulness to Him. 

“Tt is hardly credible of how great consequence before 
God the smallest things are; and what great inconveniences 
sometimes follow those which appear to be light faults. 

“ As a very little dust will disorder a clock, and the least 
sand will obscure our sight, so the least grain of sin 
which is upon the heart will hinder its right motion toward 
God. 

‘¢ We ought to be in the church as the saints are in heaven, 
and in the house as the holiest men are in the church; doing 
our work in the house as we pray in the church; worship- 
ping God from the ground of the heart. 

“We should be continually laboring to cut off all the use- 
less things that surround us: and God usually retrenches 
the superfluities of our souls in the same proportion as we 
do those of our bodies. 

“The best means of resisting the devil is, to destroy 
whatever of the world remains in us, in order to raise for 
God, upon its ruins, a building all of love. Then shall we 


100 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


begin, in this fleeting life, to love God as we shall love Him 
in eternity. 

“‘We scarce conceive how easy it is to rob God of His 
due, in our friendship with the most virtuous persons, until 
they are torn from us by death. But if this loss produce 
lasting sorrow, that is a clear proof that we had before two 
treasures, between which we divided our heart. 

“(7.) If, after having renounced all, we do not watch in- 
cessantly, and beseech God to accompany our vigilance with 
His, we shall be again entangled and overcome. 

“As the most dangerous winds may enter at little open- 
ings, so the devil never enters more dangerously than by 
little unobserved incidents, which seem to be nothing, yet 
insensibly open the heart to great temptations. 

“It is good to renew ourselves from time to time, by 
closely examining the state of our souls, as if we had 
never done it before; for nothing tends more to the full 
assurance of faith, than to keep ourselves by this means in 
humility, and the exercise of all good works. 

“To continual watchfulness and prayer ought to be added 
continual employment. For grace flies a vacuum as well as 
nature; and the devil fills whatever God does not fill. 

“There is no faithfulness like that which ought to be 
between a guide of souls and the person directed by Him. 
They ought continually to regard each other in God, and 
closely to examine themselves, whether all their thoughts 
are pure, and all their words directed with Christian discre- 
tion. Other affairs are only the things of men; but these 
are peculiarly the things of God. 

“(8.) The words of St. Paul, ‘No man can call Jesus 
Lord, but by the Holy Ghost,’ show us the necessity of eye 
ing God in our good works, and even in our minutest 
thoughts ; knowing that none are pleasing to Him, but those 
which He forms in-us and with us. From hence we learn 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. TOW 


that we cannot serve Him, unless He use our tongue, hands, 
and heart, to do by Himself and His Spirit whatever He 
would have us to do. 

“Tf we were not utterly impotent, our good works would 
be our own property; whereas now they belong wholly to 
God, because they proceed from Him and His grace: while 
raising our works, and making them all Divine, He honors 
Himself in us through them. 

“One of the principal rules of religion is, to lose no occa- 
sion of serving God. And, since He is invisible to our eyes, 
we are to serve Him in our neighbor; which He receives as 
if done to Himself in person, standing visibly before us. 

“God does not love men that are inconstant, nor good 
works that are intermitted. Nothing is pleasing to Him, 
but what has a resemblance of His own immutability. 

. “A constant attention to the work which God entrusts us 
with is a mark of solid piety. 

“ Love fasts when it can, and as much as it can. It leads 
to all the ordinances of God, and employs itself in all the 
outward works whereof it is capable. It flies, as it were, 
like Elijah over the plain, to find God upon His holy moun- 
tain. 

“God is so great, that He communicates greatness to the 
least thing that is done for His service. 

“Happy are they who are sick, yea, or lose their life, for 
having done a good work. 

“God frequently conceals the part which His children 
have in the conversion of other souls. Yet one may boldly 
gay, that person who long groans before Him for the conver- 
sion of another, whenever that soul is converted to God, is 
one of the chief causes of it. 

“Charity cannot be practiced right, unless, First, we exer- 
cise it the moment God gives the occasion ; and, Secondly, 
retire the instant after to offer it to God by humble thanks- 


oF CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


giving. And this for three reasons: First, to render Him 
what we have received from Him. The Second, to avoid 
the dangerous temptation which springs from the very good- 
ness of these works. And the Third, to unite ourselves to 
God, in whom the soul expands itself in prayer, with all the 
graces we have received, and the good works we have done, 
to draw from Him new strength against the bad effects 
which these very works may produce in us, if we do not 
make use of the antidotes which God has ordained against 
these poisons. The true means to be filled anew with the 
riches of grace is thus to strip ourselves of it; and without 
this it is extremely difficult not to grow faint in the practice 
of good works. 

“Good works do not receive their last perfection, till they, 
as it were, lose themselves in God. This is a kind of death 
to them, resembling that of our bodies, which will not attain 
their highest life, their immortality, till they lose themselves 
in the glory of our souls, or rather of God, wherewith they 
shall be filled. And it is only what they had of earthly 
and mortal, which good works lose by this spiritual death. 

“Fire is the symbol of love; and the love of God is the 
principle and the end of all our good works. But truth 
surpasses figure; and the fire of Divine love has this ad- 
vantage over material fire, that it can reascend to its source, 
and raise thither with it all the good works which it pro- 
duces. And by this means it prevents their being corrupted 
by pride, vanity, or any evil mixture. But this cannot be 
done otherwise than by making these good works in a 
spiritual manner die in God, by a deep gratitude, which 
plunges the soul in Him as in an abyss, with all that it is, 
and all the grace and works for which it is indebted to Him; 
a gratitude, whereby the soul seems to empty itself of them, 
that they may return to their source, as rivers seem willing 


to empty themselves, when they pour themselves with all 
their waters into the sea. 


ae 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 103 


When we have received any favor from God, we ought to 
retire, if not into our closets, into our hearts, and say, ‘I 
come, Lord, to restore to Thee what Thou hast given; and 
I freely relinquish it, to enter again into my own nothing- 
ness. For what is the most perfect creature in heaven or 
earth in Thy presence, but a void capable of being filled - 
with Thee and by Thee; as the air which is void and dark, 
is capable of being filled with the light of the sun, who 
withdraws it every day to restore it the next, there being 
nothing in the air that either appropriates this light or re- 
sists it? O give me the same facility of receiving and re- 
storing Thy grace and good works! I say, Thine; for I 
acknowledge the root from which they spring is in Thee, 
and not in me.’” 


_ PROPOSITIONS WRITTEN IN 1764. 

26. In the year 1764, upon a review of the whole subject, 
I wrote down the sum of what I had observed in the follow- 
ing short propositions : — 

“(1.) There is such a thing as perfection; for it is again 
and again mentioned in Scripture. 

“(2.) It is not so early as justification; for justified per- 
sons are to ‘ go on unto perfection,’ Heb. vi. 1. 

“(3.) It is not so late as death; for St. Paul speaks of 
living men that were perfect, Phil. iii. 15. 

“(4.) It is not absolute. Absolute perfection belongs not _ 
to man, nor to angels, but to God alone. 

“(6.) Itdoes.not make a man infallible; none is infallible, 
while he remains in the body. 

“(6.) Is it sinless? It is not worth while to contend for 
aterm. It is ‘salvation from sin.’ 

“(7.) It is ‘ perfect love, 1 John iv. 18. This is the es- 
sence of it; its properties, or inseparable fruits, are, rejoic- 


104 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


ing evermore, praying without ceasing, and in every thing 
giving thanks, 1 Thess. v. 16, ete. 

(8.) It is improvable. It is so far from lying in an indi- 
visible point, from being incapable of increase, that one 
- perfected in love may grow in grace far swifter than he did 
before. 

“(9,) It is amissible, capable of being lost; of which we 
have numerous instances. But we were not thoroughly 
convinced of this, till five or six years ago. 

“(10.) It is constantly both preceded and followed by a 
gradual work. 

“(11.) But is it in itself instantaneous or not? In ex- 
amining this, let us go on step by step. 

“An instantaneous change has been wrought in some 
believers. None can deny this. 

“Since that change, they enjoy perfect love; they feel 
this, and this alone; they ‘rejoice evermore, pray without 
ceasing, and in every thing give thanks.’ Now this is all 
that I mean by perfection; therefore, these are witnesses 
of the perfection which I preach. 

“But in some, this change was not instantaneous.’ They 
did not perceive the instant when it was wrought. It is 
often difficult to perceive the instant when a man dies; yet 
there is an instant in which life ceases. And if even sin 
ceases, there must be a last moment of its existence, and a 
first moment of our deliverance from it. 

“¢ But if they have this love now, they will loseit.’ They 
may; but they need not. And whether they do or no, they 
have it now; they now experience what we teach. They 
now are all love; they now rejoice, pray, and praise without 
ceasing. 

“ ¢ However sin is only suspended in them; it is not de- 
stroyed.’ Call it which you please. They are all love to- 
day ; and they take no thought for the morrow. 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY. 105 


“¢ But this doctrine has been much abused.’ So has that 
of justification by faith. But that is no reason for giving 
up either this or any other Scriptural doctrine. ‘ When you 
wash your child,’ as one speaks, ‘throw away the water; 
but do not throw away the child.’ 

“¢ But those who think they are saved from sin, say they 
have no need of the merits. of Christ.’ They say just the 
contrary. Their language is,— 


‘Every moment, Lord, I want, the merit of Thy death !’ 


“They never before had so deep, so unspeakable a convic- 
tion of the need of Christ in all His offices, as they have now. 

“Therefore, all our preachers should make a point of 
preaching perfection to believers, constantly, strongly and 
explicitly ; and all believers should mind this one thing, and 
continually agonize for it.” 


CONCLUSION. 


27. I have now done what I proposed. I have given a 
plain and simple account of the manner wherein I first re- 
ceived the doctrine of perfection, and the sense wherein I 
received, and wherein I do receive, and teach it to this day. 
I have declared the whole and every part of what I mean 
by that Scriptural expression. I have drawn the picture of 
it at full length, without either disguise or covering. 

And I would now ask any impartial person, What is there 
so frightful therein? Whence is all this outcry, which, for 
these twenty years and upwards, has been made throughout 
the kingdom ; as if all Christianity were destroyed, and all 
religion torn up by the roots? Why is it, that the very 
name of perfection has been cast out of the mouths of Chris- 
tians; yea, exploded and abhorred, as if it contained the 
most pernicious heresy ? Why have the preachers of it been 
hooted at, like mad dogs, even by men that fear God; nay, 


106 CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, 


and by some of their own children, some whom they, under 
God, had begotten through the Gospel? What reason is 
there for this, or what pretence? Reason, sound reason, 
there is none. It isimpossible there should. But pretences 
there are, and those in great abundance. Indeed, there is 
ground to fear that, with some who treat us thus, it is mere 
pretense; that it is no more than a copy of their coun- 
tenance. from the beginning to the end. They wanted, they 
sought occasion against me; and here they found what they 
sought. “This is Mr. Wesley’s doctrine! He preaches 
perfection!” Hedoes; yet this is not his doctrine, any more 
than it is yours, or any one’s else, that is a minister of 
Christ. For it is His doctrine, peculiarly, emphatically his ; 
it is the doctrine of Jesus Christ. Those are His words, not 
mine: “Ye shall therefore be perfect, as your Father who 
is in heaven, is perfect.” And who says, ye shall not; orat 
least, not till your soul. is separated from the body ? 

It is the doctrine of St. Paul, the doctrine of St. James, 
of St. Peter, and St. John; and no otherwise Mr. Wesley’s, 
than as it is the doctrine of every one who preaches the 
pure and the whole Gospel. I tell you, as plain as I can 
speak, where and when I found this. I found it in the 
oracles of God, in the Old and New Testament; when I 
read them with no other view or desire, but to save my own 
soul. But whosesoever this doctrine is, I pray you, what 
harm is there in it? 


Look at it again; survey it on every side, and that with 


the closest attention. In one view, it is purity of intention, - 


dedicating all the life to God. It is the giving God all our 
heart; it is one desire and design ruling all our tempers. 


It is the devoting, not a part, but all, our soul, body, and | 


substance, to God. In another view, it is all the mind 
which was in Christ, enabling us to walk as Christ walked, 
It is the circumcision of the heast from all filthiness, al] 


fil 


AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY 107 


inward as well as outward pollution. It is a renewal of the 
heart in the whole image of God, the full likeness of Him 
that ereated it. In yet another, it is the loving God with 
all our heart, and our neighbor as ourselves. Now, take it 
in which of these views you please (for there is no material 
difference), and this is the whole and sole perfection, as a 
train of writings prove to a demonstration, which I have 
believed and taught for these forty years, from the year 
1725 to the year 1765. 

28. Now let this perfection appear in its native form, and 
who can speak one word against it? Will any dare to speak 
against loving the Lord our God with all our heart, and our 
neighbor as ourselves ? against a renewal of heart, not only 
in part, but in the whole image of God? Who is he that 
will open his mouth against being cleansed from all pollu- 
tion both of flesh and spirit; or against having all the mind 
that was in Christ, and walking in all things as Christ 
walked? What man, who calls himself a Christian, has the 
hardiness to object to the devoting, not a part, but all our 
soul, body, and substance to God? What serious man 
would oppose the giving God all our heart, and the having 
one desire ruling all our tempers? I say again, let this 
Christian perfection appear in its own shape, and who will 
fight against it? It must be disguised before it can be op- 
posed. It must be covered with a bearskin first, or even the 
wild beasts of the people will scarce be induced to worry it. 

But whatever these do, let not the children of God any 
- longer fight against the image of God. Let not the mem- 
bers of Christ say anything against the whole mind that 
was in Christ. Let not those who are alive to God oppose 
the dedicating all our life to Him. _Why should you who 
have His love shed abroad in your heart, withstand the giv- 
ing Him all your heart? Does not all that is within you 
cry out, ‘Oh, what that loves can love enough?’ What 

















BT766 .W521890 
Wesley, John, 1703-1791. 
Plain account of Christian perfection. 





116796 


BT 
166 
WH 
i940 








eal 


THEOLOGY LIBRARY 
SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY AT CLAREMONT 
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA 





FR PRINTED IN na 


i NORE NS g RE 





