Skip to main content
 
Texts
 
Video
 
Audio
 
Software
 
Images
Sign up for free
Log in
 Search metadata
 Search text contents
 Search TV news captions
 Search radio transcripts
 Search archived web sites
Advanced Search
About Blog Projects Help Donate  Contact Jobs Volunteer People
Full text of "Origen On First Principles"
See other formats
Religious Studies 


foundational work in the 
Caveat of Christian thought and doctrine: it is the 
first attempt in history at a systematic Christian theology. 
For more than a decade this masterwork has been out 
of print; now it is available in a more accessible format 
and at an affordable price. 


Origen’s On First Principles is a 


“Vatican Il taught that scripture is the soul of theology. Few so fully 
embraced that conviction as did Origen. In this he remains an inspiration 
for all who see the vital connection among proclamation, catechesis, and 
theology. Thus it is good to have Origen’s theological masterpiece, On 
First Principles, available again. As Henri de Lubac writes in his splendid 
introduction: ‘It is the work of a good and brave man whose supreme 
desire was to know the truth.” 
Rev. Robert Imbelli 
Boston College 


ISBN-13: 


978-0-87061-279-4 
et ISBN-10: 0-8 


Ch . 7061-279- “a 
from Ave Maria Press, Inc Notre Dame, IN 


www.christian-classics.com 


WTA i 


A Ministry of the United Scates Province of Holy Cross 9"7808 70 


‘i Pe? cS Pe: 


ORIGEN 


Foreword by John C. Cavadini 


Introduction by Henri de Lubac 


“Origen of Alexandria truly was a figure crucial to the whole 
development of Christian thought. 
Pope Benedict XVI 


‘a Sar pe 


On First Principles 


“Origen of Alexandria truly was a figure crucial to the whole 


development of Christian thought.” 
Pope Benedict XVI 


“Vatican IT taught that scripture is the soul of theology. Few 
so fully embraced that conviction as did Origen. In this he 
remains an inspiration for all who see the vital connection 
among proclamation, catechesis, and theology. Thus it is good 
to have Origen’s theological masterpiece, On First Principles, 
available again. As Henri de Lubac writes in his splendid 
introduction: ‘It is the work of a good and brave man whose 
supreme desire was to know the truth.” 


Rev. Robert Imbelli 
Boston College 


On First Principles 


ORIGEN 


Foreword by John C. Cavadini 


Introduction by Henri de Lubae 


Christian Classics ° Notre Dame, Indiana 


This edition of Origen’s On First Principles is based on G. W. Butterworth’s English 
translation, which was first published in 1936 and then reprinted in 1966 and 
1973. The original footnotes have been converted into endnotes, scripture citations 
have been changed to in-text citations, and occasionally the spelling and punctu- 
ation of the original text have been altered. Please consult the foreword by John 
C. Cavadini for additional editorial notes. 


Project Editor: Tania M. Geist 


© 2013 by Ave Maria Press, Inc. 


Foreword © 2013 by John C. Cavadini 


All rights reserved. No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner 
whatsoever except in the case of reprints in the context of reviews, without written 
permission from Christian Classics™, Ave Maria Press”, Inc., RO. Box 428, Notre 
Dame, IN 46556, 1-800-282-1865. 


Founded in 1865, Ave Maria Press is a ministry of the United States Province of 
Holy Cross. 


www.christian-classics.com 

Paperback: ISBN-10 0-87061-279-4, ISBN-13 978-0-87061-279-4 
E-book: ISBN-10 0-87061-280-8, ISBN-13 978-0-87061-280-0 
Cover image © Joel Carillre / gettyimages 

Cover and text design by John R. Carson. 


Printed and bound in the United States of America. 


CONTENTS 
Foreword by John: C. Cavadinl wimieituiciancierateransives vii 
Introduction by Henri de Lubac.... i eeeeseseseeeeeneeees xi 
Translator’s Introduction by G. W. Butterworth ........ XXXiil 
Preface Of RiuliniUS nisesisnnia nea. cuveadiiiaaanncs! Ixxvii 
Listol AD BTEVIat ON Siaciinsndaudntiad cavnotaiuavasweniuans Ixxxi 
Book I 
PEGI ACS s scitedaaischdcleathatacsideabyddes Cairs mint teaseh inten: 1 
I FUT ASU INCU cassettes dvds Wa meadn ts decane te erent 9 
II. CSE seisuaehieoecr weno ete Ae aa 21 
Rh: . SHE ErO ly Spi scat cata tdt Re cen miulad tects 39 
IV. Loss, or Falling Away....iceceesessesesseeenseeeseees 51 
Vv. Rational Natures: ixc.cssscacieiicseniariecamasiavedecrs 57 
VI. The End or Consummation... 69 
VIL. Things Corporeal and Incorporeal dy 
TMs SUVA At eS sa crac a A acess See Sees erate 85 
Book II 
I. ee WGC 20 sinus icarctin alee lesan 93 
Il. The Perpetuity of Bodily Nature «0.0... 101 


Ill. ‘The Beginning of the World and Its Causes .. 103 
IV. ‘That the God of the Law and the Prophets, 
and the Father of Our Lord Jesus Christ, 


Ts: ONC o aoa beter dee Hee wee ES 117 
V. The Just and the Good wees 125 
VI. The Incarnation of Christ wc cece 135 
Vil, “shetHoly Spivit..ngacGAwteenstaeareu ees 145 
WIELe Sine Sutles 3 vee eer 5 yeas Vase Ae societies 151 


IX. The World, and the Movements of 
Rational Creatures Both Good and Evil, 


and the Causes of These Movements.............. 161 
X. The Resurrection and the Judgment............... 173 
KT. ——- The Promises ooo... cccccsecccvescssssessssecssesseevceeaees 183 


Book III 


Pretace-of Runs s2cssvanieieeestneio co aretaetdeacetis 193 
1. Frée Willis aia aa dicntan eae 195 
TI. —- The Opposing POWETS.....c.scsseseeeeeeeeeeeene 275 
Ill. The Threefold Wisdom.........cccccceeseseesereeeeeens 291 


IV. Whether the Statement Made by Some 
Is True, That Each Individual Has 


TWO SOULS ee eilaetibeenheadial lah eee 301 
Vv. That the World Took Its Beginning 
AT Ie oso eisoeaeat esanteci aed ie 311 
VI. The Consummation of the World.............. 321 
Book IV 


I. ‘The Divine Inspiration of the Scriptures........ 333 
II. | Many, Not Understanding the Scriptures 

Spiritually, and Interpreting Them 

Erroneously, Have Fallen into Heresies.......... 353 
Ill. Illustrations from the Scriptures of 

the Method in Which Scripture Should 

Be Understoa dewsnctaluiesficieeerenhattacne 383 
IV. Summary of Doctrine concerning 

the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, 

and of the Other Matters Discussed 


in the Foregoing Chapters..........:scsneeeeee 417 
Original Bibliography ..........e-cssecsesssecsesseseeesteeeseneenens 432 
Additional Bibliography by John C. Cavadini............... 434 
INGLES aise caer accede Rigi ae as dag arsenate 437 
Index of Names and Subjects ........cccseceseceeseeesesessssensens 467 
Index of Scriptural Quotations and Allusions............... 471 


FOREWORD 
by John C. Cavadini 


G.W. Butterworth’s translation of Origen’s On First Principles, 
originally published in 1936 and twice reprinted (1966, 1973), 
is the only complete English translation based on the critical 
edition of the text (Koetschau, 1913). Though the standard 
English translation, classic in its own right, Butterworth’s has 
been unavailable for many years. For reasons unrelated to its 
quality, teachers and individual readers found it increasingly 
hard to use. 

Butterworth translated the only complete attestation of 
the text remaining from antiquity, Rufinus’s Latin translation. 
But, following Koetschau’s edition, Butterworth supplemented 
it with translations of Greek fragments taken from various 
sources. Where there was a Greek fragment, he divided the 
page between “Latin” and “Greek” columns, or even alternated 
“Latin” and “Greek” sections, making for a presentation that 
was difficult for any but the most advanced readers to follow. 

Further, Koetschau’s presentation was predicated on a 
hermeneutic of thoroughgoing suspicion regarding Rufinus’s 
translation, alleging a systematic purge of opinions of Origen 
that by the late fourth century were not considered orthodox. 
Butterworth fully adopted, and even extended, Koetschau’s her- 
meneutic of suspicion, as anyone who reads his Introduction 
will easily discover. The average reader could miss the fact that 
the “Greek” columns and supplements were not taken from 
a continuous ancient source, but were, in effect, a running 


vii 


vill ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


polemic against the translation of Rufinus, using texts from 
sources as hostile as the anathemata of Justinian as though 
they were unbiased, objective witnesses to the original Greek. 

In the seventy-five years since initial publication, scholarly 
consensus regarding the reliability of Rufinus’s translation has 
considerably shifted. Instructors who wanted to use Butter- 
worth’s On First Principles found the bias governing the origi- 
nal presentation of the text increasingly glaring. This, coupled 
with the desire for an easier-to-read, more free-flowing text, 
gave rise to other expedients, such as the use of partial trans- 
lations, or the substitution of other texts by Origen, omitting 
On First Principles altogether. Many individual readers gave 
up too. 

This new presentation retains Butterworth’s division of the 
page into “Greek” and “Latin” columns only where there is a 
substantial, continuous attestation of the text preserved in the 
Philocalia, the anthology of Origen’s texts assembled by Basil 
of Caesarea and Gregory of Nazianzus. Otherwise the text of 
Rufinus stands alone. All other instances where Butterworth 
included the translation of a Greek fragment are omitted from 
the text, but the place of omission is noted in the text, and a 
reference to the discussions of each fragment in Crouzel and 
Simonetti’s Sources Chrétiennes version is provided. 

We hope this reader-friendly and inexpensive edition 
inspires its renewed presence in classrooms. We also hope it 
will find its way more easily into the hands of individual read- 
ers, who can now read one free-flowing text rather than nego- 
tiating a thicket of columns, lines, and asterisks and daggers. 

‘The rewards for those who read, not in the first instance 
to wade into controversy, but to allow this work to settle into 
their soul on its own terms, are great. The encounter with this 
text leaves the soul with a memory of greatness—of archi- 
tectonic ambition tempered everywhere by declarations of 


Foreword ix 


tentative results; of the boldest possible speculation under- 
taken in a spirit of loving self-effacement that chose, like 
Moses, rather to suffer affliction with the people of God than 
to enjoy the pleasures of worldly prestige (1.P.1); of the most 
specialized inquiry on behalf of the educated in which, nev- 
ertheless, the needs of the “simplest” among believers preserve 
the work from the impersonal coldness of elitism and fill it 
with warmth. Thus does this work display its configuration to 
the mystery of the Incarnation that forms its heart. 

In Book II, Origen offers perhaps the most sublime evo- 
cation of the Incarnation in patristic literature, the mystery in 
the face of which, “the human understanding with its narrow 
limits is baffled, and struck with amazement at so mighty a 
wonder knows not which way to turn.” Therefore, “we must 
pursue our contemplation with all fear and reverence” (II.vi.2). 
This “fear and reverence,” diffused from contemplation of the 
Incarnation into every nook and cranny of the text, also passes 
into the soul of the reader, and, almost imperceptibly, elevates 
it. Such is the benefit of reading the most breathtaking work 
bequeathed to us by Christian antiquity. 


August 6, 2013 

Feast of the Transfiguration 
John C. Cavadini 
Department of Theology 


University of Notre Dame 


INTRODUCTION 
by Henri de Lubac' 


OrRIGEN’s WorkKS 


When Origen died he left behind a massive body of writings 
numbering close to a thousand titles. This vast treasure, con- 
sisting chiefly of explications of holy Scripture, was widely 
used for more than a century without serious obstacles to 
its diffusion. There was of course no lack of criticism. It had 
appeared even during Origen’s Alexandrian period, and it 
redoubled immediately after his death. In subsequent gen- 
erations men like Methodius of Olympus, Peter of Alexan- 
dria, Eustathius of Antioch and Pacomius proved resolute 
and sometimes violent opponents. In any event it was inev- 
itable that, as the labor of theological reflection proceeded 
and orthodoxy was progressively defined, the imprecisions 
and inadequacies in the exposition of the faith given by this 
greatest of ante-Nicene fathers should grow increasingly more 
noticeable. His very genius, which had made him play such 
an important part in the elaboration of the dogma, made 
him correspondingly more vulnerable afterwards. Nor, how- 
ever, did Origen lack defenders from the very start. Apologies 
for him multiplied apace with the attacks against him. The 
admiration expressed by men as significant and as different 
as Athanasius and Eusebius of Caesarea could be taken for a 


xi 


xi ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


definitive guarantee of his position. His works spread rapidly 
in the West as well as in the East, emerged unscathed from 
every skirmish and went on spreading. But from about 375 
on everything changed. ‘The massive offensive launched by 
St. Epiphanius’s Panarion unleashed the first of the storms in 
which Origen’s writings were to founder. In the sixth century, 
the onslaught was still worse. The doctrinal excesses of the Syr- 
ian monk Stephen Bar Sudaili, who had concocted a strange 
system, by mixing various traits borrowed from Gnosticism 
and the Cabbala with certain ideas taken from the Periarchon, 
provoked Justinian’s thunderbolts. The list of fifteen anathe- 
mata, drawn up by the Council Fathers of 553 outside their 
official sessions, was not the worst by far; for their sources are 
in fact not Origen’s works at all. There followed the physical 
destruction of his writings. It had begun at the end of the 
fourth century; but this time it was carried out systematically. 
‘The emperor-theologian was in earnest and so was the zealous 
faction which had alerted him. Nearly all of Origen’s work 
perished. Only two letters and a few fragments remain of his 
vast correspondence which originally had had four or five 
sections. Of the exegetical works—although the principles 
of exegesis had not been involved in the controversy—barely 
twenty have come down to us in the original. Searches through 
the libraries of the Middle East could produce no more than 
“a few insignificant scraps.” There is no way to measure such 
a loss. Epiphanius and Justinian have served the enemies of 
Christian civilization well. 

Luckily there was a number of Latin translations. Some 
were made by St. Hilary, St. Jerome, and several others. The 
greater part came from the pen of Rufinus of Aquileia. Rufi- 
nus’s translations have been unjustly maligned. Recent histo- 
rians who studied them have rightly reacted against an unduly 
severe evaluation of their worth: the translations served their 


Introduction xiii 


purpose well. They are fluent, clear and pleasant to read, which 
in itself is an advantage. Though their author claims to be 
“incapable of rendering the movement of Origen’s sentences 
with the eloquence” of Jerome, he does in fact often seem 
to render the original with a genuine felicity. Of course, we 
would want them to be more faithful, more literal. Still, there 
is hardly a translation except that of the Periarchon which poses 
any really serious problems for the historian of dogma. The 
translation of the commentary on the Epistle to the Romans 
is an abridgment, and openly admits it. What is more, it was 
done from a corrupt text and Rufinus himself tells us that 
it caused him exceedingly painstaking labor. In other cases, 
the translator does not hesitate to make slight adaptations. 
Sometimes he paraphrases; less frequently he gives extracts. 
He does not hesitate to add to a passage what explanations he 
considers necessary for Latin readers. But since he honestly 
informs the reader of the kind of liberty he is taking, we may 
trust him when he writes on occasion “Simpliciter ut invenimus 
transtulimus.” These words refer to the homilies on Joshua, on 
Judges, and on Psalms 36-38. With respect to the homilies on 
Genesis, Exodus, and Leviticus the translation admits to some 
expansion of the original, but without giving us any reason to 
doubt its faithfulness to the substance. Together, the transla- 
tions are of incalculable value to us. When Rufinus set to work 
at the urgent request of his friend Macarius, convinced though 
he was that his work could be of real value, he had no inkling 
of the unrivaled importance of his task. It is fortunate indeed 
that he did not let himself be discouraged by the quarrel that 
Jerome was trying to pick with him. He saved from final ruin 
some of the most precious monuments of Christian antiquity, 
works destined to mold Latin minds for a long time to come. 

Even so, more than one historian has refused to make use 
of these translations. Such purism would be excessive even if 


xiv ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


the translations were ten times more suspect than they are: 
it is too much of an invitation to laziness and simple lack of 
inquiry. All kinds of precautions are necessary of course. One 
must not press a particular expression too far. One cannot 
rely upon a specific detail for fear that it may be a gloss. But 
when it is a question, not of a precise statement made in pass- 
ing or of a specific point of doctrine, but of what constitutes 
so to speak the texture of thought and discourse, one stands 
on firmer ground. In this case more than elsewhere, the real 
cure does not lie in abstinence but on the contrary in massive 
utilization. In order to have a chance to reach the authentic 
Origen, one must pile citations on citations. In that way the 
parallel passages control, define, and comment on one another, 
especially when one examines, for example, a phrase in Rufi- 
nus’s Latin, another in the Latin of Jerome, and finally a third 
preserved in the original Greek. Indeed such confrontations 
are not rare; and from them there emerges an impression of 
unity. Through all the variety of his works and through all 
the diversity of the versions in which they come to us, Origen 
looks most of the time surprisingly like himself. 

By the same token, this consideration rules out another 
sort of suppression. Scholars at times have depreciated and 
even systematically brushed aside not only the homilies which 
we have only in translation but even those of which the Greek 
text still exists, and also such writings as the Exhortation to 
Martyrdom. These were considered simply as signs of a “popu- 
lar Origenism”; they were “popularizations,” written for public 
consumption, and unworthy to have a share in the recon- 
struction of the true Origen synthesis. Only the Periarchon, 
the Contra Celsum and up to a point the major commentaries 
could supply tried and true material... . Discrimination of 
this sort is willful. It stems from a mistaken idea of Origen’s 
personality and of the very nature of his thought. It is as 


Introduction xv 


evident as can be that not everything which came from the 
lips or the pen of this great man bears the same features, and 
that we cannot attach equal importance to it all. But nothing 
entitles us to think that all does not have the same sincerity, 
the same conviction. One must not forget that the books on 
St. John’s gospel and the Exhortation to Martyrdom are both 
dedicated to the same Ambrose. Origen was not one of those 
curious and detached minds who “enter into sacred science 
like a tourist goes into a city to look up its monuments.” His 
Christianity was not a speculation removed from life, nor a 
dream in the margins of the concerns of the great Church. In 
his highest meditations as in his most practical exhortations, 
his Christianity was “committed,” to use the language of our 
day. We shall see the proof below. Historians who have failed 
to recognize this fact imagine him an intellectual who put 
ona mask to speak to the common people, a man whose 
interior life had its place outside the Christian community; 
these historians have gone astray in both their method and 
their interpretation. In trying to pick the trump cards out of 
Origen’s work, they have not merely deprived themselves of 
sources of the first order; they have also distorted the meaning 
of the very sources they retained. 


His PIletTy aNnD ORTHODOXY 


We must rid ourselves of the view, still far too common, 
which presents Origen as almost entirely an intellectual, eso- 
teric and rationalizing, and see him as the man of the spirit, 
the apostle, the man of the Church which he was above all 
else. The daring of his genius must not blind us to the drives 
of his piety. The shortcomings of his doctrine—inevitable in 
a thinker of the third century who was the very first to build 


xvi ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


a theology—must not make us mistake the pure quality of 
his faith. 

His intellectual formation, we must not forget, was 
entirely Christian; we might even say entirely ecclesiastic. 
Many features of his homilies remind us of it, if need be. “We 
of the Church,” he says; “I, a man of the Church, living in the 
faith of Christ and set in the midst of the Church. . . .” Justin, 
Tatian, Clement and others like them were converts; because 
of a turn of mind due to their early formation they remained 
philosophers. But when Origen affectionately proclaims him- 
self “a man of the Church,” he underlines something like an 
inborn quality that is the mark of his whole genius. When 
he speaks of the “world,” the word is often used in the sense 
it has in the gospels—the world that passes away, especially 
the evil world from which Jesus Christ comes to set us free. 
Despite the testimony of Eusebius, one may well ask whether 
he ever figured among Clement's disciples—we are far too 
much accustomed to see him in Clement’s tow. Clement after 
his conversion kept the vocabulary of the Greeks that had 
already imposed itself on Philo, and then on Tatian; he still 
called the doctrine of Moses and of Christianity itself by the 
name of “barbarian philosophy.” But Origen contrasts the 
“barbarians” who were the Egyptians, with the “saints” who 
were the great men of Israel. He had been introduced to the 
Bible on his father’s knees, and he always maintained that 
outside the Bible “there is nothing holy.” Except in Contra 
Celsum he almost never quotes from profane authors. He is 
not a man who professes in private, a lecturer, but above all 
a catechist and preacher. He is one of those who ecclesiastice 
docent verbum. He is quite willing to include idolaters, here- 
tics and “philosophers” in a single sweeping condemnation. 
He knows that “the knowledge which converts men to lead a 
holy life comes only from . . . Christ” and that Christ is found 


Introduction xvii 


only “in the Church” which is filled with his splendor—the 
Church, pillar and firm support of the truth, where the Son of 
Man dwells in fullness. From the moment when he becomes 
a priest, he is aware that he “exercises the teaching office of 
the Church, of which he bears the authentic character”; he 
wishes to be “the faithful steward of the divine mysteries.” 
He compares the writings of the apostles to the trumpets of 
Israel’s army which reduced to rubble the walls of Jericho, the 
whole machinery of paganism, and the systems of its thinkers. 
These, to him, are real idolaters because “they worship the 
inventions of their own mind.” He sees these Doctors of the 
world in league with the heretics against the Christian faith, 
an insult to its simplicity. This “simplicity of faith” is, in his 
view, altogether different from a simple adherence to “the bare 
letter”; it is a positive virtue, a form of perfection. It is this 
simplicity which renders the bride of Christ so glorious, which 
causes her to be without spot or wrinkle. Origen professes for 
it a real worship; it is, he says, “the virginity of the soul.” A 
childlike and humble spirit follows in its wake. 

In Origen’s devotion to the Person of the Savior one dis- 
cerns a note of tenderness that is all his own. It is not just 
that in his apology against Celsus he spoke of Christ with a 
nobility mindful of Pascal. It is not just that in the Periarchon 
he exalted in particularly solemn terms the mystery of the 
Incarnation, that mystery more wonderful and more disturb- 
ing than all the others, which “we must contemplate with 
fear and trembling.” It is not only that in his commentary on 
the Song of Songs he adopted the voice of the Church which 
comes from the Gentiles, to cry out: “For because of thy word, 
O Christ, which I recognized as the true word, I came to thee. 
For all the words which were said to me, and which I heard 
while I was in my own country, from worldly teachers and 
philosophers, were not true words. That only is the true word, 


xviii ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


which is in thee.” He speaks in more intimate tones as well. 
He greets with deep emotion the first appearance of Jesus’ 
name in the Bible, and observes that nowhere in the Bible is 
the name ever borne by a sinner. We ought to imitate no one, 
he says, save only Jesus. Apart from Jesus, nothing to him is 
worthy of being loved. He would have us love Jesus with the 
same love that we owe to God; more, he would have us love 
God in him. He prays to him and would have us pray to him 
even as to the Father. The absence of Christ is for Origen a 
desert barren of righteousness. In his homilies vibrate some 
of the first notes of that human piety toward Jesus which 
to us seems to have become inseparable from our religion. 
Without cutting it off from its dogmatic roots he here brings 
to perfection an aspect of devotion which had not yet won its 
place in the great tradition and which was not to unfold fully 
until much later. A distant precursor of St. Bernard, Origen 
celebrates the power and the sweetness of Jesus’ name. He 
knows that Jesus can be “found” only in the solitude and 
silence of the heart. He wants us to seek him with zeal, with 
perseverance, if need be in anguish and sorrow; to live with 
him ever present; to ask him questions and to listen to his 
replies: this, to Origen, is what the search for the meaning of 
Scripture really means; he wants us to humble ourselves deeply 
so that we may deserve to hear the sweetness of his voice. He 
declares that all the good things which man can expect and 
which God can give are summed up in Jesus. He praises those 
who contemplate Christ and who remain bound to him “by 
a bond of tender affection”’—and those who prefer to put 
their trust in his words rather than in their own conscience. 
Even as Origen smiles at Jesus’ childhood, so he suffers with 
him the suffering and humiliation of his Passion which he at 
times evokes with startling realism. He admires the majesty of 
his silence. He also meditates on the first pages of the gospel; 


Introduction xix 


and from Jesus’ submission to Joseph he learns that, no matter 
how great one may be, there is no better thing than to live 
in humble submission. He announces that there is no true 
Christian life in separation from the man who was the Christ 
and from Mary his mother. He often speaks of “my Jesus,” “my 
Lord,” “my Savior.” This personal touch had become so much 
a habit with him that he at times slipped into introducing it 
even into his quotations from Scripture. It is a Pauline trait; 
but Origen’s insistent usage makes something new of it, a 
sort of conquest of Christian piety. No doubt Tertullian had 
already spoken of “my Christ,” but this expression simply 
meant: Christ as I see him, as my faith shows him to me and 
as I claim him to be, in contrast to the Christ whom Marcion 
imagines, “Marcion’s Christ.” In an analogous way, he could 
say that the true Christ is the “Christ of the Creator,” the 
“Christ of Isaiah,” the “Christ of the Prophets,” and so on; or 
again, in a discussion of Moses or of Paul, he said just as easily: 
“my Moses,” “my Apostle.” In these polemical chapters from 
the Adversus Marcionem, the point at issue was “two Christs,” 
that is, two conceptions of Christ opposing one another. If 
Tertullian made use of the first person singular—meus, mihi— 
it was because of the personal character which he gave to the 
battle with his adversary. It was two men who fought a duel: 
“your Christ,” says Tertullian in addressing Marcion. Two 
men, but in the name of two Churches: the heretical Church 
of Marcion and the great Church Catholic. Tertullian’s “my 
Christ” was thus simply the equivalent of “the Christ of the 
Church, of the Catholic tradition, of the orthodox faith’; and 
the possessive pronoun simply expresses the personal attach- 
ment that this forceful fighter felt for that faith. But Origen is 
a man of another cast. Like John the Evangelist, he “reclined 
at the breast of Jesus.” The one for whom he as a boy would 


XX ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


have wished to meet martyrdom had forever enraptured the 
depths of his soul. 

His piety was redoubled by a very strong concern with 
orthodoxy. For example, in one of his homilies on St. Luke 
he says: “As for myself, my wish is to be truly a man of the 
Church, to be called by the name of Christ and not that of 
any heresiarch, to have this name which is blessed all over the 
earth; I desire to be, and to be called, a Christian, in my works 
as in my thoughts.” Love and faith are fused in this outcry; it is 
the force of love which exacts tightness of faith. He often alerts 
us to the danger of false doctrines from which, he observes, 
“human nature finds it difficult to purify itself.” Such doctrines 
are for him in the true sense, so to speak, “the abomination of 
desolation.” He insists that one must protect oneself against 
them by vigilance and by prayer. Not content to invoke “the 
rule of the Scriptures” or “the evangelical and apostolic rule,” 
he constantly appeals to “the rule of the Church,” “the faith of 
the Church,” “the word of the Church,” “the preaching of the 
Church,” “the tradition of the Church,” “the doctrine of the 
Church,” “the thought and teaching of the Church.” In the 
bones of the paschal Lamb he sees a symbol of the “holy dog- 
mas of the Church” of which not one shall be broken. He does 
not want “that there be any disagreement on doctrine among 
Churches.” He is Adamantius, “the man of iron”: “doctrinal 
firmness” is one of the virtues closest to his heart. He exalts 
constancy in the faith and stability of dogma. Even before 
St. Augustine, he speaks of “chastity of the heart,” that is, of 
the understanding, and doctrines that stray from the rule of 
faith seem to him worse than evil ways of life. Again, he says 
that “one must guard oneself against committing an offense 
of the head” and against eating the sacred foods outside the 
temple, that is, “against harboring thoughts different from the 
faith of the Church on divine dogmas.” One must receive the 


Introduction xxi 


faith of God in the spirit which the Church teaches us, and 
must not do like the heretics who search the Scriptures only 
in order to find some confirmation of their own doctrines. 
Their pride raises them “higher than the cedars of Lebanon” 
and their sophistries are full of deceit. But it is no use for them 
to pretend that they have a tradition which comes down from 
the apostles; they are professors of error. While the faithful 
Christian in no way strays from the great tradition, they appeal 
to secret Scriptures or to secret traditions in order to confirm 
their lies. Thus they want to make us worship a Christ whom 
they have invented “in solitude,” while the only authentic 
Christ reveals himself “within the house.” They disfigure those 
vessels of gold and silver which are the sacred texts, in order to 
fashion them into objects according to their own fancy. They 
are thieves and adulterers who seize the divine words only 
to deform them by their perverse interpretations. They are 
counterfeiters for they have coined their doctrine outside the 
Church. False teachers, false prophets, spinning out of their 
own minds what they propound, they are the liars of whom 
Ezekiel speaks. By a perverse trickery they often cover their 
idols, that is, their empty dogmas, with sweetness and chastity 
so that their propositions may be smuggled more easily into 
the ears of their listeners and lead them astray mote surely. 
They all call Jesus their master and embrace him; but their 
kiss is the kiss of Judas. 

Is this truly the same man as the “allegorist” of whom we 
have been told? And if the two representations are incom- 
patible, which are we to choose? Tillemont was clear-eyed 
when he wrote that Origen “seems to have had a very hum- 
ble spirit, very submissive to the Church, very respectful of 
her doctrines and decisions, very devoted to her unity.” His 
feeling for the Church did in fact run as deep as his feeling 
for Christ. He was in the habit of calling her “Mother,” and 


xxii ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


saw the Christians as her “children.” The voice of her teach- 
ing was pleasing to him, and he was convinced that the more 
spiritual one grows, the more one recognizes the beauty of 
her face. He thought that the greatest misfortune is to be 
“cut off from the Mystery of the Church” like that plant from 
Jerusalem which, when transplanted into Canaan, withered at 
once because it was no longer cared for by the hand of God. 
All this surely is out of keeping with the sort of allegorism 
that many have attributed to Origen. But in turn it all is very 
much in keeping with the allegorism he actually practiced. 
And we must go further. Concern for orthodoxy and devotion 
to the faith, love for the “dogmas of the truth” are precisely 
among the reasons for Origen’s allegorism. One of his goals 
is “to shut Pharaoh’s mouth” with an explication of Scripture 
that “conforms to sound doctrine.” For example, when he 
runs up against anthropomorphic passages in the Bible, he 
feels the need to interpret them, not primarily in the name of 
reason, but in the name of the faith of the Church: Akienum 
hoc est ab Ecclesiae fide. Similarly, he supposes, “who will dare 
say that the Word of God is of no use and contributes in no 
way to salvation, but does no more than tell of events that 
happened in the past and have no relation to us?” /mpia hae, 
et aliena a catholica fide sententia est. To maintain such an 
opinion, one must deny the unity of the Law and the gospel, 
the unity of the God of Moses and God the Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. On the contrary, to seek the “spiritual meaning” 
of Scripture in order to draw nourishment from it is to use 
Scripture in catholic fashion, verbum Dei catholice tractari. \t 
is to receive the Word from Jesus’ hands and to have him read 
it to you. It is to act as “a son of the Church.” If there is one 
fundamental obligation for the Christian, it is that of keeping 
“to the rule of the heavenly Church of Jesus Christ, through 
the succession from the apostles.” In concrete terms then, what 


Introduction xxiii 


is this rule? St. Irenaeus had already given the answer: it is the 
interpretation of Scripture by the spirit. 


WISDOM AND THE CROSS 


How colorless the human wisdom of the philosophers 
looks to Origen beside these treasures of divine knowledge 
in which he thus steeps himself! His writings yield nothing 
comparable to those elaborations which Clement, in the first 
book of his Stremateis, devoted to the praise of philosophy. 
Not that Origen allows no place for the profane disciplines 
within ecclesiastical doctrine: for him, the spoils of Egypt are 
fair game! Origen did not invent this metaphor which was 
destined to become famous, but he did make it his own. When 
one thinks that it was to reappear from the pen not only of 
such men as Alcuin or John Duns Scotus, but also of Peter 
Damian and even Gregory [X, one is less inclined to view it 
as evidence of unbounded intellectualism. We note, besides, 
that these “spoils” are of value only if they are brought back 
to the holy land for the building of the Temple. By contrast, 
he who goes down into Egypt to devote himself there to the 
profane sciences runs great risks. If he lingers there as did Ader 
the Idumean, if he lets himself be seduced by philosophy, he 
will return only to corrupt the faith and to break up the unity 
of his brothers. Those who escape this ruin are rare indeed. 

Yet these disciplines also have a propaedeutic role. For a 
person capable of acquiring genuine education it is desirable 
that he “draw from Greek philosophy the system of knowledge 
that is fit to serve as an introduction to Christianity.” Certain 
“ideas of geometry and astronomy,” for example, will be useful 
to him also “to explain the sacred writings.” By the same token, 
the apologist will imitate the patriarchs who did not hesitate 


xxiv ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


to enter into unions with concubines or an alien woman, even 
in old age, with a mind to having descendants conceived in 
chastity. Thus he will bring together for his instruction “liter- 
ature, grammar, geometry, arithmetic, dialectic”; “and if such 
marriages enable us to present our ideas, to discuss them, 
and to refute those who oppose them, and if in this way we 
should be able to convert a few men to the faith; if, by using 
their own methods more skillfully than they do themselves, 
we persuade them to accept the true philosophy of Christ 
and the true piety of God, then we can say that we have had 
children by dialectic or rhetoric, as by an alien woman or a 
concubine.” And again, just as Moses accepted the counsel of 
his father-in-law Jethro, priest of an alien God, just so “if we 
happen to find a word of wisdom on the lips of a pagan, we 
should not immediately disdain the word itself because of the 
speaker; because it is not right for us to swell with pride and 
scorn the words of wise men on the pretext that we possess a 
law given to us by God. Rather, as the Apostle says, we must 
test everything and retain what is good.” In any case, one must 
never make use of secular doctrines without first cleansing 
them and cutting out whatever in them is barren or dead. For, 
while every science comes from above, that is from God, there 
is not one that has not been more or less corrupted by the 
malice of men or of demons. No doubt, side by side with its 
falsehoods, “hellenic philosophy” contains elements of truth 
which are not to be despised; St. Paul “saw a manifest greatness 
in the words of worldly wisdom’—only to judge them in the 
end all the more captious and vain. If one reviews everything 
that philosophy, Greek or barbarian, teaches, one will recog- 
nize that every time it fails to agree with Christ’s teaching it is 
sheer folly. These “alien doctrines” must always be “controlled 
and held in subjection.” Origen knows that this is not easy: “I, 
too, may tell what I have learned from experience, that rare is 


Introduction XX¥ 


the man who succeeded in taking from Egypt only its useful 
things, and then going away to employ them for the service of 
God.” Lest one be taken by surprise, one will always recall that 
philosophy and the faith, like Isaac and Abimelech, are now at 
peace and now at war, and that nothing must be accepted from 
the first until we have verified its agreement with the second. 

Still more often Origen warns us against the dangers 
of philosophy. He condemns the “wisdom of the rulers of 
this world” without making distinctions. It is not just false 
knowledge, it is perverse to the core. It consists above all of 
magic and divination, “the secrets of the Egyptians, occult 
philosophy, the astrology of the Chaldeans and Indians, the 
countless opinions of the Greeks concerning divinity.” With 
this wisdom no compromise is possible. It is the wisdom of 
those who conspired against the Lord and crucified him. As for 
the “wisdom of this world,” which consists of the profane arts 
and sciences, “poetry, grammar, geometry, rhetoric, music, and 
perhaps medicine,” it too is dangerous in the form in which it 
is offered. Without being radically evil, it has become a tool 
of the demons; and its spirit is now contrary to Jesus Christ. 
It is an alien wisdom which God scatters to the winds, “the 
wealth of sinners.” It is opposed to divine wisdom as the spirit 
of the world is opposed to the spirit of God. Its adepts seek 
to overthrow the gospel with the deceits of their dialectic. 
Origen compares it to the food consecrated to idols which the 
Apostle condemned, to “the leaven of the Pharisees” which 
Jesus denounced before his disciples, to the bar of gold that 
Achan stole at Jericho in spite of Joshua's order: a cursed object 
which seduces us with its brilliant beauty and contaminates 
the whole people. He accuses it of corrupting the faith with 
its sophistries as Eve was seduced by the guile of the serpent, 
of deceiving the wise man with the variety of its theses as 
Solomon was deceived by his wives. He points out that it 


xxvi ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


invariably leaves those who follow it in uncertainty and doubt; 
like Abimelech’s wife and maidservants, it remains barren so 
long as God has not come to heal it. “Do not touch,” he says, 
“the furtive loaves of perverse doctrine. Do not long for the 
deceitful foods of philosophy which entice you away from the 
truth. This is the fast which is pleasing to God.” True, Origen 
does not refuse the use of such nourishment “to those who 
have received full knowledge of the truth”; his language and 
method with a small group of fervent and cultivated disci- 
ples will be different from those he uses with the mass of the 
Christian people. But this is only normal, as any experienced 
educator will agree. The risks and the needs are not in fact the 
same in both cases; what is profitable in one could become 
fatal in the other. Thus one must always be alert “not to wound 
those who still have little training in Christ” and who might 
get caught in the trap. In the last analysis, then, it is hardly an 
exaggeration to speak, with one of Origen’s recent interpreters, 
of “the surprising aversion” that he feels toward this philoso- 
phy “which he knows very well nonetheless.” No doubt one 
must make allowances for Origen’s rhetoric. But there is in 
his faith in Christ a seriousness and sincerity, a power of con- 
viction at once firm and measured and, all in all, a strength of 
faith that bears the signs of the Christian victory beforehand. 
Who could believe henceforth that for the use of those whom 
he called the “perfect” Origen transformed Christianity into a 
sort of philosophical wisdom, that he made it into a “platonic 
gnosis” and abandoned the cross of Christ to the “beginners”? 
This manner of presenting his thought is unfaithful. And it is 
even more of a grievous mistake to propose that according to 
him salvation consists only in the work of the cross “for the 
ordinary Christian,” while “for the Christian gnostic” it will 
be no more than “a higher teaching”; and that to the former, 
the redeemer and healer is present in the Christ of history, to 


Introduction xxvii 


the latter, the eternal Logos simply as a teacher. At the root of 
such interpretations we find the same misunderstanding which 
we have already noted in several of its forms. It is quite true 
that Origen throws into relief the role of the incarnate Logos 
as educator and illuminator of souls; but this trait, far from 
making him akin to the “gnostic” theologians, puts him in 
opposition to them. It is quite true also that he, once again fol- 
lowing St. Paul, means to preach a wisdom that surpasses “the 
simple faith” and that his “perfect believer” must go beyond 
the letter which the narrative of the Savior’s Passion and death 
traces for him. But let us not forget that for him this wisdom 
is a grace of God, altogether different from that prideful and 
miserable knowledge which “the simplest of the Christians put 
to shame.” It is this “true wisdom” which was given of old to 
such men as Isaiah and Jeremiah and which today is shared 
by those who are born in the Spirit. “When we understand, 
we understand by faith”; and to be “set free by the truth” we 
must “abide in the faith.” Let us not ascribe to Origen’s views 
some sort of disdainful arrogance. “Simple faith” or faith in the 
“simple letter” do not mean to him the faith of the simple or 
the lowly, of “those who are inferior according to human judg- 
ment.” One of the characteristics of Jesus’ preaching, Origen 

notes repeatedly, is that it is addressed to all, to the barbarians 

as to the Greeks, to the uneducated as to the learned. By the 
same token, he thinks, a true apostle of Jesus is recognizable 
by the fact that he “does not despise simple people.” He who 

counts himself a believer and wise is, on the contrary, quite 

close to being an unbeliever if he disdains what the world takes 

for folly but what God has chosen: such are the Pharisees who, 

thinking themselves superior, keep themselves apart from the 

multitude. 

Nor does Origen confuse wisdom with wisdom. We 
cite once again his clear declaration against Celsus’s haughty 


XXViil ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


reflections: “Human wisdom is what we call ‘the wisdom of 
the world, which is ‘foolishness with God.’ But the divine wis- 
dom, which is different from the human if it really is divine, 
comes by the grace of God who gives it to those who prove 
themselves to be suitable persons to receive it. . . . Celsus 
describes as very uneducated and as slaves and as quite ignorant 
those who... have not been educated in the learning of the 
Greeks. But the people whom we call very uneducated are 
those who are not ashamed to address lifeless objects.” How- 
ever, there is some excuse here for the error. It stems above all 
from the exegesis which Origen habitually gives to a text from 
the first Epistle to the Corinthians: “For 1 decided to know 
nothing among you except Jesus Christ and him crucified.” In 
the knowledge of which the Apostle here speaks, Origen sees 
no more than a knowledge that is still inferior, in other words 
a knowledge that is ignorant of Christ’s person and work. 
Where Paul intended to speak of the “mystery of the cross” 
which he had “preached in all its starkness,” Origen believes 
that it is simply a question of preaching the external fact of 
the crucifixion without revealing its mystery. Those who know 
only Jesus crucified, he thinks, are those who “suppose that the 
Word made flesh is the whole Word,” who know nothing of 
his “glory” or his divinity. For this reason they are incapable of 
comprehending the meaning of the cross, which is to say that 
they do not know the mystery of our redemption. They have 
not as yet crossed the Jordan with the armies of the true Jesus 
and pushed on to the interior of the promised land to wage 
the final battles there. Origen sees in Paul’s text an intention 
more restrictive than it really is. To him, the Christians who 
keep to this first sermon do not actually have “an elementary 
catechism”; they are at most still in the stage of a preparatory 
catechism. Such people are not necessarily weak in spirit; they 
may be wise according to the world. But they are still carnal 


Introduction xxix 


men. As yet they know Christ only “according to the flesh,” 
and if they wish to remain so, they would deserve the Apostle’s 
blame. The Apostle decided at first to know nothing else while 
he was among them because they could then bear no more. 
Their soul had not been made ready. But when he wrote to 
them later, he made it clear that he possessed a wisdom none- 
theless: a wisdom not of this world bur of God, “a secret and 
hidden wisdom” which he “proclaims among the perfect.” This 
wisdom does not annul the first knowledge but completes 
and transforms it. It is a more profound teaching which con- 
stitutes the understanding of the initial datum. It is the solid 
food which takes the place of the milk of infants, that is, once 
again, the milk not of the “weak,” of those who are simple 
according to the world, but of the v#or in the Pauline sense, 
of those who “had not yet been purified in their habits.” There 
are not, then, two categories of Christians separated by the 
power of their intelligence. There is not a popular preaching 
and a different, more refined, teaching for the intellectuals. 
Our religion “is at once spiritual and corporeal.” And if in cer- 
tain cases it is necessary to begin by preaching “the corporeal 
gospel,” this must always be with the desire to come to the 
point of showing forth the “glory of the only-begotten Son” 
underneath “the form of a servant.” Once one has aroused 
in the souls the taste for “the heavenly wisdom,” one will be 
able “to communicate to it the knowledge which will lead it 
from the Incarnation even to the one who was with God in 
the beginning.” 

But the proclamation of Jesus crucified remains no less 
essential. For “the economy of the Passion” is central. It is 
“the Economy” par excellence. Origen knows that without 
the wood of the cross the leprosy of sin cannot be healed. He 
knows that it is the whole Church, without any distinction of 
categories, that was saved by the blood of Christ. He knows 


XXX ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


that the death of Christ is the Tree of Life for all of us, that 
all fruitfulness comes from this death as from the grain of 
wheat which must fall into the earth and seem to perish. He 
declares that all the glory and all the riches of the Church lie 
in Christ’s Passion. For him, to be converted is “to come to 
the cross of Christ”; and the wisdom of the perfect consists 
not in some other knowledge, but in the contemplation of 
“the profound mysteries which Paul uncovers there for us” 
and then in rejecting all the more strongly the wisdom of the 
world. It is to be crucified to this world’s wisdom. For there is 
total opposition between the narrow way of salvation shown to 
us in the cross of Christ, and the wide and easy way on which 
the philosophy of the wise men of the world seeks to engage 
us. The “vision of the Logos” can be attained only at the price 
of death to the world and ar the cost of great tribulation; and 
no matter how sublime this vision may be, it will never make 
us lose sight of the crucified Jesus, at once priest and victim. 
There is no wisdom that excuses from taking up his cross and 
following him. Even supposing that, like Paul, one has been 
caught up to the third heaven, there is only one way not to fall 
back; and it is precisely this, to “take up the cross and follow 
Jesus in whom ‘we have a great high priest who has passed 
through the heavens.” 

Origen delights in commenting on the Prophet's oracles 
concerning the suffering Servant of Yahweh. He admires the 
profound “philosophy” which the Apostle discerns in the Pas- 
sion. He binds himself to Paul’s statement: Jesus “humbled 
himself even unto death and became obedient even to the 
cross.” Sadly he confirms the fact that many do not under- 
stand this text and “imagine a Jesus inaccessible to suffering” 
and altogether superior, so they think, to all such abasement. 
“Under the guise of religious respect for Jesus,” when they 
come to the rending cry Quare me dereliquisti? they wish to 


Introduction xxxl 


see no more than a token of humility. Origen himself, on the 
other hand, most certainly had a vivid sense of the scandal of 
the mysterium crucis. To say that the Lord of Majesty was cru- 
cified, he who had come down from heaven, how “tortuous” 
such an affirmation appears; how hard to believe! Nonetheless, 
he will not blush at his Savior’s cross. It is just this supreme 
humiliation of the Son of Man, which is ridiculed by the phi- 
losophers, from which the believer draws the power to scorn 
their laughter and their sarcasm. “The Christian faith has no 
fear of scandal.” This scandal becomes a triumph of faith, 
and that which seemed “folly” is transformed into wisdom, 
“into a wisdom so great that it swallows all the wisdom of the 
Egyptians, that is, of this world.” When the light of the cross 
penetrates the Christian's intelligence, it dispels all the dark 
shadows which the mistakes of the philosophers had accumu- 
lated there. It is this light of the cross which illumines the lives 
of the saints and makes them all martyrs, that is, witnesses 
of the Savior. It is the power of the cross that annihilates all 
evil desires; by it, “the whole army of sin and the flesh is put 
to rout.” So great is this power that it procures healing and 
salvation not only for present and future generations, but even 
for those of past centuries. Even more, it is sufficient to save 
not only all mankind but also the celestial orders and powers. 
It is through union with the cross that our mutual union 
in the Father and the Son is realized. And no man was ever 
better placed to hear such a promise than he who hung with 
Jesus on the cross: “For he was a plant worthy of paradise, 
who was joined to the Tree of Life in this way.” “The death of 
Christ reduced to impotence those powers which war against 
the human race.” If the demons fear and tremble, the cause 
is again nothing else but the cross: the blood that ows down 
from it does not appease their thirst but destroys their power. 
It is the cross which has vanquished them and by which we 


XXXli ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


shall vanquish them in our turn. “The power of the cross” 
is irresistible. And so we must faithfully bear its sign, take 
up “the standard of the cross” to meet its struggles and per- 
secutions, so that we too may be able to say with Paul: “Far 
be it from me to glory except in the cross of our Lord Jesus 
Christ.” In summing up, we may say that there is, as it were, 
a twofold advent of the Logos in the soul. At the first advent, 
Christ barely begins to be known; the soul, still “untaught” 
{rudis\ does not see his beauty; it discerns only the birth and 
the crucifixion in the flesh. But the second advent corresponds 
in some way, within the soul, to that advent which will be the 
consummation of the world; to him who reaches perfection, 
or simply Christian maturity, Christ appears transfigured in 
his beauty and his glory. Then, far from rejecting the mystery 
of the Incarnation or of the cross, the soul understands at 
last. Its faith becomes luminous. It finds its own glory in this 
mystery “by which the world has been crucified to me and I 
to the world.” It sees in all clarity that this death to the world 
in Christ is a “blessed death.” Such is, not the public and 
provisional teaching adapted to those who are “weak” or to 
the first stage of the beginners, but rather the final state of the 
perfect, itself a sign and anticipation within the soul of the 
final consummation. For to him for whom the world has been 
crucified and who no longer glories except in the cross, the end 
of the world has come, so to speak. With Romano Guardini, 
Origen could have said: “The cross is the absolute symbol.” 


TRANSLATOR’S 
INTRODUCTION 


by G. W. Butterworth 


I. LirFE AND WRITINGS OF ORIGEN 


“The greatest teacher of the Church after the apostles”— such 
was the description of Origen which Jerome adopted from 
Didymus, the blind theologian of Alexandria, and inserted 
in the preface to his translation of the great master’s Homilies 
on Ezekiel.’ In the preface to his own work, On the Meaning 
of Hebrew Names, Jerome repeated the tribute, remarking that 
“all but the ignorant” recognized it to be true.? Later on, when 
his enthusiasm for Origen had cooled, Jerome found it embar- 
rassing to be reminded of these early laudations. Yet his first 
judgment was certainly sound, and few who study the works 
of Origen today will be disposed to contest it. 

The story of Origen’s life is easily accessible to the student,’ 
and need not be retold here except in outline. He was born 
AD 185-186, probably at Alexandria, of Christian parents. 
At the age of seventeen he narrowly escaped death in the per- 
secution of Severus, when his father Leonides was martyred 
and Origen was with great difficulty prevented from volun- 
tarily sharing his fate. Owing to the departure of Clement 
from Alexandria in the same persecution the headship of the 


XXXiil 


xxxiv ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Catechetical School became vacant, and such was the ability 
and industry of Origen that he was appointed to fill this post 
at the age of eighteen. He labored with increasing success as 
a teacher, working almost day and night with the crowds, 
including heretics and non-Christians as well as members 
of the Church, who attended his lectures or came to consult 
him privately. About AD 215 he visited Caesarea in Palestine, 
where his friends Alexander bishop of Jerusalem and Theoc- 
tistus bishop of Caesarea asked him to lecture in church on 
the Scriptures. Demetrius, patriarch of Alexandria, objected 
to this, for Origen had not been ordained. In spite of the 
protests of Origen’s friends Demetrius demanded his return 
to Alexandria, and he obeyed. 

During the next period of his life, lasting from twelve 
to fifteen years, Origen began the literary work which estab- 
lished his fame throughout the whole Church. A wealthy lay- 
man named Ambrose, whom he had restored from heresy to 
the orthodox faith, became his life-long friend, and supplied 
him with the means to write and publish his books. The first 
parts of the Commentary on St. John were composed then, 
and following them came the treatise on First Principles, a 
comprehensive investigation of Christian doctrine on a scale 
never before attempted. It is probable that this work aroused 
opposition. Origen’s mind was such that he could leave no 
question unprobed; and in the effort to reduce the Churchss 
faith to a single, logical system, based on the Scriptures as they 
were then understood, he was led into speculations which to 
simpler folk appeared fantastic and dangerous. Owing either 
to this, or else to jealousy on the part of Demetrius, or per- 
haps to a combination of both, the relations between Origen 
and his bishop became strained and he took advantage of an 
invitation to visit Greece. Calling at Caesarea on the way, he 
was there ordained presbyter by Theoctistus and Alexander. 


Translator’s Introduction XXXV 


This act caused a final break with Demetrius, who strongly 
disapproved of it; and when Origen returned to Alexandria 
at the conclusion of his visit to Greece it became evident that 
he must seek another home. 

Demetrius called a synod of Egyptian bishops, who 
decided that Origen should no longer be allowed to teach 
at Alexandria. Soon afterwards he was excommunicated, on 
what grounds we do not know, except that Jerome tells us 
they were not doctrinal.* But the sentence, though accepted 
at Rome and throughout a considerable part of the Christian 
world, had little practical effect outside Egypt; and Origen was 
gladly received by Theoctistus at Caesarea, where he became at 
once an honored teacher of the Church. Here he worked from 
AD 231 for the rest of his life. In addition to his writing, he 
expounded the Scriptures to the ordinary church congrega- 
tions and lectured on deeper theological subjects to educated 
students. One of these, Gregory, afterwards called Thauma- 
turgus, or the Wonderworker, has left us, in his Panegyric,’ a 
striking description of Origen. No higher tribute has ever been 
paid by a pupil to a revered master. Gregory was a young man, 
on his way to study law at Berytus, when he met with Ori- 
gen. At the time it seemed a chance meeting, but afterwards 
Gregory could only attribute it to divine providence. Origen’s 
charm of manner, his generous friendship, his wide sympathy 
and consummate wisdom captivated him. For five years he 
remained at Caesarea, and when at last he left to return to his 
native land he felt, to use his own simile, like the prodigal son 
going from his father’s house into the far country. A letter of 
Origen’s reached him shortly after, urging him to dedicate his 
great gifts to God’s service in the ministry of the Church; and 
in spite of much genuine hesitation Gregory became bishop 
of Neo-Caesarea, where he achieved marvelous success.® 


XXXVI ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


The literary work of Origen was enormous in extent. 
Before he left Alexandria he had already written, besides the 
First Principles and five books of the Commentary on St. Jobn, 
two volumes on The Resurrection, ten volumes of Stromata or 
Miscellanies, a Commentary on Psalms i-xxy, eight volumes on 
Genesis and five on Lamentations. This activity was contin- 
ued at Caesarea. He produced Commentaries on almost every 
book of the Bible, both Old and New Testaments. A treatise 
on Prayer was addressed to Ambrose and Tatiana; and when, 
during the persecution of Maximin (235-237) Ambrose and 
Protoctetus, a presbyter of Caesarea, were imprisoned, Ori- 
gen wrote the Exhortation to Martyrdom for their encourage- 
ment. Of a different character are the eight books Against 
Celsus, which contain a detailed answer to a clever attack on 
Christianity made by an educated Greek about half a century 
before. Until he was sixty Origen would not allow his homilies 
delivered extermporaneously in church to be taken down and 
published. But he then withdrew his prohibition, and more 
than two hundred have been preserved, for the most part in 
Latin translations by Rufinus. 

A further proof of his untiring industry, and also of his 
deep reverence for the Scriptures, can be found in the Hexa- 
pia. This was a text of the Old Testament, in which six, and 
sometimes even more, different versions were placed side by 
side in columns for purposes of comparison. ‘The six versions 
were the Hebrew, a transliteration of it in Greek characters, 
and the Greek versions of Aquila, of Symmachus, of the Sep- 
tuagint and of Theodotion. It took Origen twenty-eight years 
to accomplish this task, the object of which was to ascertain 
the true text of the Septuagint. The work extended to fifty 
volumes, and being too large to be copied it did not survive 
for long. Today nothing remains of it but some fragments, not 
inconsiderable in their total bulk, of the Septuagint. 


: ; 
Translator’s Introduction XxxVii 


Origen wrote many letters, and Eusebius was able to 
collect a hundred of them. Unfortunately all but three have 
perished. No loss of his writings is so regrettable as the loss of 
these letters. They would have given us a picture of the man, in 
his extraordinary attractiveness as a teacher and friend, which 
his theological compositions cannot be expected to supply. 
Those that remain are the letter to Gregory Thaumaturgus 
already referred to,’ one to Africanus,® and portions of a third 
quoted in Latin by Jerome and Rufinus. The authenticity of 
this latter is not, how ever, absolutely beyond doubt. The letter 
to Africanus was in answer to one which Africanus had written 
on the subject of the History of Susanna, attached to the book 
of Daniel in the Septuagint. Africanus urged that it was a late 
addition and not part of the original Daniel. In quite modern 
critical fashion he argued that the story was not contained 
in the Hebrew; that it was different in style from the rest of 
Daniel; and above all that it contained plays on Greek words 
which in Hebrew would have been pointless. Origen’s reply 
was to defend the passage. He was unwilling to reject a story 
which had great value for purposes of instruction and which 
had always been accepted in the Church. He had consulted 
Jewish scholars about the puns, but found that they would not 
commit themselves; there might possibly be Hebrew equiv- 
alents or analogies, although they could not produce them. 
This was Origen’s own conclusion. In regard to the alleged 
difference in style, he replies simply that he cannot see it. 
Origen was no higher critic. This letter is of prime importance 
for all who would understand Origen’s character, for it shows 
that he was, essentially and before all else a Christian pastor, 
whose main concern was for the spiritual needs of Christians 
and the traditional faith of the Church. This remains true in 
spite of the undoubted fact that he was chiefly a teacher of the 


xxxvili ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


educated, and that he felt the simpliciores needed correction 
on many points. 

Origen’s later life at Caesarea was varied by visits to dif- 
ferent parts of Palestine, to Athens and to Arabia. The first 
Arabian visit was made in order to convince Beryllus, bishop 
of Bostra, of the falsity of his views on the subject of the 
Incarnation, and the second to deal with errors concerning 
the Resurrection. In both cases he was successful. All through 
his life Origen appears as a defender of orthodox doctrine 
against heresy; and what is more, as one who could win men 
to his own viewpoint by persuasion and sympathy. Finally, in 
AD 250, when the persecution of Decius broke out, Origen 
was imprisoned, probably at Tyre. His friend Alexander of 
Jerusalem died in prison. Origen himself was cruelly tortured, 
but bore his suffering with the same undaunted spirit that 
he had displayed since boyhood. The death of Decius in 251 
gave him release from prison. But his health was broken by 
all that he had undergone, and he died at Tyre in 253, in the 
seventieth year of his age. His tomb was still to be seen there 
at the close of the twelfth century. 

Origen is one of those figures, none too common even 
in Church history, of whose character we can say that we 
know nothing but what is good. He was humble and free from 
envy, caring neither for power nor wealth. He bore unmer- 
ited suffering, from friends and foes alike, without complaint. 
His life, from beginning to end, was hard and strenuous. His 
courage never failed, and he died in reality a martyr’s death. 
He loved truth with a sincerity and devotion rarely equaled, 
and never excelled. Intellectually he stands pre-eminent and 
alone, towering above the Greek fathers as Augustine towers 
above the Latins. The wide sweep of his thought is amazing. 
He contemplates a universe, not small and narrow as was that 


of many of his contemporaries, but of immense magnitude, 


: ; 
Translator’s Introduction XXXiX 


world following world in almost infinite sequence, from the 
dim primeval epoch when God created all souls equal and free, 
to the far-off event when after countless vicissitudes of degra- 
dation and suffering they shall return to their original unity 
and perfection, and “God shall be all in all.” Tt may be that 
the Church of those days was right in warning her children 
off these speculations, and keeping them to the path of a sim- 
pler and more definite faith; lest perhaps, through overmuch 
thinking on problems insoluble to man, weaker souls should 
find themselves, like Milton’s angels, “in wandering mazes 
lost.” We of these days, however, cannot help regretting, not 
without a sense of shame, that this salutary warning should 
have been accompanied, as it was, by fierce denunciations 
which are neither Christian nor rational. And yet the fact that 
Origen stands outside the formal calendar of Christian saints 
gives him a certain solitariness which is not altogether inap- 
propriate. For it can be said with truth that there is no father 
of the Church whose works are more profitable for study and 
whose temper and character are more worthy of our imitation. 


Il. Tue Frest Principres: DATE AND 
CIRCUMSTANCES OF ITs COMPOSITION 


The treatise on First Principles was written before Origen 
left Alexandria for good in AD 231, that is, before he was 
forty-six years of age. When we seek for a more precise date 
we encounter difficulties. Our sources of information are the 
treatise itself and Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. VI. 14-24. From the 
first we obtain the following facts. 

In Bk. II., Ch. iii. 6 (see p. 110 below) Origen refers to 
his Commentary on Genesis 1:1, a8 a work already written. 
On the contrary, in Bk. I., Ch. ii. 6 (see p. 25 below), when 


xl ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


mentioning Genesis 1:26, he promises to explain the verse 
more carefully when he reaches it in his Commentary. The 
verse was in fact expounded in the fourth book of the Com- 
mentary and Genesis 1:16—18 in the third. As there were eight 
books of this Commentary written before the year 231, it 
seems probable that the work was begun quite early, especially 
when we remember that Origen was engaged in several differ- 
ent compositions at the same time. 

In Bk. II., Ch. iv. 4 (see p. 123 below) Origen refers the 
reader to his Commentary on the Second Psalm. Evidently this 
work also was being written contemporaneously with the First 
Principles. 

In Bk. IT., Ch. x. 1 (see p. 173 below) mention is made of 
the books on the Reswrrection which were an carly work, being 
themselves quoted, according to Eusebius, in the Commentary 
on Lamentations. 

From these passages all the knowledge we obtain is that 
the books on First Principles were written at a time when Ori- 
gen was also at work on the commentaries on Genesis, the 
Psalms and Lamentations. These were not, however, his earli- 
est compositions, for the books on the Resurrection preceded 
them, as did also the beginning of the Commentary on St. John, 
which he calls “the firstfruits of my labors in Alexandria.”’ 

The question is, therefore, when were the commentaries 
begun? This turns on our view of the chronology of Eusebius 
in the Sixth Book of his Eeclesiastical History. In Ch. 23 of this 
Book Eusebius implies that Origen began his commentaries 
immediately after his return from the interview with Mam- 
maea, the aunt of the Emperor Elagabalus (218~222), and 
the mother of his successor, Alexander Severus (222-235). 
Mammaea would have been at Antioch in the year 218, when 
her nephew visited the city after his victory over Macrinas. 
But the text of Eusebius appears to date this visit in the time 


Translator's Introduction xli 


of Alexander. If this were so, it would either be a visit at the 
beginning of Alexander’s reign, of which otherwise we know 
nothing, or else one that occurred after 231. The latter is very 
improbable, since Eusebius does not mention Origen’s depar- 
ture from Alexandria until Ch. 26, after giving a long account 
of his exegetical work in that city in Chs. 24 and 25. While we 
need not suppose that every detail of Eusebius’s chronology 
is correct, it is evident that he is taking pains to place events 
in what he regards as their proper order. We may therefore 
conclude that, although the mention of Alexander in Ch. 
21 brings to his mind the invitation sent by this Emperor's 
mother to Origen, the incident belongs in reality to the reign 
of Elagabalus, whom Eusebius has mentioned under his true 
name Antoninus only a few lines previously. It was after 218, 
then, that Origen began his commentaries, “at the urgent 
desire of Ambrose, who not only employed innumerable 
incentives in the form of requests and exhortations, but also 
furnished abundant means for the work.”* 

‘The First Principles may have been written, therefore, at 
any date between, let us say, 219 and 230. But in view of the 
fact that the references contained in it to the commentaries on 
Genesis and the Psalms are to quite early parts of these works, 
we can with reasonable certainty fix the date not later than 
AD 225. Origen would then have been between thirty-five 
and forty years old when the work was complete. 

It is true that some scholars favor an earlier date than this. 
Schnitzer gives 213 and Preuschen 212-215. These dates can 
only be maintained on the assumption that the chronology of 
Eusebius is altogether unreliable. But there is good reason on 
general grounds for holding to 218 as the time when Origen 
began his work of writing commentaries. The first years of his 
adult life, after the departure of Clement in 202, were so fully 
occupied with teaching at Alexandria that, as we are distinctly 


xiii ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


told, he had no time to study the Scriptures properly. Then he 
called Heracles to take a share in the work of the school, and 
immediately began his researches on the Biblical text which 
culminated in the Hexapla. This was doubtless a preliminary 
to the production of the commentaries. The need for these 
was only slowly becoming apparent in the Church; although 
Heracleon the Gnostic had written a Commentary on St. John 
some forty or fifty years previously, and it was this which in 
all probability inspired Origen to attempt his own work on 
the same Gospel. Then, after the first visit to Caesarea, came 
the definite request of Ambrose that he should produce com- 
mentaries systematically and on a large scale. With the request 
was joined, as we have seen, the offer of ample financial help 
which enabled Origen to accede to it. 

‘The First Principles was a work of an entirely different 
character from the commentaries. For if these latter were, at 
least in the form and scope which Origen gave them, new to 
the Church, the First Principles was a fresh departure alto- 
gether. Not that it was without precursors. Its originality con- 
sisted in its vastness of plan, in the unity of its purpose, and in 
the genius with which it was executed. Origen would certainly 
not have regarded himself as a pioneer, still less as a teacher 
of doubtful orthodoxy. He was the exponent of the Christian 
tradition to thoughtful and cultivated men; but he would 
subject that tradition to a far keener examination than his 
predecessors had ventured upon. De Faye, in his recent work 
on Origen,” has suggested that the First Principles was designed 
to take the place of the Didaskalos, or Teacher, which Clem- 
ent had planned to follow on his Protreptikos and Paidagogos, 
but which he was never able to write.’ It is more natural to 
suppose that the Stromata and the Hypotyposes were intended 
to be the continuation of the two works just mentioned. But 
it would appear that Clement himself composed a work on 


Translator’s Introduction xlili 


First Principles and Theology.’ It is no longer extant; in fact we 
have no certain mention of it except in his own works. Perhaps 
it was never published at all in the strict sense of the word, 
but used solely for the students to whom Clement lectured 
in the Catechetical School. This treatise probably dealt with 
the origin of the world, among other subjects, and it is not 
unreasonable to regard it as having laid down the lines which 
Origen afterwards followed. In both works the substance was 
simply the lectures delivered to students in the School. Zahn 
has conjectured that a fragment found in John Malalas may 
refer to this lost work of Clement’s. It runs as follows: “The 
Syrian, the son of Agenor, was a man of wisdom, who com- 
posed his Arithmetical Philosophy in the Phoenician language. 
He suggested that First Principles were incorporeal, that bod- 
ies underwent changes, and that souls entered into different 
kinds of animals. He first expounded these doctrines, as the 
most wise Clement wrote of them.”° The likeness between 
this and some of the contents of Origen’s First Principles is at 
once evident. Even if Zahn’s identification is not correct, we 
can yet see that Origen was dealing with questions which had 
been raised and discussed in the School before his time, and 
which were then admitted to be legitimate subjects for inquiry. 


III. THE TRANSLATION OF RUFINUS: 
CIRCUMSTANCES OF ITs COMPOSITION 


As I have already remarked, the grounds on which Origen 
was condemned by the Synod of bishops called by Demetrius 
in Alexandria were not doctrinal.’ That is to say, the First 
Principles was not then and there held to be heretical; if it had 
been, the fact would certainly have come into prominence. 
Nonetheless, the work could scarcely fail to cause offense, in 


xliv ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


so far as it came to the knowledge of the simpliciores, who 
even in Clement’s day were disposed to fear all thinking and 
to raise the cry, “Only believe.”* As time went on the offense 
would be likely to increase. For Origen was not a lonely figure 
in the Church. He had many followers, who admired him not 
only for his interpretations of the Scriptures but also for his 
theological doctrines. 

The first serious attack was made by Methodius, bishop 
of Patara in Lycia, in the early years of the fourth century. 
He wrote vigorously against Origen and his followers in 
regard to doctrines characteristic of the First Principles, viz: 
the eternity of creation, the pre-existence of souls and the 
spiritual nature of the resurrection body. At the Council of 
Nicaea Origen’s name and authority do not appear to have 
been invoked by either side, but in the controversies which 
followed it was not long before the Arians discovered that 
some support for their distinctive teaching might be drawn 
from the considerable degree of subordination which he had 
predicated of the Son. Others, however, including such great 
names as Athanasius and the Cappadocian fathers, Basil and 
the two Gregories, while admitting that his works were not 
wholly free from error, yet regarded him as orthodox in the 
main and defended him. 

Towards the end of the fourth century Epiphanius, bishop 
of Salamis in Cyprus, renewed the attack. In two works, the 
Anchoratus and the Adv. Heresies, he includes Origen among 
the heretics, on the grounds previously set forth by Metho- 
dius and on others dealing with the nature of the Son and his 
relation to the Father. Origen was charged with teaching that 
the Son, though generated from the essence of the Father, was 
nevertheless a creature, bearing the title Son by courtesy and 
not by right; that the Holy Spirit was also a creature; and that 
one day the Kingdom of Christ would come to an end and 


Translator’s Introduction xlyv 


all beings, including the devil himself, would be reconciled 
and restored to God. 

Epiphanius felt it to be not enough to write against Ori- 
gen; in his old age he traveled to Palestine in order to extir- 
pate, if possible, from the minds of all who were well-disposed 
towards the great theologian every trace of what he considered 
to be pestilent heresies. Origen had now been dead nearly 
one hundred and forty years, and the Church had changed 
from being a body of persecuted believers into a victorious 
institution, honored and privileged by the State. The zeal for 
repression of which she had once been the victim was now 
directed against all who would not conform to the type of 
thought now in favor, a type more rigid than that which was 
held to be permissible for educated men in the days of Origen. 
Epiphanius was a true representative of his age in this respect. 
There were living near Jerusalem at this time Rufinus, who 
had established a monastery on the Mount of Olives in AD 
377, and Jerome, who had dwelt similarly at Bethlehem since 
386. Both were admirers of Origen; and so, too, was John, 
bishop of Jerusalem. Not one of these would have consented 
to be bound by every fragment of Origen’s teaching, but they 
respected his genius and revered his memory. Jerome, in par- 
ticular, had begun to translate Origen’s Homilies even before 
he left Rome. He used Origen’s Commentary on Ephesians 
freely in writing his own Commentary on that epistle, bor- 
rowing then without question much of Origen’s speculation 
on the angelic beings which he afterwards repudiated. His 
prefaces, too, as we have seen, speak of Origen in the highest 
possible terms. 

The first act of Epiphanius was to preach, at the invitation 
of the bishop, in the Church of the Resurrection at Jerusalem. 
‘The sermon was a fierce attack upon Origenism directed, as it 
seemed to those who heard it, against the bishop himself. He 


xlvi ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


followed this up by urging the monks to dissociate themselves 
from their bishop until he had cleared himself from the suspi- 
cion of heresy. Jerome took alarm at this, for he was sensitive 
to the least imputation of heresy, and adopted the attitude rec- 
ommended by Epiphanius. Rufinus, however, was the leading 
member of a group of clergy who supported the bishop. This 
caused the first breach between Jerome and Rufinus; but it did 
not last long, for after Epiphanius had returned to Cyprus the 
two friends were reconciled, and Jerome returned to commu- 
nion with his bishop. 

It is clear, however, that there still remained a diversity of 
feeling and outlook upon the subject of Origen which was 
likely to cause trouble if ever the dispute should arise again. To 
us Jerome appears to have shown extreme timidity in the face 
of an accusation which was not directed against him personally 
and which he could easily have rebutted. We must remember, 
on the other hand, that a charge of heresy, if substantiated, was 
then becoming a serious matter for any man of prominence 
in the Church, involving perhaps loss of liberty, or even of life 
itself. Jerome, too, was a Latin, and had little sympathy with 
the Greek habit of thinking out problems. Anyway it is certain 
that, in spite of all he had previously written in Origen’s praise, 
he determined that for the future he would say or do nothing 
to compromise himself. 

There the matter might have ended, had not Rufinus 
returned to Italy in 397. He had read and lectured in Greek 
for many years, and was familiar with the writings of the early 
Greek fathers, including Origen. He brought back with him 
many manuscripts of these works. They were then unknown 
in Italy. Even Pope Anastasius, when asked a little later on 
to condemn Origen, while readily agreeing to do so on the 
basis of a few extracts from the First Principles, yet admitted 
that he did not know either the author or his writings. But 


Translator’s Introduction xbvii 


there was a certain friend of Rufinus, named Macarius, who 
had heard of the First Principles and was anxious to read it, 
hoping to find in it some arguments to help him in a contro- 
versy in which he was then engaged with the mathematici, or 
pagan astrologers. He had dreamed of a ship coming to Italy 
laden with the spoils of the East; and when Rufinus appeared 
he interpreted the dream as an indication of his return and 
begged him to translate the work, for he was unable himself to 
read it in Greek. Rufinus hesitated, knowing well the odium 
which would gather round any man who seemed to be friendly 
towards Origen. Finally, however, he consented, and produced 
the version which is now before us. 

Rufinus did not believe that the Greek text which had 
come down to him was in every detail authentic. He could not 
imagine a time when Christian thought had been more fluid 
than it was in his own day; and although he was well aware 
that Origen was a bold thinker, he felt it to be quite impos- 
sible that he should have differed on any material point from 
the theology of the fourth century. That the text of the First 
Principles did so differ was plain. It was daily being quoted as 
evidence of its author’s heresy. Rufinus maintained, without 
any doubt in all honesty, that the text had been tampered with 
by heretics. To prove this he translated and published with his 
version of the First Principles the first book of the Defense of 
Origen, a work composed by Pamphilus the martyr in collab- 
oration with Eusebius of Caesarea, the Church historian.’ The 
object of this work was to refute the attacks made on Origen 
by Methodius and others. 

Jerome asserted afterwards that this book was written by 
Eusebius and not by Pamphilus; but this is contradicted by 
the statement of Eusebius himself and by the later testimony 
of Photius, who tells us that Eusebius and Pamphilus wrote 
the first five books together and that the sixth was composed 


xlviii ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


by Eusebius alone after the martyr’s death.* Rufinus attributes 
the first book to Pamphilus alone; and in this he was probably 
correct, since in it the name of Pamphilus is prefixed, in dia- 
logue fashion, to all the paragraphs which state the objections 
made to Origen’s teaching or introduce his replies, the latter 
being presented largely in Origen’s own words. Moreover at 
the beginning of the book the first person singular is used. 
‘The authority of Pamphilus the martyr was very great, and it 
was a natural method of protection for Rufinus to make the 
Defense of Origen known to the Latin world as a preliminary 
to the publication of the First Principles. 

The Defense, so far as we have it in Rufinus’s translation, 
opens with five chapters wherein Origen’s faith in regard to the 
Church tradition, the nature of heresy, and the doctrines of 
the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, together with the Incarnation 
is defined by quotations made from his own writings. These 
chapters are wholly orthodox; for, as we have already said, 
Origen counted it his business to defend the Church tradition 
and to explain its meaning to intelligent men. Pamphilus sums 
up this section by exclaiming: “What can be so correct as this, 
what so true, what so catholic, what more useful for general 
instruction even among those who rage against him with bitter 
enmity, what so entirely free from blame?” 

We are, however, almost completely dependent upon Ruf- 
nus for our knowledge of what actually it was that Origen said 
and Pamphilus praised. Only in a few cases do we possess the 
Greek which enables us to check him, and when we can do 
this the result is not satisfactory. For instance, in Ch. IV., on 
the Holy Spirit, Rufinus writes as follows: “But for us there 
is one God the Father, from whom are all things. There is 
therefore one true God who, as I said, is the fount of deity, 
and one Christ the maker of christs, and one Holy Spirit who 


makes the Holy Spirit in soul of every saint.” Now Origen’s 


Translator’s Introduction xlix 


own statement, as Pamphilus quoted it in Greek, was to the 
effect that the Father’s work embraces the whole universe, the 
work of the Son extends to rational creatures only, and the 
work of the Spirit is confined to the saints. The Son is there- 
fore “less” than the Father, and the Spirit “still less” than the 
Son. It could not have been by accident or by a mere habit of 
loose translation that these offensive phrases were avoided; the 
omission was deliberate. When Pamphilus quoted this passage 
of Origen, clearly he did not realize that it might be called 
heretical. This point weakens considerably the contention of 
Rufinus that the text of Origen had been corrupted by here- 
tics; if anything had changed it was the authorized theology 
of the Church. 

‘The Defense goes on to enumerate nine charges made 
against Origen’s teaching and to give answers to them in his 
own words supplemented by the explanations of Pamphi- 
lus. Most of the charges are easily disposed of; for they relate 
to questions which are satisfactorily dealt with in the First 
Principles, even though Origen’s statements may sometimes 
lend themselves to perversion by hostile critics. For instance, 
some affirmed that he denied the literal truth of Scripture and 
the events of our Lord’s earthly life. But Origen’s teaching is 
quite clear: he only denied the literal truth in such stories as 
the Garden of Eden and the Fall, or others containing similar 
anthropomorphisms, where it seemed to him to be incredible. 
Ordinary historical facts he accepted readily enough, although 
often he did not consider them important or even edifying. 
The charge, therefore, while not wholly unintelligible, admits 
of a reasonable answer. 

A more serious charge is that Origen denied the reality of 
punishment in the next life, because men would then have no 
bodies. Again, Origen’s doctrine on these questions, though 
it ran counter to the gross materialism of many in his time, 


| ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


is both rational and scriptural. He found the term “spiritual 
body” in the Scriptures and held fast to it. The body, he con- 
tended, must be suitable to the sphere in which it has to live, 
and in a spiritual world we shall need spiritual bodies. These 
would be the same bodies which we have now, because they 
would be garments of the same personality; but they would 
not resemble the earthly body in appearance or structure or 
function. Punishment too, must be disciplinary and remedial 
in character and not a mere infliction of pain, which would be 
unworthy of God. All this is clearly and intelligently argued in 
the First Principles; in fact, it proceeds directly from Origen’s 
idea of God and forms the basis of his whole system of theol- 
ogy. But it lay open to attack by men whose ideas of heaven 
were framed after the pattern of things on earth. Pamphi- 
lus spends much space in answering this charge on Origen’s 
lines. Once again, however, we have to complain of a serious 
mistranslation by Rufinus. He deliberately omits the phrase 
“spiritual bodies,” found both in Origen and in Pamphilus. 
He could not possibly have claimed that heretics had inserted 
this in the text, when its source was so obvious. It was omitted 
in the hope of conciliating his Latin readers. 

A further charge is that Origen held false opinions about 
the soul. Here, too, Pamphilus feels the need of defending him 
at some length. The Church, he says, had not spoken deci- 
sively on this question. If it had, then Origen might have been 
deserving of blame; but in fact many different opinions were 
held by Christians about the origin and nature of the soul. 
Moreover, here as elsewhere, Origen put forward his views for 
discussion, and not as settled dogmas. The last charge of all, 
and perhaps the most difficult one to counter, is that Origen 
taught the doctrine of transmigration of souls. Now any reader 
of the First Principles, if he takes into consideration, as he 
must do, the irrefutable evidence of Jerome and the Emperor 


tt 


Translator’s Introduction li 


Justinian, will be forced to admit that Origen at least allowed 
the possibility of transmigration. That is putting the case at 
its lowest. Pamphilus does not quote the evidence of the First 
Principles. He relies on passages from the Commentary on St. 
Matthew, in which Origen argues against the doctrine. We 
possess the Greek text of this passage, so that there can be no 
doubt of its genuineness. The argument runs as follows: if such 
transmigration should occur, it would happen, by hypothesis, 
as a punishment for sin. What then could prevent the process 
from going on infinitely, and destroying the possibility ofa 
time when “heaven and earth shall pass away”? If, on the other 
hand, men should at last, one by one and through infinite 
ages, become purified so as no longer to need bodies, what 
then becomes of the statement of Scripture, “When the Son 
of Man cometh, shall He find faith on the earth?” This rea- 
soning is very different from that in the First Principles. It is 
possible that Origen’s opinion had changed in the intervening 
years. Or he may have felt that more caution was needed in a 
commentary which would circulate widely among all classes 
of Christians, than in a treatise which reflected for the most 
part the discussions between himself and his students in the 
Catechetical School. 

One result of this examination of Pamphilus’s Defense is 
to put us on our guard when reading Rufinus. Pamphilus, 
enthusiastic though he was, had felt it needful to exercise cau- 
tion and to make certain admissions when defending Origen. 
Rufinus did not dare to let even Pamphilus speak for himself. 
What then would he do with Origen? He is perfectly candid 
with his readers, at least in a general way. He would alter Ori- 
gen where he thought him wrong; not arbitrarily, of course, 
but in accordance with statements of an orthodox character to 
be found elsewhere in his writings. But to justify himself still 
further, Rufinus wrote a small pamphlet on “Zhe Corruption 


lii ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


of the Works of Origen” and attached it to the translation of 
the First Principles.’ Here he gives more fully his reasons for 
altering the text. They are as follows: 

(i) /t was impossible to suppose that so intelligent and learned 
a man as Origen should have contradicted himself. A difference 
between works written in youth and old age might be natural, 
due either to forgetfulness or to change of opinion in the interval. 
But Origen exhibits contradictions in the same passage, almost 
in successive sentences. 

‘This argument is answered by Jerome in his Apology, Bk. 
IL, Ch. 16. Rufinus brings forward but one instance, namely, 
that in the same passage Origen says that the Holy Spirit is 
of the divine essence and also numbers him among created 
beings. This is from the First Principles. Jerome points out 
that Eusebius and Didymus had both accepted the offensive 
passage as orthodox. Neither Didymus, who was himself a 
commentator on the First Principles, nor Eusebius, had ever 
complained that the text had been interpolated by heretics. 
What Didymus said was that, to use Jerome's words, “simple 
men like us” did not understand Origen’s real meaning, which 
was quite orthodox. Of course it was, we must agree. For 
Origen accepted the Church tradition that Father, Son and 
Holy Spirit were consubstantial. What he had to account for 
was the order of the Persons, and in particular the priority of 
the Father. If Origen’s solution of the problem was wrong, the 
proper course was to propose a better one. Jerome and Rufi- 
nus both preferred to leave this problem unsolved and to be 
content with the acceptance of a formula. But they dealt with 
Origen in different ways, the one calling him a heretic, the 
other defending him by imputing his reasonings to heretics. 

(ii) Other writers of unquestioned orthodoxy had had their 
works corrupted by heretics; as for instance Clement of Rome, 
Clement of Alexandria and Dionysius of Alexandria. 


Translator’s Introduction liti 


In regard to Clement of Rome Rufinus was misled by 
the universal opinion of his day that the Recognitions were his 
work. As for the others, the natural inference is, as Jerome 
clearly sees, that (supposing the incriminated passages to be 
heretical) the authors may have made mistakes; or that incau- 
tious statements may have been allowed before the time of 
Arius but carefully scrutinized after; or that unskillful copyists 
may have changed the text inadvertently. We need not spend 
longer on this. 

(iii) Origen himself had complained, in a letter still extant, 
that his works had been corrupted by heretics. 

‘The letter of Origen, which Rufinus here professes to 
translate, is of great interest. It deals only with one specific 
point, the possibility of the devil’s salvation. Origen denies 
that he ever asserted this; only a madman could have done 
so. A discussion had taken place between himself and a here- 
tic, of which notes had been made and afterwards published. 
Origen declares that he had never given the matter a second 
thought until it was brought to his notice that an incorrect 
version was being circulated. He discovered on inquiry that 
the notes had been revised for publication with the object, as 
the author calmly admitted, of “improving” them. The letter, 
as given by Rufinus, goes on to speak of a forged work which 
had been published under Origen’s name and which contained 
heretical statements. The author of this was discovered and his 
work condemned as a forgery in his own presence by a group 
of Origen’s friends. 

The only point we need consider here is that relating to 
the devil’s salvation. According to the First Principles Origen 
did assert that the devil would at last be saved. It is indeed 
an essential part of his system of thought. Again and again 
he returns to his favorite text, “that God may be all in all.” 


Why then should he have denied it? We should be tempted 


Bf oe et eet ee 


liv ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


to suppose that the letter is not authentic, but for the fact that 
it was available to Jerome also and must therefore have been 
one of the collection of Origen’s letters known then to all the 
Greek world. But again Jerome gives us at any rate a partial 
answer to the argument of Rufinus. He proves that the latter 
has not presented the letter fairly. He has omitted the first 
part, which explains the second. Jerome translates this first 
part for us.° It is a bold and outspoken defense of himself by 
Origen against Demetrius of Alexandria and others who had 
condemned him. The contents are quite in Origen’s manner. 
The Scripture itself declares, he says, that leaders and princes 
may go wrong; this is now being fulfilled. Yet we must not hate 
them, but rather pity and pray for them. We must not speak 
evil of any man. Michael would not even rail at the devil, but 
left it to God to rebuke him. Now, Origen continues, not only 
gross sinners, such as adulterers and thieves, shall be shut out 
of the kingdom of God, but evil speakers too. So careful is he, 
therefore, in view of this warning, that he will not even rail at 
the devil. But as a result of this care, some have charged him 
with asserting the salvation of the devil, which only a madman 
would assert. 

By suppressing the first part of the letter with its incon- 
venient criticism of bishops, and also the definite statement 
of Origen that he will not rail even at the devil, Rufinus has 
given a false impression of the letter, in spite of the superficial 
accuracy of such portions as he quotes. 

Jerome goes on to relate another fact which bears upon 
this question. There was current a dialogue between Origen 
and Candidus, a Valentinian. Candidus asserted that the devil 
was of a wholly evil nature and could not be saved. Origen 
maintained that it was by his own fault and not by his evil 
nature that the devil fell, and that he might have been saved if 


| 


Translator’s Introduction lv 


he had so willed. Candidus turns this into an admission that 
the devil will be saved, which Origen denies. 

It is clear from all this that what Origen was forced by the 
logic of his thought to assert was the theoretical possibility of 
the devil’s salvation. In no way could he avoid this. When he 
is dealing with ultimate problems, as in the First Principles, 
he is certainly carried beyond this theoretical possibility. In 
the last resort, when God is “all in all,” there is no room for 
a devil as such. Must we then agree with Denis, that this let- 
ter, if genuine, would prove “that Origen was weak enough 
to retract .. . not only what he had thought, but what he 
continued to think”?’ We need not go so far as this. When 
working out a speculative theology, as in the First Principles, an 
author must be allowed freedom to indicate, not dogmatically 
but suggestively for discussion, where his principles appear to 
lead. Practical teaching to an uneducated multitude is another 
thing. More care would be needed then, and a bold teacher 
ought not to be pressed to reduce all his speculative conclu- 
sions to categorical dogmas. Origen may quite justly have 
claimed this protection, especially if it be the case, as he is 
said to have asserted in his letter to Fabian of Rome, that the 
First Principles was published in the beginning by Ambrose 
without his knowledge.® 

We need not deal with the other examples given by Rufi- _ 
nus of the corruption of writings by heretics. They add nothing 
to the force of his argument. He has certainly not established 
any right to give the world a garbled version of Origen’s work. 
On the contrary, he has laid himself under the suspicion that 
fear of heresy is with him a stronger motive than love of truth. 
Both when translating Pamphilus and when quoting Origen’s 
letter he has shown himself willing to alter the text, or to omit 
portions of it, on no evidence whatever, and for no purpose 
except to conciliate the prejudices of his readers and to give 


en Se 


li ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


greater authority to his translation. But if he uses so much 
freedom in framing this preliminary defense of his work, we 
must clearly examine the translation itself with critical eyes. 
For our desire is simply to discover what Origen taught. Only 
by adhering strictly to the truth can we rightly estimate his 
services to the Church and his position in the development 
of Christian doctrine. 


IV. THE CONTROVERSY BETWEEN 
JEROME AND RUFINUS 


Besides fortifying himself by the publication of the two 
abovementioned introductory essays Rufinus used another 
weapon of defense. In his own preface he referred in glowing 
terms to the previous translations of Origen’s works made by 
Jerome. Now when we recall the disturbance at Jerusalem 
only a few years before, when Jerome had openly taken his 
stand against Origen, we can hardly acquit Rufinus of guile 
in making these allusions. Jerome, according to him, “had 
inspired every one with a deep longing to read Origen and 
study him earnestly.” He had promised to continue his own 
translations, but the desire to be a “father of the word” and not 
a mere translator had conquered him, and he was now much 
too busy with his own compositions. Consequently Rufinus 
had consented to “take up the work which was begun and 
approved by him,” although he confesses that he cannot bring 
to it an ability comparable with that of Jerome. He goes on to 
describe the method of his translation, and to declare that it 
was the same method as that followed by Jerome himself, who 
had so “smoothed over and emended” any passages likely to 
cause offense, that “a Latin reader would find in them nothing 
out of harmony with our faith.” 


Translator’s Introduction lvii 


All this was strictly true, but seeing that Jerome had by 
this time changed his opinion about Origen we cannot be 
surprised that he took exception to Rufinus’s statements when 
he heard of them. For their effect was at the very least to rep- 
resent him as acquiescing in every doctrine of Origen which 
Rufinus had thought fit not to remove from his translation. 
In the quarrel at Jerusalem Rufinus had taken an opposite 
side to Jerome, as we have seen. That is to say, he was more 
liberal-minded than Jerome in regard to what was or was not 
permissible as speculation for purposes of discussion. If, know- 
ing Jerome as he did, Rufinus really thought that he would 
take his eulogy as a sincere compliment, he must have been 
singularly dull. We must admit, however, that in his subse- 
quent Defense he does protest most strongly that his praise 
was sincerely meant. 

‘The translation of the First Principles soon came into the 
hands of Jerome’s friends in Italy, of whom Pammachius, 
Oceanus and Marcella were the chief. They were horrified by 
some of the doctrines still remaining in it and by the implied 
suggestion that Jerome would raise no objection to them. 
‘They sent him, therefore, a copy of the work with a request 
for information. Jerome replied by making a faithful Latin 
translation of the whole of the First Principles and sending it 
to Pammachius with a covering letter.'! He admits that he had 
once praised Origen for his good work; he would still do so if 
others would not praise his errors. Origen’s doctrines on the 
nature of the Son and the Holy Spirit, on the pre-existence of 
souls, on the resurrection, and on the ultimate restitution of all 
things, when it will be “the same for Gabriel as for the devil, 
for Paul as for Caiaphas, for virgins as for prostitutes,” were 
poisonous heresies. No Latin writer had ever yet ventured to 
translate his works on the Resurrection and on First Principles, 
or the Stromata and the Commentaries, but only the Homilies, 


{viii ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


or popular addresses, which were harmless. The assertion that 
Origen’s works had been corrupted by heretics Jerome denies; 
both Eusebius and Didymus had taken for granted that Ori- 
gen held the incriminated views. Moreover, Jerome cannot 
believe that Pamphilus wrote the first book of the Defense; it 
must be by Eusebius. If, however, Pamphilus did write it, his 
martyrdom would wash away the fault. 

Jerome’s defense was in the main a reasonable one. He 
had a right to change his opinion of Origen if he so wished. 
But he was not candid enough to confess that in his previous 
writings he had adopted as his own without question some at 
least of the doctrines which he was now condemning, namely, 
the fall of souls from a heavenly state into human bodies and 
the subjection of Lucifer and the other opposing powers to 
the rule of Christ in his future kingdom. Moreover, he cannot 
restrain his pen from making remarks about Rufinus which 
are both spiteful and untrue. The letter, however, was not 
addressed to Rufinus and presumably need never have come 
to his knowledge. Jerome had enclosed with it a short letter 
for Rufinus, which Pammachius was asked to deliver. This was 
written in a different strain. It expostulated with him for the 
language he had used in the preface to the First Principles, but 
it also contained expressions of esteem and friendship which 
should have been sufficient to avert a quarrel between the two. 
Unfortunately Pammachius, by what we can only regard as 
a gross breach of faith, did not deliver this letter. Instead, he 
and his friends published Jerome’s letter to him, and when 
this came to the knowledge of Rufinus, he felt it necessary to 
record his own case in the form of a lengthy Defense. 

The Defense enumerates, as was inevitable, the instances 
in which Jerome in his early days had freely accepted Ori- 
gen’s opinions. If Jerome had frankly admitted a change of 
views all this would have been irrelevant; but, as we have seen, 


Br ie ooh ce te Pte i a foie 


Translator’s Introduction lix 


he shrank from doing this. Little exception can be taken to 
the tone of Rufinus’s statements; he writes warmly, but in a 
Christian spirit. The facts were proved beyond dispute from 
Jerome's own writings; he had actually used many passages of 
Origen which he now objected to. But over and above this 
there emerge from the discussion three points which reveal the 
different tempers of the two men. A consideration of these will 
help us to view the controversy in a true light. 

First, Rufinus comments on Jerome’s lack of charity. He 
is aware of his opponent's literary skill, that he can so han- 
dle words as “to make one whom he wishes to injure and 
to wound appear to have received neither wounds nor inju- 
ries. .. . Any idle gossip stirs him up to fault-finding and 
*? “T will pardon him then, though he never par- 
dons others, but condemns them for their words without any 
thought of charity.”> As for himself, he adds at the close: “I ask 
for pardon, if 1 have handled the matter too roughly.”* Jerome's 
great services to the Church are sadly marred by his dogmatic 
and overbearing manner and by the use of his brilliant gifts 
for attacking those whom personally he disliked. 

Again, Rufinus upholds the position that Christians are 
free to discuss questions even though they may not be able to 
reach the complete truth about them. Jerome and the world 
to which he belonged appear to have ruled out all discussion 
whatever. They are aware of no difficulties; they are troubled 
by no problems. It is important to remember that Rufinus, 
whose own belief was severely orthodox, should have been 
ready to defend Origen on this point, as Pamphilus had done 
before him. When questions are raised which the Apostle does 
not plainly answer, then, he says, “we either say that we do 
not know, or that we stand in doubt; and that since we do 
not get a full understanding but only a hint of his meaning, 


vituperation. 


we do not declare but suggest the explanation.”’ It is evidence 


Ix ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


of a genuine feeling for truth that Rufinus should have left 
as much as he did of the inquiries of Origen, whereas Jerome 
regarded them as wholly illegitimate and productive of harm. 

The third point is but a particular instance of the second. 
Origen’s only motive in ascribing a pre-existence to souls was 
to defend the justice of God. The different surroundings into 
which men were born was to him a real difficulty. There is 
probably no other Christian father who has a heart so tender, 
so sensitive to human suffering, as Origen had. Jerome had 
once followed Origen in his explanation of the problem, but 
afterwards, terrified by the possibility of being thought a her- 
etic, he contemptuously rejected all such speculations. ‘They 
were, he said, of pagan origin. Rufinus answered him in words 
that are dignified and memorable: 

Neither you (ie., Jerome), nor Origen are forthwith to be 
reckoned among pagans if, as you yourself have said, it was 
with the desire of vindicating God’s justice and of answering 
those who assert that all things are governed by chance or 
fate, with the desire, I say, of showing that the providence 
of God which controls the universe is just, that you declared 
that each soul has acquired the causes of its inequality from 
its movements and feelings in that previous existence which 
it had in the heavenly places; or even if you said that it was in 
harmony with the good and unchangeable and simple nature 
of the Trinity that every creature should at the end of all things 
be restored to the original condition in which it was created at 
the first, and that this would happen after long punishments 
continuing through ages of time, which God inflicts on each 
soul not in the spirit of one who is angry but of a healer, whose 
admonitions are without fault, and who because his object is 
to restore and to heal will at last bring his punishments to an 
end. How far these words are true God must judge; but they 
seem to me to contain little impiety against God, nor any 


Translator’s Introduction ixi 


paganism, especially when they are spoken with the desire 
and intention of finding some argument by which the justice 
of God might be vindicated.® 

The man who could write thus, at considerable risk to his 
reputation, deserves our respect and gratitude. 

Jerome's friends in Italy sent him notes of the chief points 
of Rufinus’s attack. His brother Paulinian saw a copy of the 
work and, committing some portions to memory, commu- 
nicated them to Jerome in Palestine, whither he was return- 
ing after some years’ absence. From these two sources Jerome 
obtained sufficient information to write two books of a counter 
Defense. His one anxiety is to clear himself from any suspicion 
of heresy. But he will not see that the only satisfactory way 
of doing this is to admit that, on his own principles, he had 
formerly made a mistake in including Origen’s opinions in his 
works. He says that these opinions were given side by side with 
others, for the reader to choose from, and that sometimes he 
had indicated his dissent from them. “What is my fault?” he 
naively asks. ‘The fault was that, if the opinions in question 
were poisonous heresies, he should not have inserted them in 
his Commentary on Ephesians without the slightest warning 
to the reader that they were such. If on the other hand they 
were permissible speculations he had no ground of complaint 
against Rufinus for translating them into Latin. 

A copy of these two books was brought to Rufinus by 
the captain of a trading ship which was carrying goods to 
Aquileia. Rufinus was disposed to reply still further, but the 
Christian world was now becoming scandalized at this unedi- 
fying controversy, and Chromatius the bishop of Aquileia pre- 
vailed upon him to desist. Yet he sent back a letter to Jerome 
which was far from friendly in tone. He intimated, apparently, 
that he could have published if he had so desired other facts 


which would have destroyed his adversary’s reputation forever. 


Ixii ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Jerome answered with a third book of his Defense. It adds little 
to the others. One characteristic sentence may be quoted: “We 
were once zealous in our praise of Origen; let us be equally 
zealous in condemning him now that he is condemned by the 
whole world.”’ With this may be compared the utterance of 
Gelasius, in regard to authors whose works were prohibited to 
Latin readers after the Roman Council of AD 494. 

Rufinus, a highly religious man, wrote many books on 
ecclesiastical matters and certain commentaries on the Scrip- 
tures; but since the blessed Jerome controverted him on certain 
points concerning free will, we must hold the same belief as 
the aforementioned Jerome; and this not only in the case of 
Rufinus, but of all persons whatever whom that man of faith 
and piety has censured.* 

Whatever the mistakes of Rufinus may have been, he 
could have stood little chance of obtaining a just hearing in 
the face of such a spirit as this. 


V. CHARACTER OF RUFINUS’S TRANSLATION 


The foregoing chapters have made it clear that we must 
look back upon Rufinus with two minds. First, we owe him 
deep gratitude that he undertook the translation of the First 
Principles at all. He saw what a magnificent work it was, when 
most of his contemporaries were content to throw it aside 
as worthless. Apart from Rufinus we might have remained 
almost in the dark about its contents, and a whole world of 
Christian speculation characteristic of one of the most vigor- 
ous and brilliant periods of Church history would have been 
lost to us. And we must admire his courage; for with all his 
care to cut out or soften down the worst audacities of Origen 
he yet left enough to bring him into deep suspicion with the 


‘Translator’s Introduction lxiii 


narrower minds who then controlled the Church in the west. 
On the other hand, the fact must be faced that we cannot 
trust him. We have already seen how he will alter anything 
that appears to him to need alteration, on no other evidence 
than his own subjective impression. His most recent defender, 
M. Gustave Bardy, says that “the gaps and alterations which 
we discover here and there do not astonish us, for they were 
announced and foreseen.”' But the truth is that no one who 
had nothing to go upon except the innocent-looking prefaces 
of Rufinus would have the least conception of the scope of the 
changes which he made. There are not only long additions and 
omissions, but mistranslations, some deliberate, some perhaps 
unconscious, paraphrases in which the point and force of the 
original is completely lost, and countless minor alterations 
which must be studied in detail before their cumulative effect 
can be appreciated. After gathering every Greek fragment that 
can be found there is less than one-sixth of the original work 
available by which to check Rufinus. Included in this pro- 
portion are the most controverted, and therefore the more 
seriously altered, parts of the work. But even in the other 
parts, where fewer disputed points of doctrine occur, we can 
never be quite sure that we have Origen’s thought as he himself 
expressed it. The sharp edges of the Greek have been rubbed 
smooth by the rhetorical prose of Rufinus, and even with a 
full knowledge of such other works of Origen as have come 
down to us in the Greek it is often impossible to reconstruct 
the original with any certainty. 

All the fragments, whether in Greek or in Latin, that are 
available for checking Rufinus have been known to scholars 
for long past. But they have not been fully utilized. The pub- 
lication of Dr. Paul Koetschau’s text of the First Principles in 
1913 marked a new era. He placed in the body of the text all 
the material we possess which can justly claim to belong to 


Ixiv ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Origen; and not only thar, but he also quoted in footnotes 
many passages from Jerome and other writers which are indis- 
pensable for reference. This work renders all previous texts of 
Origen out of date, and consequently makes it imperative to 
read with caution all previous descriptions of his theology. 
“Te is not too much to say,” comments M. de Faye, “that the 
confidence which has always been placed in these Latin ver- 
sions renders obsolete every exposition of Origen’s theology 
which saw the light before M. Koetschau’s edition of the De 
Principiis.”? In the following translation | have followed Koet- 
schau’s reconstruction throughout; not simply because it is the 
only one we possess, but also because in the course of many 
years’ reading of the text I have seen no reason to differ materi- 
ally from his conclusions. I acknowledge with much gratitude 
all the help I have received from this admirable work.’ 

Koetschau’s Introduction, contains a complete examina- 
tion of Rufinus’s translation and a list of the passages available 
for correcting it. The reader who wishes to study the matter 
in detail will do well to read this. Here, however, I will make 
a brief summary of the material referred to. 

i. The Philocalia,’ a collection of extracts from Origen’s 
works made by Basil and Gregory of Nazianzus, contains Bk. 
III. Ch. iand Bk. IV. Chs. iv—iii of the First Principles. These 
form by far the greater part of the Greek fragments now extant. 

ii. The treatise or letter sent by Justinian to Mennas, Patri- 
arch of Constantinople, before the 2nd Council of Constanti- 
nople, AD 553.° This letter contains numerous extracts from 
the First Principles, which formed the basis on which Origen 
was condemned at the Council. Whether this condemnation 
took place at the Council itself, or previously at the local synod 
of AD 543, makes no difference for our purpose. 

iii. The fifteen Anathemas against Origen decreed at the 
above-mentioned Council or synod.® Koetschau gives a place 


‘Translacor’s Introduction lx 


in his text to numbers two to six of these Anathemas, on the 
ground that they record, though not perhaps always word for 
word, the teaching of Origen in the First Principles. 

iv. Various fragments taken from Antipater of Bostra, 
Leontius of Byzantium, Theophilus of Alexandria, Epipha- 
nius, Gregory of Nyssa and others. 

Koetschau admits in all forty-three Greek fragments, vary- 
ing in length from a few words to the extensive passages taken 
from the Philocalia. Of these some fourteen are entirely miss- 
ing from the text of Rufinus; nine are shortened, altered or 
incomplete; five are inaccurately translated; and the remaining 
fifteen are given with reasonable, though not always strict, 
accuracy. 

As I have stated above, M. Gustave Bardy disputes the 
conclusions reached by Koetschau in regard to the passages 
taken from Justinian’s letter to Mennas and the Anathemas. 
He contends that the former are divorced from their context 
and that in some cases they may be deformed or interpolated. 
This is not likely. The fact that there were many followers of 
Origen even in the sixth century—it was their existence and 
influence which made Justinian so eager to secure Origin’s 
condemnation—would have rendered it necessary to be 
careful. There was also plenty of material for condemnation, 
according to Justinian’s ideas, without the need of perversion 
or exaggeration. Bardy does not in fact deny that Justinian’s 
letter gives us our best information about Origen’s true teach- 
ing, though he would use it with caution. But he makes a 
strong objection to the inclusion of the Anathemas in the text. 
These have in view, according to him, not so much Origen 
himself as the “so-called Origenists who were contemporaries 
of Justinian.”’ An examination will show, however, that they 
differ but little from the letter of Justinian. In regard to Bardy’s 
further objection to Koetschau’s reconstruction of Bk. I. Ch. 


ey A AT Lae I PO CIOS eC EM ge IE A ET OO A eee 


Ixvi ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


viii.,® on the ground that it is too hazardous, we must admit 
that the piecing together of the different fragments is inge- 
niously done and that too much reliance must not be placed 
on the precise order and connection of the passages. But there 
can be no doubt whatever that they belong to this chapter, 
for every fragment of testimony we possess speaks with the 
same voice about Origen’s doctrine of the fall of the angels 
and their ultimate restoration. “Who gave you leave,” cries 
Jerome to Rufinus, “to omit so much from your translation?” 
Unless we fill the gaps left by Rufinus with the material which 
every other writer who deals with the First Principles declares 
to have been there, we can have no hope of ascertaining what 
Origen really wrote. 

The Latin translation sent by Jerome to his friends in Italy 
has unfortunately been lost. Jerome’s usual method of transla- 
tion was no different from that of Rufinus, but on this occa- 
sion he adhered strictly to the original. “In my translation of 
the First Principles, he says, “I expressed in a simple way what 
was contained in the Greek text.”!® And Rufinus corroborates 
this when he complains of Jerome that “he re-interpreted these 
very books which I had translated, and inserted all those pas- 
sages which had been omitted by me as being of doubtful 
authenticity.”"' Some years after, this translation, though care- 
fully kept back from publication by Pammachius, was circu- 
lated in a garbled form by a friend to whom he had lent it for 
a short time. A copy of this came into the hands of one Avitus, 
who wrote to Jerome for an explanation. In reply Jerome sent 
him a true copy, accompanied by a letter containing long quo- 
tations, many of them literal, of the alleged heretical teachings 
of the work. This letter is extant and provides an authority of 
first-class character for supplementing the gaps in Rufinus’s 
translation and correcting him elsewhere. Koetschau gives 
a list of more than fifty quotations obtained from it. All are 


Translator’s Introduction kxvii 


printed in his edition, either as part of the text or in footnotes, 
and all are included in the present translation." 

M. Bardy, however, seeks to discredit Jerome’s transla- 
tion. Jerome, he says, changed the delicate nuances of Origen 
into categorical statements, presenting in an absolute manner 
theories capable of a generous interpretation; he may have 
translated Origen better, but he understood him less, lacking 
what Rufinus possessed, the sympathy which gives intelli- 
gence.'? If Bardy means that Origen’s theories were always 
subject to revision, put forward, as he so often reminds us, for 
discussion rather than as unalterable dogmas, and that while 
Rufinus partly understood this temper of mind Jerome had 
no sympathy with it at all, then his contention is true. It is 
true also that Jerome means throughout to make the worst of 
Origen and Rufinus the best, each from his own viewpoint. 
The modern reader can and must allow for this. But no argu- 
ments will alter the fact that Rufinus has left many gaps which 
without Jerome’s help we could not fill at all, and that time 
after time he deliberately transforms, abbreviates or renders 
inaccurately his original. Nor must we suppose that Origen’s 
teaching, though offered in humility and with a readiness 
to be convinced by better knowledge, lacked definiteness. 
It was this definiteness which Rufinus feared, and which he 
endeavored to obscure in his translation. On the other hand, 
Jerome’s presentation of Origen, though blunt, is full and fair. 
The passages quoted in the Letter to Avitus have a genuine 
Origenistic ring about them and there is no evidence whatever 
of hardening or exaggeration. 

Of Rufinus’s ordinary method of translation we may gain 
the truest idea by studying the two long passages of which the 
originals are preserved in the Philocalia. Generally speaking, 
the subject matter is here unobjectionable and Rufinus, even 
when abiding by his own cautious rules, had no need to alter, 


Ixviil ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


omit or interpolate. The reader of the present translation can 
form his own judgment; for in it Origen and Rufinus are set 
side by side and the two translations are made to agree in 
wording so far as is possible, that is, wherever it seemed clear 
that Rufinus was endeavoring to adhere closely to his original. 
He does not often do this, it is true. His method, like that of 
Jerome himself, is what we should call paraphrasing rather 
than translating. But he gives the general sense, for the most 
part, of what Origen wrote; and where he does this we must 
be satisfied. 

The two passages are Bk. IIT. Ch. i, on the subject of Free 
Will, and Bk. IV. Chs. i-iii on the Inspiration and Interpre- 
tation of the Scriptures.'* Koetschau has examined these care- 
fully and obtained the following results: Rufinus has omitted 
twenty-eight passages, the great majority of which, however, 
are very short, consisting of only a few words or a line or two. 
He has made twenty-two additions, again mostly not more 
than a few words in length. And there are forty-five cases of 
inaccurate translation, some being due to a misunderstanding 
of the Greek and others to the desire of altering it for dog- 
matic reasons. It must be sufficient here to make a few general 
observations on these irregularities. 

Of the additions made by Rufinus many are for the sake of 
clearness. He is fond, too, of rhetorical embellishment and will 
often put in a didactic or pietistic touch that is wanting in Ori- 
gen. Sometimes, when texts are quoted, he will add an extra 
one that occurs to him or insert a fresh illustration. In other 
cases a dogmatic motive is apparent. Origen’s dry, scientific 
statements and candid admission of difficulties are scarcely 
ever left as they stand. The assertion that the intelligence of 
some animals comes near to human reason is carefully toned 
down.'> The desire of Origen to prove the goodness of God is 


Translator’s Introduction kxix 


transformed by Rufinus into a desire to keep close to the faith 
of the Church and to test all things by “the rule of piety.”"® 

Some of the smaller omissions may be accidental. Others 
are not highly significant. But Rufinus has evidently hesitated 
to reproduce Origen’s statement that certain of Moses’s laws 
were irrational or impossible.'’ Similarly, he does not care to 
translate Origen’s criticism on a literal interpretation of Mt 
5:28, 29—what good would it do to cut out the right eye?!® 
He fears the lengths to which allegorical interpretation may 
go and omits the advice to discover in Scripture the “depths 
of the wisdom of God.”"’ In the longest of his two omissions 
it has generally been supposed that the same distrust is to be 
observed; but I have given reasons in the notes for thinking 
that Rufinus did not fully understand this passage.” 

The inaccurate renderings are often pure mistakes. Not 
seldom Rufinus altogether misses the point of the Greek. On 
the whole, however, we can gather from him fairly well the 
main drift of the arguments. But in the case of a keen thinker 
like Origen the construction of every sentence, the balance of 
phrases and often the very order of the words are important; 
and it would be folly to deny that, for all the good intentions 
of Rufinus, we lose much when we turn to his version from 


the Greek. 


VI. THe DocTRINE OF THE FIRST PRINCIPLES 


It is not clear what was the exact meaning attached by 
Origen to the title [epi Apywv. The phrase may indicate 
that the work is an inquiry into the elementary principles 
of the Christian religion; or, interpreted in a wider sense, it 
may signify that Origen intended to present his readers with 
a complete philosophy of religion. This is suggested by his 


Ee gy te ee ee Fe 


Ixx ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


own assertion, made at the beginning of the book, that he 
was framing a “single body of doctrine.”' There may be in 
addition some thought of the “principalities,” with whose 
history and destiny parts of the book are concerned, and also 
of the “beginnings” of the universe, and consequently of the 
end which, in Origen’s oft-repeated phrase, must be like the 
beginning. The word Apyai will cover all these meanings and 
probably Origen meant it to be understood in a comprehen- 
sive way. As we have seen, the title was not a new one, since 
Clement of Alexandria had already used ir. 

The thoughts to which Origen’s speculations led him 
proved strange and disturbing to Christians of later ages. But 
we need not doubt that they were natural enough to the age and 
intellectual environment in which they arose. It never occurred 
to Origen that he was anything but an orthodox defender of 
the faith. All he tried to do was to work out its implications for 
the educated world of his time. Problems which do not arise in 
simple minds were continually being raised by his pupils and 
by the heretics in their rival theological schools. What is the 
explanation of apparently undeserved suffering? Has man free 
will, or is this an illusion? What happened before this world 
was created, and what will happen after it has come to an end? 
What is the origin and nature of the human soul? Are the stars 
alive? Are there worlds in the sky, where spirits live? Origen 
believed that it was right to investigate such problems. Not all 
of them could be solved. But some might be, and the Christian 
thinker must do his best. 

Other problems were of even greater importance. It was 
universally acknowledged in the Church that Father, Son, 
and Spirit constituted the Trinity, that each was divine, and 
that a vast gulf separated them from the universe of created 
beings. But no authority had as yet laid down precisely how 
they were related to one another, or had attempted to answer 


Translator’s Introduction Ixxi 


a whole series of questions on the subject of the divine nature 
which present themselves at once to the mind of a thoughtful 
believer. This was the task which Origen, as a comparatively 
young man, took in hand. He was not altogether a pioneer, 
for Pantaenus and Clement had prepared the way. Origen’s 
achievement was to focus all previous speculation, after pass- 
ing it through his own brilliant intellect, into a coherent sys- 
tem. Though subject to every limitation of his age, he yet had 
the scientific spirit and used a scientific method. He follows 
where reason leads him. He is sensitive to difficulties and often 
acknowledges ignorance. It is indeed his spirit and method 
rather than his conclusions which are of permanent value. For 
the Church, no doubt wisely in the main, set aside his chief 
doctrines, branding them as heretical. But she would not have 
reached so sure a conviction about the safe path of theological 
progress had it not been for the stimulus provided by this bold 
and clear thinker, who brought every question fearlessly into 
the light of day. 

M. de Faye has rightly observed that Origen’s system is in 
the same class with the Gnostic speculations of his time.* The 
Father is the fount and origin of all being, and is pure spirit. 
The problem is to connect him with the existent material 
world. The Gnostics bridged the gulf by a series of descents 
from spirit into matter, to be followed at last by a restoration 
of the spiritual seeds or sparks imprisoned in matter to their 
original home. On this theme they played with all manner of 
fantastic variations. The Christian theology, as expounded by 
Origen, severely avoids these extravagances; yet the process of 
descent and ascent runs through it all. The Son is begotten of 
the Father by an eternal act of will. Gnostic theories of ema- 
nation are rejected on the ground that they involve a division 
of the divine nature. The eternal generation of the Son is as it 
were an expansion rather than a division of the divine nature. 


lxxti ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


But Origen, in his keen desire to represent this eternal act as 
proceeding from will and intelligence and not as a fatalistic 
process, sometimes describes the begetting as a creating, and 
the Son as a created being. It was this that puzzled Rufinus, 
how Origen could be both orthodox and unorthodox at the 
same time. But there is really neither any doubt about Ori- 
gen'’s words, nor difficulty about his thought. He relied on 
such scriptural passages as “the first-born of all creation” (Col 
1:15) and he emphasizes over and over again the secondary 
position of the Son. The Holy Spirit is still less in degree, but 
all three are consubstantial, partaking of the fullness of the 
divine essence. Both Son and Spirit are genuine Beings, not 
simply divine attributes, and Origen had been taught that an 
indication of them was to be seen in the two cherubim who, 
in Isaiah’s vision, cover the face of God.? 

A fresh departure is made by the creation of rational 
beings, called either minds or souls. These are definitely out- 
side the Godhead, as the Son and Spirit are definitely within. 
Nevertheless they are spiritual creatures, made in God’s own 
image. Origen inquires whether they were made infinite in 
number and decides that they were not. By a curious limita- 
tion of the divine power, which is characteristic of his thought, 
he tells us that God made exactly as many as he could control. 
They were all equal, and apparently identical. But they had 
free will, and this faculty caused movements to arise within 
them. Some remained in their original condition, but others 
fell away from God. Thus was variety and diversity introduced 
into the world, not by God’s ordering, but by the free action 
of created souls. The fall necessitated the use of bodies; at first 
bright and transparent bodies such as stars have, and after- 
wards darker and heavier ones. In this way the various orders 
of angelic beings arose and below them the daemons; for all 
are of one original nature and ascend or descend in accordance 


Translator’s Introduction boii 


with the movements of their own wills. From one class of these 
spirits the human race was constituted, and the qualities of 
each human soul and the environment into which it is born 
are due to its merits or demerits in previous existences. God is 
entirely just and has no favorites; souls are the masters of their 
own destinies and each obtains what he deserves. 

The matter which was necessary to serve as bodies for the 
fallen spirits was created by God and is not eternal. Other mat- 
ter had to be created to provide them with a dwelling-place. 
Matter is such that it can be adapted to an infinite variety of 
forms and purposes. The sojourn of man in this present world 
is designed to discipline and educate him, so that he may rise 
in the scale of being. He may, however, fall; and just as the 
most heights lie open to him, so do the lowest depths. Pun- 
ishment is always remedial, never purely retributive. However 
low a spirit may fall, he may rise again; and however high he 
may soar, a fresh fall is still possible. It was this condition of 
things which gave rise to Jerome’s caustic criticism that accord- 
ing to Origen angels might become devils and the devil an 
archangel. ‘That is indeed what Origen meant to assert; that as 
no limit could be placed to human willfulness and sin, so no 
limit could be placed to the power of God’s love, when once 
the human soul had responded to its healing and uplifting 
influence. 

Logically speaking, such a process might continue indef- 
initely. But clear as was Origen’s head, his heart insisted on 
having the last word here. Did not the Scriptures speak of a 
time when “God shall be all in all”? Thus Origen was led to the 
belief that one day the love of God would prove stronger even 
than the freedom of man and that all created spirits would 
return to that unity and perfection which was theirs at the 
beginning. Then bodies, which had grown progressively finer 
as their wearers ascended, would either be discarded forever, or 


Ixxiv ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


would be etherealized into garments of the lightest and most 
tenuous nature conceivable. And this event, Origen knew well, 
must be far distant. He felt how intractable was the human 
spirit, how dull and impervious to enlightenment it could be. 
To meet this difficulty: he assumed a succession of worlds, 
not identical in form, but each framed out of the materials of 
its predecessor and each, we may suppose, advancing a step 
further on the road to the ultimate perfection. 

The pre-existence and the future re-incarnation of the 
human soul was a doctrine that met with much opposition in 
the Church on account of its obvious connection with Greek 
and oriental speculation. But it led even Origen himself into 
a difficulty when he came to discuss the Incarnation. Jesus, 
as man, possessed a soul. Had this soul a pre-existence, like 
all others? Origen answered that it had. In the beginning, 
when other souls were declining from God, the soul of Jesus 
retained its innocence and continued by its own free choice in 
such close association with the Word of God that finally habit 
became changed into nature and an indissoluble union was 
created. It was this soul, already united with the Word of God, 
which took flesh of the Virgin Mary and appeared among 
men. And since there were multitudes of spiritual beings who 
had never come to earth, Origen supposed that Christ would 
visit them, too, in their celestial abodes, would assume their 
nature and would even suffer for them. 

‘The system thus outlined was based upon a belief in man’s 
free will. Origen is fully conscious of the importance of free 
will and he devotes a long chapter to examining it and meeting 
objections. All the Gnostic systems, and most other specu- 
lations of this period, ran in a fatalistic direction. If Origen 
appears to us to spend unnecessary trouble in his effort to 
establish the fact of human freedom, we must remember that 


Translaror’s Introduction boxy 


it is largely this which gives the Christian tone and color to 
all his thought. 

It is obvious that, however sincerely Origen started from 
the simple Christian faith, he ended in speculations which 
were only remotely connected with it. The real source of these 
speculations is to be found in the intellectual atmosphere of 
the time, in which the ideas of Platonists, Stoics, and orien- 
tals were mingled. But Origen claimed to find it all in the 
Scriptures. Philo the Jew had discovered, or more probably 
perfected, a method of using the Old Testament by which 
its varied contents, words, phrases and stories, were made to 
suggest philosophical ideas. Christian teachers at Alexandria 
continued to use this method, chiefly, though not solely, for 
the Old Testament, the difficulties of which, moral, theological 
and historical, challenged the inquiring mind to discover hid- 
den meanings. The Church had rested its faith too largely on 
the Old Testament, with arguments from miracle and proph- 
ecy, to be able to look at it boldly and confess that it recorded 
a gradually developing revelation of God. This never seems to 
enter Origen’s mind as a possibility. For him the Scriptures are 
everywhere perfect and complete, when rightly understood, 
to the minutest detail. He feels that the marvelous success 
of Christianity in the face of a hostile world guarantees the 
New Testament story, and that this in its turn guarantees the 
Old which predicts it. The Scriptures being thus established 
as divine writings may be made the basis of any thoughts 
which the intelligent reader can put into them or extract from 
them. Origen has three chapters on the Scriptures and the true 
method of their interpretation. It would be an exaggeration to 
say that the method is wholly arbitrary, for it has its rules. But 
it despises the history, ignores the poetry, and turns all that is 
warm and human into frigid intellectual reasonings. Its great- 
est value was that, in the hands of Origen at any rate, it kept 


Ixxvi ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


the idea of God on a high moral and spiritual level and free 
from the distortions that are bound to creep in when the Old 
Testament is accepted in its literal sense as a perfect revelation. 
Beyond that, it preserved the treasure of these writings against 
possible rationalistic attack until the advent of happier days 
when the Church could with more certainty distinguish the 
temporary from the permanent and discern beneath superficial 
imperfections the abiding truth and divine inspiration. 

The weakness of Origen’s system, considered as a whole, 
lies in its assumption that the entire cosmic process is a mis- 
take, due to the misuse of free will. He regards it as axiomatic 
that the end must be like the beginning. Is there nothing, 
then, to be accomplished in these vast stretches of time? Can 
God do no more than restore things to the position they were 
in before the primeval fall? If we are to take Origen literally, it 
would appear that God cannot. History, however long drawn 
out, is but the mending of an original fault. We have it on 
good authority that in one passage he even said that perfected 
souls would be swallowed up in the divine essence from which 
they sprang.‘ Such a system of thought is at heart pessimistic, 
and it was perhaps some instinctive apprehension of this fact 
which caused the Church to turn away from it. But we must 
not be blind to the nobility of Origen’s achievement. It is the 
work of a good and a brave man whose supreme desire was 
to know the truth. As such it is still worthy of our respect- 
ful attention, and wherever the love of truth is found, there 
will Origen never fail to receive his meed of gratitude and 


reverence. 


PREFACE OF RUFINUS 


1. I know that many of the brethren, impelled by their ear- 
nest desire to understand the scriptures, have made requests 
to a number of scholars well versed in Greek literature to 
put Origen into Roman dress and present him to Latin ears. 

And when, in furtherance of this object, our brother and col- 
league, at the entreaty of bishop Damasus, translated two of 
the Homilies on the Song of Songs from Greek into Latin, 
he composed so fine and noble a preface to that work, as 
to inspire everyone with a deep longing to read Origen and 
study him seriously. For he said that the text, “The king hath 
brought me into his chamber,” might well be applied to the 
soul of Origen; and added that while in the rest of his works 
Origen had surpassed all other writers, in the Song of Songs he 
had even surpassed himself. He promises, indeed, in that very 
preface, that he himself will give us not only these books on 
the Song of Songs but also many other works of Origen in a 
translation for Roman ears. I can see, however, that he derives 
most pleasure from the works of his own pen. He pursues a 
task that promises greater fame, that of being a “father of the 
word”! and not a mere translator. For this reason I take up the 
work which was begun and approved by him. Nevertheless I 
cannot adorn the writings of this great man with a degree of 
eloquence comparable to his. Consequently I fear it may hap- 
pen through my fault that the man whom he has deservedly 
praised as being the next teacher of wisdom and knowledge 


Ixxvii 


lxxviii ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


appear far inferior to what he really is. 

2. It was this oft-recurring thought which kept me silent 
and prevented me from yielding to the continual entreaties 
of the brethren to attempt this work. But so powerful is your 
influence, most faithful brother Macarius, that not even my 
want of skill could any longer provide grounds for resistance. 
Accordingly, not to suffer you to make too heavy a claim upon 
me, | gave way, even against my previous determination; but 
on the condition and understanding that in my translation 
I would follow as far as possible the rule observed by my 
predecessors and especially by the distinguished man whom 
I mentioned above. For he, when translating into Latin more 
than seventy treatises of Origen, called Homilies, and also a 
number of his commentaries on St. Paul’s epistles, both of 
which are known to contain in the original a good many state- 
ments likely to cause offence, so smoothed over and emended 
these in his translation, that a Latin reader would find in them 
nothing out of harmony with our faith. His example, there- 
fore, I am following to the best of my ability; if not with an 
equal degree of eloquence, yet at least observing the same 
’ rules, and taking care not to reproduce such passages from 
the books of Origen as are found to be inconsistent with and 
contrary to his true teaching. 

3. The cause of these variations I have explained to you 
more fully in the Apologeticus, a work written by Pamphilus in 
defense of Origen’s books, to which I added a very brief tract, 
showing, as I think, by clear proofs that these have been cor- 
rupted in many places by heretics and evilly disposed persons.” 
This is especially the case with the books which you are now 
pressing me to translate, namely those entitled Peri Archon, 
which may be rendered either Concerning First Principles or 
Concerning Principalities. These books are indeed most obscure 


Preface of Rufinus / hoxix 


and difficult for other reasons. For in them Ofigen discusses 
questions on which philosophers, after spending their whole 


lives in the task, have succeeded i in discovering nothing. But © 


our author made it his aim, $0 far as he possibly could, to turn 
into a religious direction man’s belief in a Creator and his rea- 
sonings about the created world) which philosophers have used 
to advocate irreligion. Wherever, therefore, I have found in 
his books anything contrary to the reverent statements made 


by him about the Trinity in other places, I have either omit- ~'" 


ted it as a corrupt and interpolated passage, or reproduced it 
in a form that agrees with the doctrine; which I have often 
found him affirming elsewhere. If, however, speaking as he 
does to men of knowledge and discernment, he has occa- 
sionally expressed himself obscurely in the effort to be brief, 
I have, to make the passage clearer, padded: such remarks on 
the same subject as I have read in a fuller form in his other 
books, bearing in mind the need of explanation. But I have 
said nothing of my own, simply giving back to him his own 
statements found in other places. 

4. I have written thus in my preface by way of precaution, 
to prevent slanderers from supposing that they have once again 
discovered some matter for accusation against me. For you 
have seen what perverse and contentious men will do. The 
fact is, | have undertaken this heavy labor, God and your 
prayers helping me, not to shut the mouths of slanderers (for 
this is impossible, unless indeed God should do it), but to 
provide material for those who desire to advance towards the 
knowledge of things. One request, however, I solemnly make 
of everyone who shall either transcribe or read these books, in 
the sight of God the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, 
by his faith in the kingdom to come, by the mystery of the 
resurrection from the dead, by the “everlasting fire which is 
prepared for the devil and his angels” (Mt 25:41), that, as he 


Ixxx ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


would not possess for an eternal inheritance that place where 
there is “weeping and gnashing of teeth” (Mt 8:12; Lk 13:28), 
and where “their fire is not quenched and their worm dieth 
not” (Is 66:24; Mk 9:48), he shall neither add anything to this 
writing, nor take anything away, nor interpolate anything, nor 
change anything, but shall compare his copy with the origi- 
nals from which it was made, and shall emend it and make it 
distinct to the very letter, and shall not allow a manuscript to 
remain incorrect or indistinct, lest the difficulty of ascertaining 
the meaning, if the manuscript is not distinct, should increase 
the obscurities of the work for those that read it. 


List oF ABBREVIATIONS 


WoRrKS BY ORIGEN 


COE TA CANE ecstelnavtaats Commentary on the Song of Songs 

Comm. in Ep. ad Ephes. ...... Commentary on Ephesians 

Comm. In Ep. ad Rom......... Commentary on Romans 

Comm. In Ep. ad Titum...... Commentary on Titus 

COMME: IH ESOE. clot ayy vaste Commentary on Exodus 

Comm. in Tob. cecccccccccccceces Commentary on the 
Gospel of John 

Comm. in Matt. ..ccccccccecees Commentary on Matthew 

Con: CSUN sauneiitarte: Against Celsus 

Ep. ad Africanum...vcce Letter to Julius Africanus 

Exhort. in Marty. seccccccc Exhortation to Martyrdom 

Hom. in. Gen. cccccecscssecseeevees Homilies on Genesis 

Hom. in Jereme crccccccccccecees Homilies on Jeremiah 

Hope ti LUE stuecen eden Homilies on Luke 

Hom. in Num, cocccccsccccsvsseee Homilies on Numbers 

Hom. in Psalm. cocccccccccrsceere Homilies on the Psalms 

Sel. int Gen. cocecceccessesesereeronee Selecta on Genesis 

GENERAL 

TNX os eran ects a easteg ies Septuagint 

PG elo Deere eee caie Patrologia Graeca (Migne) 

Peale Seas tesa ohare ens Patrologia Latina (Migne) 

& Graeians soa tens Sources Chrétiennes 

Vie apaceew Vulgate 


lxxxi 


BOOK I 


SUL 5 


PREFACE 5x p. 749/300 


1. All who believe and are convinced that grace and truth 
came by Jesus Christ\(cf. Jn 1:17), and who know Christ to 
be the truth (in accordance with his own saying, “I am the 
truth” [Jn 14:6]), derivey 
lead a good and blessed lifefrom no other source but the 
_very words and teaching of Christ. By the words of Christywe 
do not mean only those which formed his teaching when he 
_-=>(Qwas madé)man and dwelt in the flesh, since even before that 
Christ the Word of God \ was in Moses and the pr phets. For 
without the Word of.God how could they hav¢ prophesi 


e knowledge which calls men to {9 | 


Yi 


about Christ? In proof 6 Swhich we should not find it difi- ~ 


cult to show from the divine scriptures how/ that Moses or 
the prophets were filled with the spirit of Christin all their 
words and deeds, were we not anxious to confine the present 
work within the briefest possible limits. I ¢ount it sufficient, 
therefore, to quote this one testimony of Paul, taken from the 
epistle which he writes to the he Hebrews, where he speaks as 
follows: “By faith Moses, when he was grown up, refused to be 
called the son of Pharaoh's daughter, choosing rather to suffer 
affliction with the people of God than to enjoy the pleasures 
of sin for a season, accounting the reproach of Christ greater 


1 


| 
alt at 


r.F 9,98 +e If 

2 j ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 
riches than Ph treasures of Egypt" (Heb 11:24ff.). And as for 
the fact that Christ spoke in his apostles after his ascension 
into heaven, this is shown by Paul in the following passage: 
“Or do ye seek a proof of him that speaketh in me, that is, 
Christ?” (2 Cor 13:3). | 

~ 2. Many of those, howeyer, who profess to believe in 
Christ, hold conflicting opinions not only on small and trivial 
questions but also on some at are great and important; on 
the nature, for instance, 0 Coster of the Lord Jesus Christ 
or of the Holy Spirit, and in =lition on the natures of those 
create beings) the dominions and thé holy y powers: sIn_yiew 


of this it seems necessary first to lay down adefinite line and 
unmistakable ole rule in regard to-each of these, and to postpone 


the inquiry oS eae For just as 
there are many among Greeks and barbarians alike who prom- 


_-isé us the truth, and yet we gave up seeking for it from all who 


claimed it for false opinions after we had come to believe that 
Christ was the Son of God and had become convinced that 


we must learn the truth from him; in the same way when we 


find many who think they hold thédoctrine of Christ>some 


of them differing in their beliefs from the Chieaane tre of earlier 
times, and yet the teaching of the church, handed down in 


———_—_— 
‘ unbroken succession from the apostles, is still preserved and 


continues to exist in the churches up to the present day, we 
maintain that that only is to be believed as the truth which 
in no way conflicts with the tradition of the church and the 
apostles. i. 

3. But the following fact should be understood. The holy 
apostles, when preaching the faith of Christ, took certain doc- 
trines, those namely which they believed to be necessary ones, 
and delivered them in the plainest terms to all believers, even 
to such as appeared to be somewhat dull in the investigation 


’ of divine knowledge. The grounds of their statements they | 


mm | 
fA Pp ~ 


id 


}/ 
Book I, Preface , vo 


l 
left to be investigated by such as should merit the higher gifts 
- of the Spirit and in particular/by such as should afterwards 


receive through the Holy Spirit himself the graces oflanguage, 


wisdom and knowledge. There were other doctrittes, however, 
_about which the apostles\simply said that things were so, keep- 
ing silence as to 
being to supply the more diligent of those who came after _ 
them, such as should prove to be lovers of wisdom, with an 
»exerciseon which to display the fruit of their ability. The men 
‘T refer to are those who train themselves to become fenty 
and capable of receiving wisdom. _ 


SS, 


4. The kind of doctrines which om believed in plain terms | y) 


through the apostolic teaching are the following: 

First, that God is one, who created and set in order all 
things, and who, when nothing existed, caused the universe 
to be.! He is God from the first creation and foundation of 
the world, the God of all righteous men, of Adam, Abel, 
Seth, Enos, Enoch, Noah, Shem, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, of 
the twelve patriarchs, of Moses and the prophets. This God, 
in these last days (cf. Heb 1:1), according to the previous 
announcements made through his prophets, sent the Lord 
Jesus Christ, first for the purpose of calling Israel, and sec- 
ondly, after the unbelief of the people of Israel, of calling the 
Gentiles also. This om good God, the Father of our Lord 
» Jesus Christ, himself gave the law, the prophets and the gos- 

_> pels, and he is God both of the apostles and He of the Old 
and New Testaments. 

Then again: Christ Jesus, he who came to Lert was begot- 


~~ ten of the Father before every created thing.” And after he had 


ministered to the Father in the foundation of all things, for “all 
things were made through him” (Jn 1:3) in these'last times he 
emptied himself and was made man, was made flesh, although 
he was God (cf. Heb 1:1; Phil 2:7; Jn 1:14); and being made 


e how or why their intention undoubtedly , 


=. 


+7 


ee ¢ 


¥ 


t> 


4 , ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


man, he still remained what he was, namely, God. He took to 
himself a body like our body, differing in this alone, that it was 
born of a virgin and of the Holy Spirit. And this Jesus Christ 
was born and suffered in truth and not merely in appearance, 
and truly died our common death. Moreover he truly rose 


from the dead, and after the resurrection companied — his 


disciples and was then taken up into heaven. 


___ Then again, the apostles delivered this doctriné, that the “ 
. Holy Spirivis united in honor and dignity with the Father and 


the Son. In regard to him it is not yet clearly known whether 
he is to be thought of as begotten or unbegotten,’ or as being 
himself also a Son of God or not; but these are matters which 
we must investigate to the best of our power from holy scrip- 
ture, inquiring with wisdom and diligence. It is, however, 
certainly taught with the utmost clearness in the Church, that 
this Spirit inspired each one of the saints, both the prophets 
and the apostles, and that there was not one Spirit in the men 
of old and another in those who were inspired at the coming 
of Christ. 

5. Next after this the apostles taught that the soul, having 
a substance and life of its own, will be rewarded according 
to its deserts after its departure from this world; for it will 
either obtain an inheritance of eternal life and blessedness, ie 
its deeds shall warrant this, or it must be given over to eternal” 
fire and torments, if the guilt of its crimes shall so so determine. 
Further, there will be a time for the resurrection of the dead, 
when this body, which is now “sown in corruption,” shall “rise 
in incorruption,” and that which is “sown in dishonor” shall 
“rise in glory” (1 Cor 15:42f.). 

This also is laid down in the Church's teaching, that every 
rational soul is possessed of free will and choice; and also, 
that it is engaged in a struggle against the devil and his angels 
and the opposing powers; for these strive to weigh the soul 


KE 


Book I, Preface 5 


down with sins, whereas we, if we lead a wise and upright life, 


endeavor to free ourselves from such a burden. There follows _” 


from this the conviction that we are not subject to necessity, 
so as to be compelled by every means, even against our will, 
to do either good or evil. For if we are possessed of free will, 
some spiritual powers may very likely be able to urge us on to 


_ > sin and others to assist us to salvation; we are not, however, 


compelled by necessity to act either rightly or wrongly, as is 
thought to be the case by those who say that human events 


+ ‘x are due to the course and motion of the stars, not only those 
7 = events which fall outside the sphere of our freedom of will but 


even those that lie within our own power. 


In regard to the soul, whether it takes its rise from thy 


“ < transference of the seed, in such a way that the principle 


or substance of the soul may be regarded as inherent in the 
seminal particles of the body itself; or whether it has some 
others beginning, and whether this beginning is begotten or 
unbegotten, or at any rate whether it is imparted to the body 
from without or no; all this i is not ney cleat ct defined i in the 
teaching. f ; 


6, Further, in roid to tHe devil and his, angels and the 


~—epposing spiritual powers, the Church teaching lays it down 


that these beings exist, but what they are or how they exist 


~ it has not explained very clearly. Among most Christians, 


however, the following opinion is held, that this devil was 
formerly an angel, but became an apostate and persuaded as 
many angels as he could to fall away with him; and these are 


even now called his angels. 


7. The Church teaching also includes the doctrine that this 
dd “world was made and began to exist ata definite time and that <% 
f ’ by rea reason of its s corruptible nature it must suffer dissolution. 


~ But what existed before this world, or what will exist after i it, 


J 
0 ( 


6 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


has not yet been made known openly to the many, for no clear 

~ statement on the point is set forth in the Church teaching. 

8. Then there is the doctrine that the scriptures were 

~ composed through the Spirit of God and that they have not 
only that meaning which is obvious, but also another which 
is hidden from the majority of readers. For the contents of 
‘scripture are the outward forms of certain mysteries and the 
images of divine things. On this point the entire Church is 
unanimous, that while the whole law is spiritual, the inspired 
meaning is not recognized by all, but only by those who are 
gifted with the grace of the Holy Spirit in the word of wisdom 
and knowledge... ° ~ 

» The term asomaton, that is, incorporeal, is unused and 
unknown, not only in many other writings but also in our 
scriptures. If, however, any one is inclined to produce it for 
us out of that little book called The Teaching of Peter, where 
the Savior is represented as saying to his disciples, “I am not 
an incorporeal daemon,” I must answer in the first place that 
the book itself is not included among the books of the Church 
and I can show that it is not a writing of Peter nor of anyone 
else who was inspired by the Spirit of God. But even sup- 
posing this point is waived, the sense conveyed by the word 

. “incorporeal” in that passage is not the same as is expressed by 


Greek and non-Christian writers when they record a discus- 


sion by philosophers on incorporeal nature. For in the book 
in question the Savior used the words “incorporeal daemon” 
in order to denote that the fashion and outline, whatever it 
may be, of the daemonic body is not like this dense and visible 
body of ours. And the words must be understood in the sense 
intended by the author of that writing, namely, that the Sav- 
ior did not have such a body as the daemons have. Now this 
body is by y nature a fine substance a and thin like air, and on this 
account most people think and speak of it as incorporeal; but 


ho clo oz P Be "i 
| pg gabon 119, 1 


rt, 4 ut A so. 
Book I, Preface 25, 8 


fl arty %, Le 1518322, Jod I24 
_ the Savior had a body which was solid and capable of being 
handled. It is customary for everything which is not like this 
ss to be termed incorporeal by the more simple and uneducated 
\ of men, just as the air we breathe may be called incorporeal 
' because it is not a body that can ag rasped or held or that 
can resist pressure. \F 
9. Nevertheless we shall inquire whether the actual thing 
which Greek philosophers call/asomaton or incorporeal is 
found in the holy scriptures under another name. We must > 
also seek to discover’how God himself is to be conceived,’ ” 
whether as corporeal and fashioned in some shape, or as being 
\ yor a different nature from bodies, a point which is not clearly © 
set forth in the teaching. The same inquiry must be made in 
regard to Christ and the Holy Spirit, and indeed in regard to 
\ every soul and every rational nature also. | 
10. This also is contained in the church teaching, that 
there exist certain angels of God and good powers, who min- 
ister to him in bringing about the salvation of men; but when 
these were created, and what they are like, or how they exist, is 
not very clearly defined. And as for the sun, moon and stars, 
the tradition does not clearly say whether they are living beings 
or On wag tt — 2 


—_ Everyone therefore who is desirous of constructing out of 


Af | she foregoing a connected body of doctrine must use points 


dance with the commandment which says, “Enlighten your- 
selves with the light of knowledge” /(Hos 10:12 [LXX]). Thus 
by clear and cogent arguments he will discover the truth about 
each particular point and so will produce, as we have said, a 
_single body of doctrine, with the aid of such illustrations and 
declarations as he shall find in the holy scriptures and of such 
conclusions as he shall ascertain to follow logically from them 
when rightly understood. a 


1 like these as elementary and aise principles, i in accor- 


n 2 ' 
’ 
7) $2 


bat Yo 4 tr ,270F 


f 


ol ved / Chapter I 


at eh who wil} try to eetoein 


that eve accor tures Goills is a body, since 
they findsit wri en : ei 
consuming-fire” (Dt 4:24) and in the pat according to 
John, “God is spirit, and they who worship him must worship 
in spirit and in truth” Qn. 4:24). Now these men will have it 
that fire and spirit are body and nothing else. But I would ask 
them what they have to say about this passage of scripture, 
“God is light,” as John says in his epistle, “God is light, and in 
him is no darkness” (1 Jn 1:5). He is that light, surely, which 
lightens the whole understanding of those who are capable of 
receiving truth, as it is written in the thirty-fifth psalm, “In 
thy light shall we see light” (Ps 35:10 [LXX]). For what other 
light of God can we speak of, in which a man sees light, except 
God's spiritual power, which when it lightens a man causes 
him either to see clearly the truth of all things or to know God 
himself who is called the truth? Such then is the meaning of 
the saying, “In thy light shall we see light”; that is, in thy word 


and thy wisdom, which is thy Son, in him shall we see thee, ~ +» 


the Father. For can we possibly think that, because it is termed 
light, it is like the light of our sun? And how can there be the 
slightest reason for supposing that from that material light 


10 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


the grounds of knowledge could be derived and the meaning 
of truth discovered? 

2. If then they accept this argument of ours, proved by 
reason itself, about the nature of light, and will admit that the 
use of the word light cannot possibly mean that God is to be 
thought of as being a body, they will allow a similar reason- 
ing in regard to the phrase “ a consuming fire.” For what does 
God “consume” by virtue'of this fact of being a “fire”? Are 
we to suppose that he consumes bodily matter, “wood or hay 
or-stubble”? (cf. 1 Cor 3:12). What is there in this statement 
consistent with the praises due to God, if he is a fire that con- 
sumes material substances like these? Let us rather consider 
that God does inde¢d consume and destroy, but that what 
he consumes are evil thoughts of the mind, shameful deeds 
and longings after sin, when these implant themselves in the 
minds of believers; and that he takes those souls which render 
themselves capable of receiving his word. and wisdom and 
dwells in them a¢cording to the saying, “I and the Father will 
come and mak abode with him” (cf. Jn 14:23)' having 


first consumed 


d worthy of himself. ae 
however, who think that God is a body in con- 
sequence of the saying, “God is spirit” (Jn 4:24)we must reply 
It is a custom of holy a et it wishes to 
point to/something of an opposite naturéto this dense and 
solid bédy, to call it spirit, as in the saying, “The letter killeth, 
but the spirit giveth life” (2 Cor 3:6). Here undoubtedly the 
letter means that which is bodily, and the spirit that which 
is intellectual, or as we also call it, spiritual. The apostle also 
says, “Even until this day, whenever Moses is read, a veil lieth 
upon their hearts; but when a man shall turn to the Lord, the 
veil shall be taken away; and where the Spirit of the Lord is, 
there is liberty” (2 Cor 3:15—17). For so long as a man does 


their vices and passions and made them into _~ 


as 


SM 


Book I, Chapter I i ll 


not attend to the spiritual meaning “a veil lies upon his heart,” 


“in consequence of which veil, in other words his duller under- 


standing, the scripture itself is said or thought to be veiled; and 
this is the explanation of the veil which is said to have covered 
the face of Moses when he was speaking to the people (cf. Ex 
34:33, 35), that is, when the law is read in public. But if we 
turn to the Lord, where also the Word of God is, and where 
the Holy Spirit reveals spiritual knowledge, the veil will be 
taken away, and we shall then with unveiled face behold in 
the holy scriptures the glory of the Lord. 

3. Further, although many saints partake of the Holy 
Spirit, he is not on that account to be regarded as a kind of 
body, which is divided into material parts and distributed to 
each of the saints; but rather as a sanctifying power, a share 
of which is said to be possessed by all who have shown them- 
selves worthy of being sanctified through his grace. And to 
make this statement more easily understood let us take an 
illustration from things admittedly of lesser importance. There 
are many who share in the teaching and art of medicine; yet 
are we to suppose that all who share in medicine have some 
material substance\called medicine placed before them from 
which they take away little particles and so obtain a share of 
it? Must we not rather understand that all who with ready 
and prepared minds a comprehension of the art and its 
teaching may be said to share in medicine? These illustrations 
from medicine must not be supposed to apply in every detail 
when compared with the Holy Spirit; they establish this point 
only, that a thing in which many have a share is not necessarily 
to be regarded as a body. The aN ly Spirit is far different from 
the system or science of orate for the Holy Spirit is an 


X 
intellectual existence, with a subsistence and being of its own, 
whereas medicine is nothing of the sort. 


mas 


12 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


4. We must now turn to the Gospel passage itself, where 
it is written that “God is spirit” (Jn 4:24), and must show that 
this is to be understood in a sense agreeing with what we have 
just said. Let us ask when our Savior spoke these words, and to 
whom, and in what connection. We find undoubtedly that he 
uttered them when speaking to the woman of Samaria, who 
thought that men ought to worship God in Mount Gerizim 
according to the belief of the Samaritans. “God,” he told her, 
“js spirit.” The woman of Samaria, supposing him to be an 
ordinary Jew, was asking him whether men ought to worship 
God “in Jerusalem” or “in this mountain.” These were her 
words: “All our fathers worshipped in this mountain, but ye 
say that in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to wor- 
ship” (Jn 4:20). It was this belief of the woman, who thought 
that God would be worshipped rightly or wrongly by Jews 
in Jerusalem or by Samaritans in Mount Gerizim because of 
some special privilege attaching to the material places, that 
the Savior contradicts by saying that the man who desires to 
seek for God must abandon all idea of material places. These 
are his words: “The hour cometh, when the true worship- 
pers shall worship the Father neither in Jerusalem nor in this 
mountain. God is spirit, and they that worship him must 


worship in spirit and in truth” din truth” (cf. Jn 4:21, 23, 24). See, too, 
how appropriately | he associated truth with spirit, calling God 
spirit to distinguish him from bodies, and truth to distinguish 
him from a shadow or an image. For those who worshipped 
in Jerusalem, “serving a shadow and image of heavenly things” 
(Heb 8:5), worshipped neither in truth nor in spirit, and the 
same is true of those who worshipped in Mount Gerizim. 

5. Having then refuted, to the best of our ability, every 


interpretation which suggests that we should attribute to 


__,,,a God any material characteristics, we assert that in truth he is 


so 


eo OOO 
in-comprehensible and immeasurable. For whatever may be 
—— 


Book I, Chapter I 13 


the knowledge which we have been able to obtain about God, 
whether by perception or by reflection, we must of necessity 
believe that he is far and away better than our thoughts about 
him. For if we see a man who can scarcely look at a glimmer 
or the light of the smallest lamp, and if we wish to teach such 
a one, whose eyesight is not strong enough to receive more 
light than we have said, about the brightness and splendor of 
the sun, shall we not have to tell him that the splendor of the 
sun is unspeakably and immeasurably better and more © glori- 
ous than all this light he can see? In the same way our © mind ) 
is shut up within bars of flesh and blood and rendered d duller 
and feebler by reason of its association with such material 
substances; and although it is regarded as far more excellent 
when compared with the natural body, yet when it strains 
after incorporeal things and seeks to gain a sight of them i it has 
scarcely the power of a glimmer of light or a tiny lamp. And 
among all intellectual, that is, incorporeal things, what is there 
\ so universally surpassing, so unspeakably and immeasurably 


excelling, as God, whose nature certainly the vision of the 


human mind, however pure or clear to the very utmost that 
mind may be, canitot t gaze at or behold? 

6. But it will not appear out of place if to make the matter 
clearer still we use yet another illustration. Sometimes our eyes 
cannot look upon the light itself, that is, the actual sun, but 
when we see the brightness and rays of the sun as they pour 
into our windows, it may be, or into any small openings for 
light, we are able to infer from these how great is the source 
and fountain of physical light. So, too, the works of divine 


" providence and the plan of this universe are as it were rays of 


God's nature in contrast to his real substance and being, and 


~ because our mind is of itself unable to behold God as he is, it 


understands the parent of the universe from the beauty of his 
works and the comeliness of his creatures. 


/62 —— 
/ E 


14 / / 


God therefore must not be thou 
body, nor to exist ih a body, a simple inte 
existence, admitting i in himself of no addition whatever, so_ 
that he cannot be believed to have in himself a more or a less, 
but is Unity, or if ] may so say, Oneness” throughout, and the 
mind and fount ftom which originates all intellectual existence 
or mind. Now mind does not need physical space in which to 
move and operate, nor does it need a magnitude discernible 
by the senses, nor bodily shape or color, nor anything else 
whatever like these, which are suitable to bodies and mat- 
ter. Accordingly that simple and wholly mental existence can 
admit no delay or hesitation in any of its movements or oper- 
ations; for if it did so, the simplicity of its divine nature would 
appear to be in some degree limited and impeded by such 
an addition, and that which is the first principle of all things 
would be found to be composite and diverse, and would be 
many and not one; sirice only the species of deity, if 1 may 
so call it, has the privilege of existing apart from all material 
intermixture. 

That mind needs no space in which to move according 
to its own nature is certain even from the evidence of our 
own mind. For if this abides in its own proper sphere and 
nothing occurs from any cause to enfeeble it, it will never be 
at all retarded by reason of differences of place from acting in 
conformity with its own movements; nor on the other hand 
will it gain any increase or accession of speed from the peculiar 
nature of any place. And if it be objected, for example, that 
when men are travelling by sea and tossed by the waves, their 
mind is somewhat less vigorous than it is wont to be on land, 
we must believe this experience to be due not to the difference 
of place but to the movement and disturbance of the body 
with which the mind is joined or intermingled. For it seems 
almost against nature for the human body to live on the sea, 


Book I, Chapter I Vig he 15 


and on se hes a the body, as if unequal to its task, appears 
to sustain ind’s moi ini i 
e mind's movements in irregular and disordered 


manner, giving feebleryassistance to its keen flashes, precisely 


as happens even witht men on land when they are in the grip 
of a fever; in whos¢ case it is certain that, if the mind fulfills 
its functions less effectively through thé strength of the fever, 
the cause is to be found notin any defect of locality but in the 
disease of the he renders it disturbed and confused 
and altogether unable to bestow its customary services on the 
mind under the well-known and natural conditions. For we 
men are ahimals, formed by a union of body and | soul, and 
thus alone did it become possible for us to live on ‘the earth. 
But God, who is the beginning of all things, must not be 
regarded as a composite being, lest perchance we find that the 
elements, out of which everything that is called composite has 
been composed, are prior to the first principle himself. 

Nor does the mind need physical magnitude in order 
to perform any act or movement, as an eye does when in 
looking at large bodies it expands and at small ones narrows 
and contracts for the purpose of seeing. Mind certainly needs 
intellectual magnitude, because it grows in an intellectual and 
not in a physical sense. For mind does not increase by phys- 
ical additions at the same time as the body does until the 
twentieth or thirtieth year of its age, but by the employment 
of instructions and exercises a sharpening of the natural fac- 
ulties is effected and he powers implanted within are roused 
to intelligence. Thus the capacity of the intellect is enlarged 
not by being increased with physi itions, but by being 
cultivated through exercises in learning. These it cannot receive 
immediately from birth or boyhood because the structure of 
the bodily parts which the mind uses as instruments for its 
own exercise is as yet weak and feeble, being neither able to 


2247 
4OF 
he 


7 
Bo ah” 
A&Z 
IT 
A 

” 


at 


16 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


endure the force of the mind’s working nor sufficiently devel- 
oped to display a capacity for receiving instruction. _ 

7. But if there are any who consider the mind itself and 
the soul to be a body, I should like them to tell me how it can 
take in reasons and arguments relating to questions of great _ 
importance, full of difficulty and subtlety. Whence-comes it 
that the’power of memory, the contemplajofi of invisible 
things, yes, and the perception of incorporeal things reside in 
a body? How does a bodily nature investigate the teachings of 
the arts and the meanings and reasons of things? And divine 


/doctrines, which are obviously incorporeal, how can it discern 


i ha 
Mm f ‘XQ 
' 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ pe 
boty * 


and understand them? One might perhaps think that, just 
as the bodily form and shape of the ears or eyes contributes 
something to hearing or to seeing, and as the various parts of 
our body, which have been formed by God, each possess some 
special capacity, due to their particular form, for doing the 


~.work for which they were by nature designed, so too, the soul 


or mind must be supposed to have an outward shape fitly and 
iinderstanding individual things and of being set in motion by 
vital movements. But what sort of appearance the mind could 


have, seeing that it isa mind and moves in an intellectual way, 


- Ido not know who could describe or tell us. 


In further confirmation and explanation of what we 
have said about the mind or soul, as being superior to all 
bodily nature, the following remarks may be added. Each of 
the bodily senses is appropriately connected with a material 
substance towards which the particular sense is directed. For 
instance, sight is connected with color, shape and size; hear- 
ing with the voice and sound; smelling with vapors pleas- 
ant and unpleasant; taste with flavors; touch with things 
hot or cold, hard or soft, rough or smooth. But it is clear to 
all that the sense of mind is far superior to the senses above 


Book I, Chapter I 17 


mentioned. Does it not then appear absurd that these inferior 
senses should have substances connected with them, as objects 
towards which their activities are directed, whereas this faculty, 
the sense of mind, which is superior to them, should have no 
substance whatever connected with it, and that this faculty of 
an intellectual nature should be a mere accident arising out 
of bodies?? Those who assert this are undoubtedly speaking 
in disparaging terms of that substance which is the better 
part of their own nature; nay more, they do wrong even to 
God himself in supposing that he can be understood through 
a bodily nature, since according to them) that which can be 
understood or perceived through a body is itself a body; and 
they are unwilling to have it understood that there is a certain 


| affinity between the mind and God, of whom the mind is an 


intellectual image, and that by reason of this fact the mind, 
especially if it is purified and separated from bodily matter, is 
able to have some perception of the divine nature: 

8. But these assertions may perhaps seem 6 be less author- 
itative to those who desire to be instructéd in divine things 
from the holy scriptures and who sect to have it proved to 
them from that source how God's nature surpasses the nature 
of bodies. See then, whether the apostle, too, does not say the 
same thing when he speaks as follows about Christ: “Who is 
the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation” 
(Col 1:15). It is not, as some suppose; that God’s nature is 
visible to one and invisible to others; for the apostle did not 
say “the image of God who is invisible” to men or “invisible” 
to sinners, but he makes an absolutely unvarying declaration 
about God's very nature in these words, “image of the invisible 
God.” And John, too, when he says in the gospel, “No one 
hath seen God at any time” (Jn 1:18), plainly declares to all 
who are capable of understanding, that there is no existence 
to which God is visible; not as if he were one who is visible 


18 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES Book I, Chapter I POTD. SELES: a 


by nature and yet eludes and escapes the gaze of his creatures sense are often applied to the coal so that we speak of seeing 


because of their frailty, but that he is in his nature impossible with the eyes of the heart, that is, of drawing some intellectual 
to be seen. conclusion by means of the faculty of intelligence. So too we —— 
And if you should ask me what is my belief about the » 2+ speak of hearing with the ears when we discern the d 
Only-begotten himself, whether I would say that God’s na / meaning of some statement. So too we speak of the soul as 
which is naturally invisible, is not even visible to high, do being able to use teeth, when it eats and consumes the bread d of - 
not immediately think this question to be i impious or é surd, life who comes down from heaven. In a similar way we speak 
because we shall give it a logical answer. (For as it ig incon- * of it as using all the other bodily organs, which are transferred 
gruous to say that the Son can see the Father, so it js unbe- from their corporeal significance and applied to the faculties of 
fitting to believe that the Holy Spirit can see the Son). ‘ Iris _ the soul; as Solomon says, “You will find a divine sense” (Prv 
one thing to see, another to know. To see and to be seen is a 2:5).° For he knew thar there were in us two kinds of senses, 
property of bodies; to know and to be known is an attribute of 5 the one being mortal, corruptible and human, and the other 
2 intellectual existence. Whatever therefore is proper to bodies : immortal and intellectual, which here he calls “divine.” By this 
must not be believed either of the Father or of the Son, the divine sense, therefore, not of the eyes but of a pure heart, that pin 
relations between whom are such as pertain to the nature is, the mind, God can be seen by those who are worthy. That hee t 
of deity. And finally, Christ in the gospel did not say, “No heart is used for mind, that is for the intellectual faculty, you you 
one seeth the Father except the Son, nor the Son except the wilco iil Gaal On nen aie ee y find over and over again in all the scriptures, 
Father,” but “no one knoweth the Son except the Father, nor both the New and the Old. 
J doth anyone know the Father except the Son” (Mt 11:27). e Having thus investigated the nature of God, though in 
es This clearly shows that what is called “seeing” and “being seen” a manner far from worthy by reason of the weakness of our 
ey in the case of bodily existences is with the Father and the Son human understanding, let us now see what meaning is to be 
called “knowing” and “being known,” through the faculty of given to the name Christ. 
knowledge and not through our frail sense of sight. It is, there- ee 2 ee oP 


fore, because the expressions “to see” and “to be seen” cannot 
suitably be applied to incorporeal and invisible existence that 
in the gospel the Father is not said to be seen by the Son nor 
the Son by the Father, but to be known. 

9. But if the question is put to us why it was said, “Bl 
are the pure in heart, for they shall see God” (Mr 5:8), I answer 
that in my opinion our argument will be much more 
established by this passage. For what else is “to see God/in the 
heart” but to understand and know him with the mind, just 
as we have explained above? For the names of the organs of 


' 
>» Ming = heart <— Py 
7 q e Com Jn. 4 904° 9 


‘ a 9 ) . 
Pa, if Ty tlh, 23 
ty c CS 7 ) 
” v* hel 


) 


= 4/4 see 
/ uit 


C._; ey (ERY rt -—interrad a 
Spe B«s 2 pou P . Volta 8 toga 


no relat Ten thas does pet rrtndlon Cond 
/ 


Chapter II mt hytyf FS 


l 4 0h / z 
Oar, ae} eo yA sn, of Ove 
. A i. 1 f p cer 
L 24 Of. 
ait CHRIST 
oy / 4 / / / 
4 y “ ; j f 
a Pe Aan v4 


w this, & in Christ there is one nature,) 

; deity, because hé is the only-begotten Son of the Father, ~ 

and another human nature, which in very recent times he took * 

upon him to fulfill the se. Our first task therefore 

is to see what the‘only-begotten Son of God is, seeing he is 

‘ called by many different names according to the circumstances 

_,,wand beliefs of the different writers. He is called Wisdom, as “9 ~°« 

Solomon said, speaking in the person of Wisdom: “The Lord | 
created me the beginning of his ways for his works. Before 
he made anything, before the ages he established me. In the 
beginning before he made the earth, before the springs of 
waters came forth, before the mountains were settled, before 
all the hills he begets me” (Prv 8:22-25).”! He is also called 
Firstborn, as the apostle Paul says: “who is the firstborn of all 
‘creation’ (Col 1:15). The Firstborn is not, however, by nature 
a different being from Wisdom, but is one and the same. 
Finally, the apostle Paul says, “Christ, the power of God and 
the wisdom of God” (1 Cor 1:24). 

2. Let no oné think, however, that when we give him the 
name “wisdom of God” we mean anything without hypostatic | 
existence,” that is, to take an illustration, that we understand 
him to be not as it were some wise living being, but a certain 


fr. > 21 


x UF 
22 “ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


thing which makes men wise by revealing and imparting itself 
to the minds of such as are able to receive its influence and 
intelligence. If then it is once rightly accepted that the only- 
begotten Son of God is God’s wisdom hypostatically existing, 
I do not think that our mind ought to stray beyond this to 
the suspicion that this hypostasis or substance could possibly 


possess bodily characteristics, since everything that is corpo- 
real is distinguished by shape or color or size. And who in his 


sober senses ever looked for shape or color or measurable size 
in wisdom, considered solely as wisdom? And can anyone who 
has learned to regard God with feelings of reverence suppose 
or believe that God the Father ever existed, even for a single 
moment, without begetting this wisdom? For he would either 
say that God could not have begotten wisdom before he did 
beget her, so that he brought wisdom into being when she 
had not existed before, or else that he could have begotten 
her and—whar it is profanity even to say about God—that he 
was unwilling to do so; each of which alternatives, as everyone 
can see, is absurd and impious, that is, either that God should 
advance from being unable to being able, or that, while being 
’ able, he should act as if he were not and should delay to beget 
wisdom. 
Wherefore we recognize that God was always the Father 
of his only-begotten Son, who was born indeed of him and 
draws his being from him, but is yet without any beginning, 
~ not only of that kind which can be distinguished by periods 
of time, but even of that other kind which the mind alone is 
wont to contemplate in itself and to perceive, if I may so say, 


with the bare intellect and reason. Wisdom, therefore, must be 


believed to have been begotten beyond the limits of any begin- 
ning that we can speak of or understand. And because in this , 
very subsistence of wisdom there was implicit every capacity 
and form of the creation that was to be, both of those things 


34 (89) 72,92 
— —~/ £7 ai 


y ; 
Book I, Chapter II re / | 23 


the “beginning of the ways” of God and is said to have been 
created, in the sense, namely, that she fashions cfoxcharid 
and contains within herself the species and causes of the entire 
creation, in the same manner also must wisdom be understood 
to be the Word of God. For wisdom opens to all other beings, 
that is, to the whole creation, the meaning of the mysteries and 
secrets which are contained within the wisdom of God, and so 
she is called the Word, because she is as it were an interpreter 
of the mind’s secrets. Hence I consider that to be a true saying 
which is written in the Acts of Paul, “He is the Word, a living 
being.”* John, however, uses yet more exalted and wonderful 
language in the beginning of his gospel, when by an appro- 
priate declaration he defines the Word to be God; “And the 
Word was God, and he was in the beginning with God” (Jn 
1:1, 2). Let him who assigns a beginning to the Word of God 
or the wisdom of God beware lest he utters impiety against 
the unbegotten Father himself, in denying that he was always 
a Father and that he begat the Word and possessed wisdom in 
all previous times or ages or whatever else they may be called. 

4. This Son, then, is also the truth and the life (cf. Jn 14:6) 
of all things that exist; and rightly so. For the things that were 
made, how could they live, except by the gift of life? Or the 
things that exist, how could they really and truly exist, unless 
they were derived from the truth? Or how could rational 


™~ 
beings exist, unless the Word or reason had existed before 
them? Or how could they be wise, unless wisdom existed? 
But since it was to happen that some should fall away from 
life and bring death upon themselves by the yery fact of their 
falling (for death is nothing else but a departure from life), 
and yet it would certainly not have been logical that beings 
once created by God for the enjoyment of life should utterly 
perish, it was needful that before the existence of death there 
should exist a power capable of destroying the death that was 
to come, and that there should exist a resurrection (cf. Jn 


24 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


11:25), the figure of which was shown in our Lord and Savior, 


which resurrection should have its ground in the very wisdom 
and word and life of God. Or again, since it was to happen 
that some of those)who were created would prove unable, in 
consequence of the good being within them as an accident 
and not by nature, that is, not essentially, to remain firm and 
steadfast and to abide forever in the just and temperate use 
of their original blessings, but would turn and change and 
fall away from their first state, the word and wisdom of God 
became the way (cf. Jn 14:6). And it is called the way for this 
reason, that itleads t the Father those who walk along it. 


Whatever then we have said of the wisdom of God will fe 


also fitly apply to and be understood of him in his other titl 

as the Son of God, the life, the word, the truth, the way and 
the resurrection. For all these titles are derived from his works 
and powers, and in none of them is there the least reason to 
understand anything corporeal, which might seem to denote 
either sizé or shape or color. But whereas the offspring of men 
or of the other animals whom we see around us correspond to 
the seed of those by whom they were begotten, or of the moth- 
ers in whose womb they are formed and nourished, drawing 
from these parents whatever it is that they take and bring into 
the light of day when they are born, it is impious and shocking 


S 


Ing, 


Book I, Chapter II 25 


to regard God the Father in the begetting of his only-begotten 
Son and in the Son's subsistence as being similar to any human 
being or other animal in the act of begetting; but there must 
needs be some exceptional process, worthy of God, to which 
we can find no comparison whatever, not merely in things, 
but even in thought and imagination, such that by its aid 
human thought could apprehend how the unbegotten God 
becomes Father of the only-begotten Son. This is an eternal 
and everlasting begetting, as brightness is begotten from light 
(cf. Wis 7:26; Heb 1:3). For he does not become Son in an 


> external way through the adoption of the Spirit (Rom 8: ees 


but is Son by nature. 

5. Let us now see how our statements are also supported 
by the authority of divine scripture. The apostle Paul says that 
the only-begotten Son is “the image of the invisible God,” 
and that he is the “firstborn of all creation” (Col 1:15) and 
when writing to the Hebrews he says of the Son that he is the 
“brightness of God’s glory and the express image of his sub- 
stance” (Heb 1:3). But we also find, in the book of Wisdom 
which is said to be Solomon's, a certain description of the 
wisdom of God in the following terms: “For she is a breath of 
the power of God, and a pure effluence (that is, emanation‘) of 
the glory of the Almighty.” Therefore, “nothing that is defiled 
can enter into her. For she is the brightness of the eternal 
light and an unspotted mirror of the working of God and an 
image of his goodness (Wis 7:25ff.). Now, as we said above, 
the wisdom of God has her subsistence nowhere else but in 
him who is the beginning of all things, from whom also she 


‘took her birth. And because he himself, who alone is a Son 


By nature, is this wisdom, he is on this account also called the 
“only-begotten.” 


6. Let us now see what we abba to understand by the 
expression “image of the invisible God,” in order that we may 


a Pa 


26 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


learn therefrom how God can rightly be called the Father 
of his Son; and let us first of all consider what things are 
called images in ordinary human speech. Sometimes the term 
“image” is applied to an object painted or carved on some 
material, such as wood or stone. Sometimes a child is said to 
be the image of its parent, when the likeness of the parent's 
features is in every respect faithfully reproduced in the child. 
Now I think that the first of these illustrations may be fitly 
applied to him who was made “in the image and likeness of 
God” (Gn 1:26), that is, man. Of man, however, we shall 
inquire more carefully, with God’s help, when we come to the 
exposition of this passage in Genesis.” 

But in regard to the Son of God, of whom we are now 
speaking, the image may be compared to our second illus- 


tration; for this reason, that he is the invisible image of the 
invisible God, just as according to the script re narrative we 


say that the image of Adam was his son Seth. It is writterrthus:—_ 


“And Adam begat Seth after his own image and after his own 
kind (Gn 5:3). This image preserves the unity of nature and 
substance common to a father and a son. For if “all things 
that the Father doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise” (Jn 
5:19), then in this very fact that the Son does all things just 
as the Father does, the Father's image is reproduced in the 
Son, whose birth from the Father is as it were an act of his 
will proceeding from the mind. And on this account my own 
opinion is that an act of the Father's will ought to be sufficient 
to ensure the existence of what he wills; for in willing he uses 
no other means than that which is produced by the deliber- 
ations of his will. It is in this way, then, that the existence of 
the Son also is begotten by him. 

This point must above all be upheld by ‘oan who allow 
nothing to be unbegotten, that is, unborn, except God the 
Father only.® Moreover, we must take care not to fall into the 


— 


Book I, Chapter II 27 


absurd fables of those who imagine for themselves certain 


emanations, splitting the divine nature into parts and, so far ' 


as they can, dividing God the Father.’ For it is not only the 
utmost impiety, but also the depth of folly, to entertain the 


slightest suspicion that such a thing could happen to an incor- . 
pores pein nor is it at all consistent with our intelligence to to 


ink that a physical division of an incorporeal being is pos- 
sible. Rather must we suppose that as an act of will proceeds 
from the mind without either cutting off any part of the mind 
or being separated or divided from it, in some similar fashion 
has the Father begotten the Son, who is indeed his image; so 


image that is also invisible“, ~~ P- 


P 
For the Son is the Word, and therefore we must urider- 
stand that nothingA in him is perceptible to the senses. ‘He is 


wisdom, and in wisdom we must not suspect the presence of _, 
anything corporeal. “He is the true light, which lighteth every . 
—_man that Cometh into the world”-Jn-t:9), but he has nothing 


in common with the light of our sun. Our Savior is therefore 
the image of the invisible God, the Father, being the truth, 
when considered in relation to the Father himself,° and the 
image, when considered in relation to us, to whom he reveals 
the Father (cf. Jn 14:6); through which image we know the 
Father, whom “no one” else “knoweth save the Sonand he to 
whom the Son hath willed to reveal him” (Mt 11:27). And he 
reveals the Father by being himself understood; for whoever 
has understood him understands as a consequence the Father 
also”, according to his own saying, “He that hath seen me, 
hath seen the Father also” (Jn 14:9).!° 

7. But we quoted the saying of Paul in which he speaks of 


Christ as being “the brightness of God’s glory, and the express 


image of his substance” (Heb 1:3); let us see, therefore, what 
we are to learn from this. “God is light,” according to John 


a A 


Z& 


that as the Father is invisible by nature, he has begotten an an “ 25 


28 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


(1 Jn 1:5). The only-begotten Son, therefore, is the bright- 
ness of this light, pro¢eeding from God without separation, 
as brightness from light, and lightening the whole creation. 
For by the same method of exposition which we have used 
above,'! to show how he is the way and leads to the Father, 
rational creation the secrets of wisdom fe the mysteries of 
' knowledge, and how he is also the truth and the life and the 
resurrection, must we arrive at the meaning of his being the 
P brightness; for it is through its brightness that the nature of 
~, the light itself i is known and experienced. This brightness falls 
softly and gently on the éender and weak eyes of mortal man 
and little by little trains and accustoms them, as it were, to 
bear the ithe in itsclearness; and when it has removed from 
t darkens and obstructs their vision, in accordance 
rd’s saying, “Cast out the beam out of thine eye” 
; Lk 6:42) it renders them capable of enduring the 
glory of the light, becoming in this respect even a kind of 

t _mediator tween men and the light (cf. 1 Tm 2:5). 
‘8. Christ is said, however, by the apostle to be not only 
“the brightness of God’s glory” but also “the express image 
of his substance” (Heb 1:3) or subsistence. I do not think it 
superfluous, therefore, to turn our attention to this point, 
namely, how there can be said to exist, besides the actual 
substance or subsistence of God (whatever that substance or 
subsistence means), something else which is an image of his 
substance. See, then, whether the Son of God, who is called 
y God's word and wisdom, and who alone knows the Father and 
‘> reveals him to whom he will (cf. Mt 11:27), to those, namely, 
; who become capable of receiving his word and wisdom, may 
. not perhaps be said to express the image of God’s substance 
or subsistence for this reason, that he makes God understood 
and known; that is, when wisdom outlines first in herself the 


Book I, Chapter II 29 


things which she wishes to reveal to others, by means of which 
they are to know and understand God, then she herself may 
be called the express image of God's substance (Heb 1:3). 

In order, however, to understand still more completely 
how the Savior is “the image of God’s substance” or subsis- 
tence, let us use an illustration which, although it does not 
fully or properly represent the subject under discussion, we 
may yet be allowed to employ for the sole purpose of showing 
that when the Son, “who was in the form of God, emptied 
himself” (Phil 2:6, 7). his desire was by means of this very 
emptying to display to us the fullness of the godhead. Let us 
suppose, for example, that there existed a statue of so great 


a size as to fill the whole world, but which on account of its 


immensity was imperceptible to anyone, and that another 


statue was made similar to it in every detail, in shape of limbs 


and outline of features, in form and material, but not in its 
immense size, so that those who were unable to perceive and 
behold the immense one could yet be confident that they had 
seen it when they saw the small one, because this preserved 
every line of limbs and features and the very form and material 
with an absolutely indistinguishable similarity." 

It is by some such likeness as this that the Son, in empty- 
ing himself of his equality with the Father (cf. Phil 2:7) and 


showing to us a way by which we may know him, becomes 


‘an “express image” of God’s substance (cf. Heb 1:3); so that, 


through this fact of his becoming to us the brightness, we 
who were not able to look at the glory of pure light while it 
remained in the greatness of his godhead, may find a way of 
beholding the divine light through looking at the brightness. 
Needless to say, a comparison with statues, taken from the 
region of material things, is to be allowed for no other purpose 
but to show that the Son of God, though brought within the 


very narrow compass of a human body, yet gave indications, 


30 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


in the likeness of his power and works to those of God the 
Father, of the immense and invisible greatness that was in him; 
witness the words which he said to his disciples, “He that hath 
seen me hath seen the Father also” (Jn 14:9), and, “I and the 
Father are one” (Jn 10:30); along with which we must also 
interpret that similar saying of his, “the Father in me, and I 
in the Father” (Jn 10:38). 

9. Let us now see what is the meaning of that passage 
which we find written in the Wisdom of Solomon, who 
speaks of wisdom as follows: “She is a breath of the power 
of God and a pure effluence (that is, emanation) of the glory 
of the Almighty and the brightness of the eternal light and 
an unspotted mirror of the working or power of God and 
an image of his goodness” (Wis 7:25, 26). He gives here five 
definitions of God and from each of them in turn he indicates 
a certain characteristic belonging to God’s wisdom; for he 
speaks of God’s “power” and “glory” and “eternal light” and 
“working” and “goodness.” He says, however, that wisdom is 
a breath not of the glory of the Almighty, nor of the eternal 
light, nor of the working of the Father, nor of his goodness, 
since it was not suitable to apply the term breath to any one 
of these; but in all appropriateness he says that wisdom i isa 
breath of the “power” of God. Now the power of od must 
mean that by which he is strong, that by which he it estab- 
lished and also preserves and controls all things visible and 
invisible, and that by which he is sufficient for all things which 
are the objects of his providence and with all of which he is 
present as if they were joined in one. The breath, then, or if | 
I may so call it, the strength of all this power, so great and so 
immense, comes to-have a subsistence its own; and although it 
» proceeds from the power itself as will proceeding from mind," 
~ yet nevertheless the will of God comes itself to be a power of 
God. There comes into existence, therefore, another power, 


Book I, Chapter II 31 


subsisting in its own proper nature, a kind breath, as the pas- 
sage of Scripture calls it, of the first and unbegotten power of 
God, drawing from this source whatever existence it has; and 
there is no time when it did not exist. 

For if anyone is inclined to describe it as being non- 
existent at first but coming into existence afterwards, let him 
tell us why the Father who caused it to exist did not do so 
before. And if he lays it down that there was one definite 
beginning when this “breath” first proceeded from the power 
of God, we shall ask again why it did not so proceed before 
this beginning of which he has spoken. Thus by ever inquir- 
ing what happened before and going further back with our 
questions, we shall reach the conclusion that, since God always 


had both the power and the will, there was never the slightest *”~ 


reason or possibility that he should not always have had this 
good thing that he desired. This proves that there always has 
existed that breath of the power of God, having no beginning 
but God himself. Nor indeed could it have fidly had any other 
beginning except him from whom it takes its existence and 
birth, thar is, God. And in regard to the apostle’s saying that 
“Christ is the power of God” (1 Cor 1:24) this power must be 
called not merely a breath of the power of God but a power 
proceeding from the power. 
10. Let us now look into the saying that wisdom is “an 
effluence,” that is, an emanation, “of the clear glory of the 
Almighty,” and if we first consider what “the glory of the 


___ Almighty” is, we shall then understand what its “effluence” 


is. Now as one cannot be a father apart from having a son, 
nor a lord apart from holding a possession or a slave, so we 


_» cannot even call, God almighty if there are none over whom 


he can exercise his power. Accordingly, to prove that God is 
almighty we must assume the existence of the universe. For 
if anyone would have i it that certain ages, or periods of time, 


a | 
~ coe 


“ 


» were controlled by him as king and ruler. 


32 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


or whatever he cares to call them, elapsed during which the 
present creation did not exist, he would undoubtedly prove 
that in those ages or periods God was not almighty, but that 
he afterwards became almighty from the time when he began 
to have creatures over whom he could exercise power. Thus 
God will apparently have rienced a kind of progress, for 
there can be no doubt that it 
than not to be so. 


Now how does it seem an 
should at first not possess something that is appropriate to 
him, and afterwards by a kind of progress should come to 
possess it? But if there was no time when he was not almighty, 


then of necessity those things must always have ¢ existed, in in /)\ 


virtue of which he is called almighty; and he must always have 
had creatures over which he exercised his power and which 

Of these we shall treat more fully in the proper er place 
when we come to discuss the subject of God’s creatures." Yet 
even now, since we are dealing with the question how wisdom 
is a pure efHluence, or emanation, of the glory of the Almighty, 
I deem it necessary to give warning, however briefly, to prevent 
anyone from thinking that the title of Almighty belonged to 
God before the birth of wisdom, through which he is called 
Father; for wisdom, which is the Son of God, is said to be a 
“pure efHuence of the glory of the Almighty.” Let him who is 
inclined to believe this hear what the scriptures plainly pro- 
claim; for it says that “thou hast made all things in wisdom” 
(Ps 104:24 [LXX 103:24]), and the Gospel teaches that “all 
things were made by him and without him was not anything 
made” (Jn 1:3); and let him understand from this that the title 


| of Almighty cannot be older in God than that of Father, for it 
"is through the Son that the Father is almighty. 


better for him to be almighty 


ing but absurd that ro cy 


4 


52-3 


Book I, Chapter II ie 33 

But the passage speaks of a glory belonging to the 
Almighty, of which glory wisdom is the effluence. From this 
we learn that wisdom, through which God is called Almighty, 
has a share even inthe glory of omnipotence. For it is through 
wisdom, which is Christ, that God holds power over all things, 
not only by his own authority as Master, but also by the vol- 
untary service of his subjects. And to prove to you that the 


omnipotence of the Father and the Son is one and the same, “ 
just as God and the Lord are one and the same as the Father, 


listen to the manner in which John speaks in the Apocalypse: 


“These things saith the Lord God, which is and which was and 


which is to come, the Almighty” (Rv 1:8). For he who “is to 
aerate ki beh And just as no one ought to 
be offended because, while the Father is God, the Savior also 
is God; so too ought no one to be offended because, while 
the Father is called Almighty, the Son also is called Almighty. 

Moreover we shall in this way see the truth of that say- 
ing which Christ utters to the Father: “All things that are 
mine are thine, and thine are mine, and I am glorified in 
them” (Jn 17:10). Now if all things which are the Father's are 
Christ’s, and among all that the Father is, he is Almighty, then 
undoubtedly the only-begotten Son must also be Almighty, 
that the Son aay have all that the Father has. “And I am glori- 
fied,” he says, “in them.” For “in the name of Jesus every knee 
shall bow, of things in heaven, and things on earth, and things 
under the earth; and every tongue shall confess that Jesus is 
Lord in the glory of God the Father” (Phil 2:10, 11).'* He is 
therefore the “effluence of the glory of God” in this respect, 
that he is Almighty, God’s pure and clear wisdom itself, glori- 
fied as being the effluence of omnipotence or glory. 

We add the following, however, to make it more clearly 
understood what the glory of omnipotence is. God the Father 
is almighty because he holds dominion over all things, that is, 


Fs dher 


34 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


over heaven and earth, sun, moon and stars and everything 
contained in them. This dominion he exercises through his 
Word, for “in the name of Jesus every knee bows, of things 
in heaven, and things on earth, and things under the earth.” 
Now if every knee bows to Jesus, then undoubtedly it is Jesus 
to whom all things have been subjected, and it is he who wields 
dominion over all things; and all things have been subjected 
to the Father through him; for it is through wisdom, that is, 
_by word and reason and not by force and necessity, that they 
are subject. His glory, therefore, lies in the very fact that he 
possesses all things; and this is the purest and brightest glory of 
omnipotence, that the universe is held in subjection by reason 
and wisdom, and not by force and necessity. It is called the 
“purest and brightest” glory of wisdom as the most suitable way 
of distinguishing it from that glory which is not pure or sincere. 

For every nature which is alterable and changeable, even 
though it may be glorified in works of righteousness or wis- 
dom, cannot be said to possess a glory that is sincere and 
bright, by reason of the fact that its righteousness and wisdom 
are accidents, and whatever is accidental may also be separated 
and lost. But since the wisdom of God, which is his only- 
begotten Son, is in all respects unalterable and unchangeable, 
and since every good quality in him is essential and can never 
be changed or altered, his glory is on that account described 
as pure and sincere. 

11. In the third place, wisdom is said to be the bright- 
ness of the eternal light. The force of this expression we have 
explained in a previous passage, where we introduced the 
illustration of the sun and the brightness of its rays'® and 
showed to the best of our ability how the expression should 
be understood. We will add, however, this one point. The 
term everlasting or eternal properly denotes that which had 
no beginning of existence and can never cease to be what it 


Book I, Chapter II 35 


is. This is the idea underlying the passage in John, where he 
says that “God is light” (1 Jn 1:5). Now God’s wisdom is the 
brightness of that light, not only in so far as it is light, but 
in so far as it is everlasting light. His wisdom is therefore an 
everlasting brightness, enduring eternally. If this point is fully 
understood, it is a clear proof that the Son's existence springs 
from the Father himself, yet not in time, nor from any other 
Beginning except, as we have said, from God himself. 

12. Wisdom is also called an “unspotted mirror of the 
energy or working of God” (cf. Wis 7:25).'7 We must first 
understand, therefore, what the “working” of God's power is. 
It is a kind of strength, so to speak, by means of which the 
Father works, whether in his acts of creation, or of providence, | 
or of judgment, or in the ordering and superintendence of 
every detail of the universe at his own appointed time. And 
when wisdom is called the “unspotted mirror” of the Father’s 
power and working, she would have us understand her nature _ 
to be like the image reflected in a mirror, which moves and™ 
acts in correspondence with the movements and actions of 
him who looks into the mirror, not deviating front them in 
any way whatever. So too the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the 
wisdom of God, speaks of himself when he says, “the works 
which the Father doeth, these also doeth the Son in like man- 
ner” (Jn 5:19); and again, “the Son can do nothing of himself, 
but what he hath seen the Father doing” (ibid.). 

As regards the power of his works, then, the Son is in 
no way whatever separate or different from the Father, nor 
is his work anything other than the Father's work, but there 
is one and the same movement, so to speak, in all they do; 
consequently the Father has called him an “unspotted mirror,” 
in order to make it understood that there is absolutely no 
dissimilarity between the Son and the Father. Some indeed 
have said that the Son’s acts are to be compared with a pupil's 


36 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


work in likeness to or imitation of his master, or that such 
things as the Father has first formed in their spiritual essence 
are made by the Son in bodily material; ls yet how can these 
opinions be reconciled with the Gospel, which says, not that 
the Son does like things, but that he does the same things “in 
like manner” (Jn 5:19)? 

13. There remains the inquiry, what is the “image of his 
goodness”? Here, I think, we do well to adopt the same line of 
reasoning which we used above in regard to the image formed 
in a mirror. The original goodness is undoubtedly the Father; 
and from this is born the Son, who is in every respect an 
image of the Father, and who may also without any doubt be 
properly called an “image of his goodness.”!” 

For there is no other second goodness existing in the 
Son, besides that which is in the Father. So the Savior himself 
rightly says in the Gospel that “none is good save one, God 
the Father” (Mk 10:18), the purpose of this statement being to 
make it understood that the Son is not of some other “good- 
ness,” but of that alone which is in the Father; whose image 
he is rightly called, because he neither springs from any other 
source than from original goodness itself,—for if that were so, 
there would seem to be a different goodness in the Son from 
that which is in the Father—nor has the goodness that is in 
him any dissimilarity or divergence from that of the Father. 
Accordingly we ought not to imagine that there is some kind 
of blasphemy, as it were, in the saying that “none is good save 


one, God the Father” (Mk 10:18) as if these words were to be 


taken as a denial that either Christ or the Holy Spirit is good; 


but, as we said before,”* the original goodness must be believed 
to reside in God the Father, and from him both the Son and 
Holy Spirit undoubtedly draw into themselves the nature of 


that goodness existing in the fount”! from which the one is 


born and the other proceeds. 


Book I, Chapter II 37 


If then there are any other things called good in the scrip- 
tures, such as an angel, or a man, ora slave, or a treasure, or a 
good heart, or a good tree,” all these are so called by an inex- 
act use of the word, since the goodness contained in them is 
accidental and not essential. And it would be a long business, 

“demanding another time and another work, to collect all the - 
titles of the Son of God, such for example as the true light, or 
‘the door, or righteousness, or sanctification, or redemption, 
and countless others,” and to explain for what reasons either 
in regard to his powers or his moral qualities each of these 
names is given to him. Let us rest content with those we have 
already discussed, and go on to inquire into the remaining 
parts of our subject in their proper order. 


Chapter III 


THE HOty SPIRIT 


1. We come, therefore, to the investigation, in as brief a man- 
ner as possible, of the subject of the Holy Spirit. Now all 
who in any way believe in the existence of Providence admit 
that God, who created and set in order the entire creation, 
is un-begotten,' and they recognize him to be the parent of 
the universe. And we are not alone in declaring that he has 
a Son. For although this may seem marvelous and incredible 
to those who are considered to be philosophers, whether of 
Greek or barbarian race, yet there are some even of them who | 
appear to have held a belief in his existence, for they admit 
that all things were created by the word or reason of God.’ 
We, however, in conformity with our faith in that doctrine 
which we hold for certain to be divinely inspired, believe that 
there is no possible way of explaining and bringing to man’s 
knowledge the higher and diviner teaching about the Son of 
God, except by means of those scriptures which were inspired 
by the Holy Spirit, namely, the gospels and the writings of 

the apostles, to which we add, according to the declaration — 
of Christ himself (cf. Lk 24:25-27; Jn 5:39, 46), the law and 
the prophets. But no one except those who are familiar with 
the law and the prophets, or those who profess their belief in 
Christ, could have even a suspicion of the personal existence of 


39 


SE 


1 135 
40 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


the Holy Spirit. For although no one is able to speak worthily 
of God the Father, still it is possible to gain some notion of 
him from our experience of the visible creation and from the 
instinctive thoughts of the human mind; and, moreover, it is 
possible for such knowledge to be confirmed from the holy 
scriptures. And in regard to the Son of God, although “no one 
knoweth the Son save the Father” (Mt 11:27) yet again from 
the divine scriptures the mind of man is directed how to think 
of him too; and this not only from the New, but also from the 
Old Testament, through those deeds done by holy men which 
allude figuratively to Christ, and from which we can learn both 
his divine nature and the human nature which he assumed. 
2. Of the existence of the Holy Spirit, however, we are 
taught in many passages of scripture. For instance, David 
says in the fiftieth psalm, “And take not thy Holy Spirit from 
me” (Ps 51:13 [LXX 50:13]); and in Daniel it is said, “The 
Holy Spirit, who is in thee” (Dn 4:6 [Theodotian]; See 4:9 of 
English version). But in the New Testament we have proofs 
in abundance, as when the Holy Spirit is related to have 
descended upon Christ (cf. Mt 3:16 and par.), and when the 
Lord breathed on his apostles after the resurrection and said, 
“Receive the Holy Spirit” (Jn 20:22); and the angel says to 
Mary, “The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee” (Lk 1:35) and 
Paul teaches us that “no one can say that Jesus is the Lord 
except in the Holy Spirit” (1 Cor 12:3) and in the Acts of 
the Apostles “through the laying on of the apostles’ hands 
the Holy Spirit was given” (Acts 8:18) in baptism. From all 
of which we learn that the person of the Holy Spirit is of so 
great authority and dignity that saving baptism is not com- 
plete except when performed with the authority of the whole 
most excellent Trinity, that is, by the naming of Father, Son 


and Holy Spirit (cf. Mt 28:19); and that the name of the Holy ’ 


Spirit must be joined to that of the unbegotten God the Father 


Si Gun Joho TF os 


Book I, Chapter III 41 


and his only-begotten Son. Who, then, is not amazed at the 
tremendous majesty of the /Holy Spirit, when he hears that 
“he who shall speak a word against the Son of man” may hope 
for forgiveness, but “he who shall blaspheme against the Holy 
Ghost has no forgiveness, either in this present world or in the 
world to come” (Mt 12:32)? 

3. It is proved by many declarations throughout the whole 
of scripture that the universe was created by God and that 
there is no substance which has not received its existence from 


him; which refutes and dismisses the doctrines falsely taught / 


by some, that there is a matter which is co-eternal with God,?/ 
or that there are unbegotten souls, in whom they would have 
it that God implanted not so much the principle of existence 
as the quality and rank of their life.* Moreover in that little 
book composed by ke called “The Shepherd, or the 


Angel of Repentance,”? jit is thus written: “First of all, believe 
that God is one, who created and set in order all things; who, 
when nothing existed) before, caused all things to be; who 


contains all things, but himself is contained by none.”® Similar 


statements are also made in the book of Enoch.’ But up to _ 
the present we have n able to find no passage in the holy * 


scriptures which would warrant us in saying that the Holy 
Spirit was a being made or created, not even in that manner in 
which we have shown above that Solomon speaks of wisdom, 
nor in the manner in which the expressions we have dealt 
with, such as life, or word, or other titles of the Son of God, 
are to be understood. The “Spirit of God,” therefore,® who 
“moved upon the waters,” as it is written, in the beginning 
of the creation of the world (cf. Gn 1:2, 1), I reckon to be 
none other than the Holy Spirit, so far as I can understand; 
which indeed I have demonstrated in my exposition of these 
passages,’ not, however, according to their literal but according 


to their spiritual meaning. 


oe ft teal 


42 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


4. Now some of our predecessors have observed that in the 
New Testament, whenever the Spirit is mentioned without its 
qualifying adjective, the expression should be understood to 
refer to the Holy Spirit; as for instance, “the fruit of the Spirit 
is love, joy, peace” (Gal 5:22) and the rest. And here again: 
“seeing ye began in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect in the 
flesh?” (Gal 3:3). We, however, think that this peculiar use 
may be observed in the Old Testament also, as when it says, 
“he that giveth spirit to the people who are upon the earth, 
and spirit to them that walk thereon” (Is 42:5). For undoubt- 
edly everyone who walks upon the earth, that is to say, every 
earthly and corporeal being, is a partaker of the Holy Spirit, 
which he receives from God. And my Hebrew master used to 
say that the two seraphim, which are described in Isaiah (Is 
6:2f.) as having six wings each and as crying one to another 
and saying, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts, were to be 
understood to mean the only-begotten Son of God and the 
Holy Spirit. And we ourselves think that the expression in the 
song of Habakkuk, “In the midst of the two animals” (or the 
two living creatures) “thou shalt be known” (Hb 3:2 [LXX]) 
should be understood to refer to Christ and the Holy Spirit. 

For all knowledge of the Father, when the Son reveals;him, 
_ -is made known to us through the Holy Spirit. So that both 
of these, who in the words of the prophet are called “animals” 
‘or “living beings,” are the cause of our knowledge of God the 
Father. For as it is said of the Son that “no one knoweth the 
Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son willeth to reveal 
him” (Mt 11:27), so in the same way does the apostle speak 
of the Holy Spirit; “God hath revealed them unto us by his 
Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth all things, even the deep things 
of God” (1 Cor 2:10). Again, when in the gospel the Savior is 


referring to the divine and deeper doctrines which his disciples 
could not yet receive, he speaks to the apostles as follows: “I — 


Book I, Chapter III 43 


have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot receive 
them now; howbeit when the comforter is come, even the 
Holy Spirit, who proceedeth from the Father, he shall teach 
you all things, and bring to your remembrance all that I have 
said unto you” (Jn 16:12f., 14:26). So then we must under- 
stand that as the Son, who alone knows the Father, reveals him 
to whom he will, in the same way also the Holy Spirit, who 


alone “searcheth even the deep things of God” (1 Cor 2:10), 


reveals God to whom he will. For “the Spirit breathes where 
he willeth”(Jn 3:8)."° : 

We must not suppose, however, that the Spirit knows 
God as we do, through the revelation of the Son. For if the 
Holy Spirit knows the Father by this means, he passes from 
ignorance to knowledge; and it is certainly as impious as it 
is foolish to confess that he is the Holy Spirit and then to 
ascribe ignorance to him. For even if we grant that something 
else existed before the Holy Spirit, yet it was not by a process 
of development that he came to be the Holy Spirit; as if one 
should dare to say that at the time when he was not yet the 
Holy Spirit he did not know the Father, but that after he had 
gained this knowledge he became the Holy Spirit. That could 
not be, for the Holy Spirit would never have been included in 


the unity of the Trinity, that is, along with God the unchange- ~* 


able Father and with his Son, unless he had always been the 
Holy Spirit.'' Of course, these terms that we use, such as 
“always” or “has been,” or any similar ones that bear a tempo- 
ral significance, must be interpreted with reservations and not 
pressed; for they relate to time, but the matters of which we 
are now speaking, though described in temporal language for 
the purposes of discussion, in their essential nature transcend 
all idea of time. 


5. Nevertheless it seems right to inquire into the —_ 
son why he who is “born again through God” (1 Prt 1:3) to 


44 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


salvation has need of both Father and Son and Holy Spirit 
and will not obtain salvation art from the entire Trinity, and 
why it is impossible to become partaker of the Father or the 
Son without the Holy Spirit. In discussing these points it will 
undoubtedly be necessary to describe the activity which is 
peculiar to the Holy Spirit and that which is peculiar to the 
Father and Son.” 

I am of opinion, then, that the activity of the Father and 
the Son is to be seen both in saints and in sinners, in rational 
men” and in dumb animals, yes, and even in lifeless things 
and in absolutely everything that exists; but the activity of the 
Holy Spirit does nor‘extend at all either to lifeless things, or to 
things that have life but yet are dumb, nor is it to be found in 
those who, though rational, still lie in: wickedness (1 Jn 5:19) 
and are not wholly converted to better things. Only in those 
who are already turning to better things and walking in the 
ways of Jesus Christ, that is, who are engaged in good deeds 
and who abide in God (cf. 1 Cor 4:17; Eph 2:10; 1 Jn 4:13), 
is the work of the Holy Spirit, I think, to be found. 

6. That the activity of the Father and the Son is to be 
found both in saints and in sinners is clear from the fact that 
all rational beings are partakers of the word of God, that is, 
of reason, and so have implanted within them some seeds, as 
it were, of wisdom and righteousness, which is Christ. And 
all things that exist derive their share of being from him who 
truly exists, who said through Moses, “I am that I am” (Ex 
3:14); which participation in God the Father extends to all, 


. both righteous and sinners, rational and irrational creatures 


and absolutely everything that exists. Certainly the apostle 
Paul shows that all have a share in Christ, when he says, “Say 
not in thy heart, who shall ascend into heaven? that is, to 
bring Christ down; or who shall descend into the abyss? that 
is, to bring Christ back again from the dead. But what saith 


Book I, Chapter III 45 


the scripture? The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth and 
in thy heart” (Rom 10:6-8). By this he indicates that Christ 
is “in the heart” of all men, in virtue of his being the word or 
reason, by sharing in which men are rational. 
Mace coco e says, “If I had 
not come and spoken unto them they had not had sin, but 
now they have no excuse for their sin” (Jn 15:22), clearly refers 
to those who have come to the age of reason, up to which 
time a man does not “have sin,” but from whence onward he 
becomes responsible for sin; and it reveals how men are said 
to “have sin” when they share in the word or reason, that is to 
say, from the time when they become capable of knowledge 
and understanding, as soon as the reason implanted within 
them has taught them the distinction between good and evil; 
and when once they have begun to know what is evil then, if 
they do it, they render themselves responsible for sin. This is 
the meaning of the saying that men “have no excuse for their 
sin” from the time that the divine word or reason has begun 
to reveal within their heart the distinction between good and 
evil, to warn them that they must avoid and beware of evil; 
and it is also the meaning of that other saying, “To him that 
knoweth good and doeth it not, to him it is sin” (Jas 4:17). 
Again, the gospel teaches that no men are without com- 
munion with God, when the Savior speaks as follows, “The 
kingdom of God cometh not with observation; neither shall 
they say, Lo here! or, there! but the kingdom of God is within 
you” (Lk 17:20, 21). Further, we must see whether perhaps the 
same meaning does riot attach to what is written in Genesis, 
“And he breathed into his face the breath of life, and man 
became a living soul” (Gn 2:7). If this breath of life is under- 


stood to have been given to men in general, then all men have 


“Sa share in God. But if we are to understand the expression as 


referring to the Spirit of God, in view of the fact that Adam 


46 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


is found to have uttered certain prophecies,'* then the breath 
of life may be regarded as given not universally but only to 
the saints. 

7. Finally, at the time of the flood, when “all flesh had 
corrupted God’s way” (Gn 6:12) it is written that God said, 
as if speaking of unworthy men and sinners, “My spirit shall 
not remain in those men forever, because they are flesh” (Gn 
6:3). Here it is clearly shown that God’s spirit is taken away 
from all the unworthy. It is also written in the Psalms; “Thou 
wilt take away their spirit and they will die, and return to 
their earth; thou wilt send forth thy spirit and they shall be 
created, and thou wilt renew the face of the earth” (Ps 104: 
29, 30 (Eng. 104]). which passage clearly points to the Holy 
Spirit who, after sinners and the unworthy have been taken 
away and destroyed, creates for himself a new people and 
“renews the face of the earth,” when through the grace of the 
Spirit men “put off the old man with his doings” (Col 3:9) 
and begin “to walk in newness of life” (Rom 6:4). And this 
is why the passage fitly applies to the Holy Spirit, because 
he will dwell not in all men, nor in those who are flesh, but 
in those whose “earth has been renewed.” Finally, it was for 
this reason that the Holy Spirit was bestowed through the 
laying on of the apostles’ hands after the grace and renewal 
of baptism (cf. Acts 8:18; Ti 3:5). Moreover our Savior after 
the resurrection, when “old things had now passed away and 
all things had become new” (2 Cor 5:17), being himself “the 
~ new man” (Eph 2:15) and the “firstborn from the dead” (Col 
1:18), says to the apostles, who were also renewed by faith in 
his resurrection, “Receive the Holy Spirit” (Jn 20:22). This 
is doubtless what our Savior Lord himself was pointing out 
in the gospel, when he said that “new wine could not be put 
into old wineskins” (Mt 9:17 and par.) and commanded that 
new wineskins be made, that is, that men should walk “in 


Book I, Chapter II] 47 


newness of life” (Rom 6:4) in order to receive the new wine, 
the newness of the Holy Spirit’s grace. 


Thus, therefore, the working of the power of God the- 


Father and God the Son is spread indiscriminately over all 
created beings, but a share in the Holy Spirit is possessed, we 
find, by the saints alone. Accordingly it is said, “No man can 
say that Jesus is the Lord except in the Holy Spirit” (1 Cor 
12:3). Even the apostles themselves are scarcely at the last 
counted worthy of hearing the words, “Ye shall receive power, 
when the Holy Spirit is come upon you” (Acts 1:8). It follows 
logically from this, I think, that “he who has sinned against the 
Son of Man is worthy of forgiveness” (cf. Mt 12:32), because 
he who is a sharer in the word or reason seems, if he ceases to 
live according to reason, to have fallen into ignorance or folly 
and so to deserve forgiveness; whereas he who has once been 
counted worthy to share in the Holy Spirit and then turns 
back again is by this very act and deed said to have blasphemed 
against the Holy Spirit (cf. Mt 12:31, 32; Mk 3:29). 

Let no one indeed imagine from what we have said about 
the Holy Spirit being bestowed on the saints alone, while the 
blessings and activities of the Father and the Son extend to 
both good and evil, just and unjust (cf. Mt 5:45), that we are 
hereby exalting the Holy Spirit above the Father and the Son 
or claiming that his dignity is greater than theirs; for this by no 
means follows. What we have been describing is the peculiar 
grace and work of the Holy Spirit. But more, nothing in the 


Trinity can be called greater or less¢° for there is but one fount 


of deity, who upholds the universe by his word and reason, 
and sanctifies “by the spirit of his mouth” all that is worthy 
of sanctification, as it is written in the Psalm, “By the word of 
the Lord were the heavens established, and all their power by 
the spirit of his mouth” (Ps 33:6). 


48 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


There is, however, a special activity of God the Father, 
beyond that which he ‘exercised on all things in giving them 
_ natural life. There is also a special ministry of the Lord Jesus 
Christ towards those on whom he confers the natural gift of 
_ reason, by means of which well-being is bestowed upon them 
| in addition to mere existence. There is yet another grace of 
| the Holy Spirit bestowed upon such as are worthy, a grace 
ministered indeed through-Christ, but put into operation by 
the Father in proportion to the merits of those who become 
capable of receiving it. This is most clearly pointed out by 
the apostle Paul, when he is explaining that the power of the 
“Trinity is one and the same, in the passage where he says, 
“There are diversities of gifts, but the same spirit; and there 
are diversities of ministrations, but the same Lord; and there 
are diversities of workings, but the same God, who worketh 
all things in all. But to each one is given the manifestation of 
the spirit as is profitable” (1 Cor 12:4~7). Here we are most 
clearly shown that there is no separation in the Trinity,'® but 
that this which is called the “gift of the spirit” is ministered 
througlnthe Son and worked by God the Father. And yet “all 
these worketh that one and the selfsame spirit, dividing to 
each man as he will” (1 Cor 12:11). 

8. This then, is the testimony we bear to the unity of 
Father, Son and Holy Spirit. Let us now return to the original 
plan of our discussion. God the Father bestows on all the gift 
of existence; and a participation in Christ, in virtue of his 
being the word or reason, makes them rational. From this it 
follows that they are worthy of praise or blame, because they 
are capable alike of virtue and of wickedness. Accordingly 
there is also available the grace of the Holy Spirit, that those 
beings who are not holy in essence may be made holy by 
participating in this grace. When therefore they obtain first 
of all their existence from God the Father, and secondly their 


Book I, Chapter III 49 


rational nature from the Word, and thirdly their holiness from 
the Holy Spirit, they become capable of receiving Christ afresh 
in his character of the righteousness of God (cf. 1 Cor 1:30), 
those, that is, who have been previously sanctified through 


the Holy Spirit; and such as have been deemed worthy of | 


advancing to this degree through the sanctification of the Holy 
Spirit obtain in addition the gift of wisdom by the power of 
the working of God’s Spirit. This is what I think Paul means 
when he says that “to some is given the word of wisdom, to 
others the word of knowledge, by them same spirit” (1 Cor 
12:8). And while pointing out the distinction of each separate 
gift he refers them all to the fount of the universe when he 
says, “There are diversities of workings, but one God, who 
worketh all things in all” (1 Cor 12:6). 

Thus the working of the Father, which endows all with 
existence, is found to be more glorious and splendid, when 
each one, through participation in Christ in his character 
of wisdom.and knowledge and sanctification, advances and 
comes to higher degrees of perfection; and when a man, by 
being sanctified through participation in the Holy Spirit, is 
made purer and holier, he becomes more worthy to receive 
the grace of wisdom and knowledge, in order that all stains of 
pollution and ignorance may be purged and removed and that 
he may make so great an advance in holiness and purity that 
the life which he received from God shall be such as is wor- 
thy of God, who gave it to be pure and perfect, and that that 
which exists shall be as worthy as he who caused it to exist. 
‘Thus, too, the man who is such as God who made him wished 
him to be, shall receive from God the power to exist forever 
and to endure for eternity. That this may come to pass, and 
that those who were made by God may be unceasingly and 
inseparably present with him who really exists, it is the work 
of wisdom to instruct and train them, and lead them on to 


> 


rel dee 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


ree 


” ie 242 
perfection, by the strengthening and unceasing sanctification 
of the Holy Spirit, through which alone they can receive God. 
In this way, then, through the ceaseless work on our behalf 
of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, renewed at every 
stage of our progress, we may perchance just succeed at last 
in beholding the holy and blessed life; and when after many 
struggles we have been able to attain to it we ought so to 
continue that no satiety of that blessing may ever possess us; 
but the more we partake of its blessedness, the more may the 
loving desire for it deepen and increase within us, as ever our 
hearts grow in fervor and eagerness to receive and hold fast 
the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. But if at any time 
satiety should possess the heart of one of those who have come 
to occupy the perfect and highest stage, I do not think that 
such a one will be removed and fall from his place all of a 
sudden. Rather must he decline by slow degrees, so that it may 
sometimes happen, when a slight fall has occurred, that the 
man quickly recovers and returns to himself. A fall does not 
therefore involve utter ruin, but a man may retrace his steps 
and return to his former state and once more set his mind on 
that which through negligence had slipped from his grasp. 


Chapter IV 


Loss, oR FALLING AWAY 


1. To show what is this loss, or fall, of those who live neg- 
ligently, it seems not unreasonable to make use of an illus- 
tration. Suppose a man has gradually become skilled in the 
science or art, let us say, of geometry or medicine, up to the 
point of reaching perfection, having trained himself for a long 
time by instructions and exercises so as to acquire completely 
the knowledge of the aforesaid art. It could surely never hap- 
pen that such a man should lie down to sleep with all this skill 
and wake up without it. It is not to the point to bring forward 
or take account here of accidents which happen through some 
injury or weakness, for these do not apply in the case we 
have proposed as an illustration. According to that, so long 
as the geometrician or doctor in question occupies himself 
in the studies and rational instructions relating to his art, a 
knowledge of the subject will remain with him. If, however, 
he loses interest in these exercises and neglects to work, then 
through this negligence his knowledge is gradually lost, a few 
details at first, then more, and so on until after a long time 
the whole vanishes into oblivion and is utterly erased from 
his memory. Yet if, in the first stages of his fall, when the 
negligence which threatens to ruin him has not gone far, he 
is aroused and without delay returns to himself, it is certainly 


51 


52 . ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


possible to recover that which had but recently been lost and 
to renew the knowledge which by that time had been only 
slightly erased from his mind. Let us now apply this to those 
who have devoted themselves to the knowledge and wisdom 
of God, to learn and labor about whom surpasses all other 
studies in ways beyond comparison; and let us consider, in the 
light of our illustration, what is involved in the acquisition of 
this knowledge and what in its loss, especially bearing in mind 
what the apostle says of those who are perfect, that they shall 
behold the glory of the Lord “face to face” “by revelations of 
mysteries”, . . .'(All? rational creatures who are incorporeal and 
invisible, if they become negligent, gradually sink to a lower 
level and take to themselves bodies suitable to the regions 
into which they descend; that is to say, first, ethereal bodies, 


and then aerial. And when they reach the neighborhood of © 


the earth they are enclosed in grosser bodies, and last of all 
are tied to human flesh.? “Tt is* a mark of extreme negligence 
and sloth for any soul to descend and to lose its own nature 


so completely as to be bound, in consequence of its vices, to » 


the gross body of one of the irrational animals.”) 

2. But’ in our desire to explain the divine blessings which 
aré bestowed upon us by the Father, the Son and the Holy 
Spirit, that Trinity which is the fount of all holiness, we have 
somewhat digressed from our subject in these last remarks; for 
when the question of the soul had arisen, we felt we ought to 
deal with it here, seeing that we were discussing the cognate 
topic of our rational nature. But the subject of rational nature 
as a whole, with its divisions into three genera and species, 
will be more conveniently considered in its proper place. And 
with God’s permission, through Jesus Christ and the Holy 
Spirit, we shall so consider it: 

3. This blessed’ and ruling power, therefore, that is, the 
power that exercises control of all things, we call the Trinity. 


Book I, Chapter IV 53 


This is the good God and kindly Father of all, at once benef- 
icent power and creative power, that is, thé power that does 
good z and creates and providentially sustains. And it is absurd 
and impious to suppose that these powlts of God have been 
at any time in abeyance for a single moment. Indeed, it is 
unlawful even to entertain the least suspicion that these pow- 
ers, through which chiefly we gain a worthy notion of God, 
should at any time have ceased from | performing works worthy 
of themselves and have become inactive. For we can neither 
suppose that these powers which are in God, nay, which are 
God, could have been thwarted from without, nor on the 
other hand, when nothing stood in their way, can we believe 


\> that they were reluctant to act and perform works worthy of 


‘themselves or that they feigned impotence. We can there- 
fore imagine no moment t whatever when that t power was not 
“engaged in acts of well-doing. Whence it follows that there 
_always existed objects for this well-doing, namely, God’s works 
or creatures, and that God, in the power of his providence, 
was always dispensing his blessings among them by doing 
them good in accordance with their condition and deserts. It 
follows plainly from this, that at no time whatever was God 
not Creator, nor Benefactor, nor Providence. | ; 

4. Yet in this matter human intelligence is feeble ani 


2 limited, when it tries to understand how during the whole 


of God’s existence his creatures have existed also, and how 
those things, which we must undoubtedly believe to have been 
created and made by God have subsisted, if we may say so, 
without a beginning. Since then there is this conflict in our 
human thoughts and reasonings, and the soundest arguments 
on either side oppose and rebut one another, each bending 
the mind of the thinker into its own direction, this truth, 
which can be confessed without any risk to piety, presents 
itself as appropriate to the small and narrow capacity of our 


} Lie dois an 
= bo e oY ore ated Abd 
pu Son _ ; l yy Fe 
54 Tk. oF ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 
fgets 
mind, ely, that God the Father always existed, and that ~ 


had an only-Dagorten Son, who at the same time, 
_ according to the explanation we have given above, is called 

* Wisdom. This is that Wisdom in whom God delighted when 
the world was finished (cf. Prv 8:30), in order that we might 
understand from this that God ever rejoices. In this Wisdom, 
therefore, who ever existed with the Father, the Creation was 
always present in form and outline, and there was never a time 


‘when the pre-figuratiomof those things which hereafter were 


_Si Iris probably i in this way that, so far as our weakness 
~ allows, we shall maintain a reverent belief about God, neither 
asserting that his creatures were unbegotten and coeternal with 
him nor on the other hand that he turned to the work of 
creation to do good when he had done nothing good before. 
For the saying that is written, “In wisdom hast thou made all 
things” (Ps 104:24 [LXX 103:24]), is a true one. And certainly 
if “all things have been made in wisdom,” then since wisdom 
has always existed, there have always existed in wisdom, by a 
pre-figuration and pre-formation, those things which after- 
wards have received substantial existence. This is, I believe, the 
thought and meaning of on when he says in Ecclesiastes: 
“What is it that hath been made? The same that is to be. And 
what is it that hath been created? The same that is destined 
to be created. And thére is nothing fresh under the sun. If 
one should speak of inything and say, Behold, this is new: it 
already hath been, in the ages that were before us” (Eccl 1: :9, 
10). If then particular things which are “under the sun” have 
already existed in/the ages which were before us—since “there 
is nothing fresh under the sun”—then undoubtedly all genera 


~ and species have forever existed, and possibly even individual 
things; but either way, the fact is made clear that God did not 


to be did ROT ext in in Wisdom. ie aes —— 


Book I, Chapter IV 55 


_ begin at a certain time to be Creator, when he had not been 
such before. 


afr A 1? 
Il. om (senasty 
' 5 re Senet. Ley pri dt 107 
/ 
Z =~, 
{So £ one Jot ¥ mN(7 
7; p= b20x% O7? . S74 \~— 
Js J | OF u 
> ,| 
Xv = xx yj} — 
| Then AG G «€ pre 
vou ¥en Chatien tefe 
j : y ent 
PA 4b rt 2 YY p. Garmet ¥r 
CP. 
Yioe fu 7] Jno 
‘ , i engl ts 2S 
Si) 


—_—— = 


ma Oneerud 
Wrabret tut 
wile peat rere . n- 


ageeteyv 


oe » 7 
«it! i ot oF 
art C 


Chapter V 
awn OT psd zes 
f evi | 


RATIONAL NATURES 


1. After this brief discussion which we have conducted to the 
best of our ability on the subject of the Father, the Son and the 
Holy Spirit, our next task is to say a few words about rational 
natures, their species, orders and functions. We shall include 


“not only the holy and the wicked powers, but also those who 


occupy’a middle position between, the good and the bad and 
are still involved in struggle and conflict. We find in the holy : 


scriptures very Many names.of certain orders and functions 


both of the holy powers and of the opposite kind. First we 
shall mention these names themselves, and then we shall 
attempt, so far as we are able, to investigate their meaning. 
There are certain holy angels of God whom Paul calls 
“ministering spirits, appointed to minister on behalf of those 
who shall receive the inheritance of salvation” (Heb 1:14). 
Also, in the writings of the same St. Paul we find him giving 
the names, from what source I know not, of certain “thrones, 
dominions, principalities and powers” (Col 1:16); and after 
enumerating these, as if he thought there were yet other ratio- 
nal functions and orders beyond those already mentioned, 
he says of the Savior, “Who is above every principality and 
authority and power and dominion, and every name that is 
named not only in this world, but also in the world to come” 


By 


qF 


58 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


(Eph 1:21). Here he plainly shows that besides those beings he 
has mentioned there are certain others, which may be named 
indeed in this world, but yet have not on the present occasion 
been enumerated by him, and which perhaps were not known 
to any other person; and there are others still, which cannot be 
named in this world, but will be named in the world to come. 

2. Then in the next place we must know that every being 
which is endowed with reason and yet fails to adhere to the 
ends and ordinances laid down by reason, is undoubtedly 
involved in sin by this departure from what is just and right. 
Every rational creature is therefore susceptible of praise and 
of blame, of praise, if in accordance with the reason which he 
has in him he advances to better things; of blame, if he departs 
from the rule and course of what is right, in which case he is 
also rightly subject to pains and penalties. We must believe this 
to be true even of the devil himself and of those who are with 
him and are called his angels. But the titles of these beings 
must now be explained, in order that we may know who they 
are with whom our discussion has to deal. 

The name Devil, and Satan, and Wicked one, is men- 
tioned in many places of scripture, and he who bears it is 
also described as being the enemy of God. Certain “angels of 
the devil” (Mt 25:41; Rv 12:7) are also named, and in addi- 
tion a “prince of this world” (Jn 12:31, 14:30, 16:11); but 
whether this latter is the devil himself or some other has not 
yet been clearly proclaimed. There are also certain “princes of 
this world” mentioned, who have a wisdom which is to be 
destroyed (cf. 1 Cor 2:6); but whether these princes are the 
same as those principalities “against whom our wrestling is” 
(cf. Eph 6:12), or whether they are different, no one, it seems 
to me, can easily decide. After the principalities there is also 
a mention of certain powers, against whom we wrestle and 
maintain a struggle, as we do also against the “princes of this 


Book I, Chapter V 59 


world” and the “rulers of this darkness”; and certain “spiritual 
hosts of wickedness in the heavenly places” (cf. Eph 6:12) are 
also mentioned by Paul. And what are we to say of the “evil 
spirits” and “impure daemons” (cf. Lk 7:21, 4:33) who are 
mentioned in the gospels? Then again, there are some who are 
included under the common title of “heavenly beings,” but 
who are said to bend the knee, or to be destined to bend the 
knee, at the name of Jesus; and others again who are “earthly” 
or from “under the earth” (Phil 2:10), all of whom Paul enu- 
merates in order. 

And in a place where we have been discussing the subject 
or rational natures it would certainly not be right to keep 
silence about ourselves, the race of men, who as you know are 
called “rational animals.” Nor must we pass over this point, 
as if it were unimportant, that even in regard to us men there 
are references to certain different classes, as when it is said that 
“the Lord’s portion is his people Jacob, Israel is the cord of his 
inheritance” (Dt 32:9), whereas other nations are said to be 
the portion of the angels, as, “when the Most High divided the 
nations and dispersed the sons of Adam, he fixed the bounds 
of the nations according to, the number of the angels of God” 
(Dt 32:8). Therefore, along with all the other rational natures, 
the constitution of the human soul must also be examined. 

3. Such, then, are the many important names of orders 
and functions that are given us, and behind them it is certain 
that there are real existences. We must now inquire whether 
God, the Founder and Creator of all things, made some of 
these beings’so holy and blessed that they could admit noth-: 
ing at all that was contrary to this nature, and others in such 
a way that they could become capable both of virtue and 
of wickedness; or whether we are to suppose that he made 
some to be altogether incapable of virtue, and others who can 
admit no wickedness whatever but can only remain in a state 


60 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


of blessedness, and others still who can admit either of these 
conditions. To begin our inquiry from the names themselves, 
let us consider whether the “holy angels,” from the time they 
first existed, always were holy, and are holy, and will be holy, 
and neither have ever admitted nor could ever admit an occa- 
sion of sin. 

Then in the next place, let us also consider whether those 
who are called holy “principalities” began from the first 
moment of their creation by God to exercise their “princi- 
pality” over others who had been made subject to them, and 
whether the latter were created in this condition and made 
for the very purpose of being subject and subordinate. Sim- 
ilarly, in regard to those who are called “powers,” let us con- 
sider whether they were created in this condition and for this 
very purpose, that they might exercise power, or whether it 
is some prize of reward of virtue that they have come to this 
power and dignity. Moreover, in regard to those who are called 
“thrones” or “seats,” let us consider whether they were counted 
worthy of their seat and secure possession of blessedness from 
the time their personality first emerged, so that they enjoy it 
solely by the will of the Creator, and whether those who are 
called “dominions” have had this dominion not conferred 
upon them as a reward for their progress but freely bestowed 
as a privilege of their creation, so that it is in some way a part 
of their nature and inseparable from them. 

Now if we accept the view that the holy angels and holy 
powers and blessed seats and glorious virtues and splendid 
dominions possess their powers and dignities and glories as 
part of their essence, it will seem to follow undoubtedly that 

those beings which have been mentioned in connection with 
the opposite functions must be regarded in the same way. Thus 
those principalities against whom our wrestling is must be held 
not to have departed from good of their own free will and after 


Book I, Chapter V {47 61 


that to have adopted the determination to resist and oppose 
everything good, but to have possessed this determination as 
part of their essence from the beginning. Similarly in regard 
to the powers and virtues, the evil that is in them will not be 
later than or subsequent to their first existence. Those, too, 
whom scripture has termed “rulers and princes of the darkness 
of the world,” inherit this realm of darkness which they rule 
over and possess, not as a result of perversity of will but from 
the necessity of their creation. Similar reasoning will force 
us to the same conclusion in regard to the “spiritual hosts of 
wickedness” and the “evil spirits” and “impure daemons.” 
But if this is an absurd belief to hold of the bad and oppos- 
ing powers—and it certainly is absurd that the cause of their 


wickedness should be separated from the determination of | 


their own will and ascribed, as something unavoidable, to their 
Creator—how can we fail to come to a similar conclusion in 
regard to the good and holy powers, namely, that goodness 
_is not in them as part of their essence. Essential goodness is 


/ found, as we have plainly shown,' solely in Christ and the 7 


Holy Spirit, and of course in the Father also. For the nature 
of the Trinity has been shown to contain nothing that is com- 
pound, which might appear to allow these good qualities to 
belong to it as accidental consequences. We conclude, then, 


that the position of every created being is the result of his own “ 


work and his own motives, and that the powers above men- 
tioned, which appear as holding sway or exercising authority 
or dominion over others, have gained this superiority and emi- 
nence over those whom they are said to govern or on whom 
they exercise their authority, not by some privilege of creation 
but as the reward of merit. * 

4. Yet in questions of such importance and difficulty we do 


not wish to base our assertions merely onacorrect train of rea- 


soning z and to compel the assent of our hearers by conjectural 


62 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


inferences alone. Let us see, therefore, whether we can obtain 
any statements from the holy scriptures, by the authority of 
which these conclusions may be more credibly upheld. First 
we shall bring forward what holy scripture contains on the 
subject of the evil powers; and after that, with the help of such 
light as the Lord shall be pleased to bestow upon us, we shall 
make inquiry about the rest of the powers, our object being, 
in matters of so great difficulty, to get as near to the truth as 
possible and to shape our belief according to the rule of piety. 

Now we find in the prophet Ezekiel two prophecies 
addressed to the prince of Tyre, the first of which might 
appear, before one had heard the second, to be spoken of some 
man who was prince of the Tyrians. For the present, therefore, 
we shall take nothing from the first one. But since the second 
is most evidently of such a kind that it cannot possibly refer 
to a man, but must be understood of some higher power, 
which had fallen from higher places and been cast down to 
lower and worse ones, we shall adduce that as an illustration 
which most clearly proves that these opposing and wicked 
powers were not so formed and created by nature, but came 
from better conditions and changed for the worse; and that 
the blessed powers also are not of such a nature as to be unable 
to admit qualities the opposite of their own, supposing one 
of them should desire to do so and should become negligent 
and fail to guard with the utmost caution the blessedness of 
his condition. For when he who is called the “prince of Tyre” 
(cf. Ez 28:2-19) is related to have been “among the holy ones” 
and “without stain” and set “in the paradise of God,” “adorned 
with a crown of honor and beauty,” how, I ask, can we suppose 
such a being to have been inferior to any of the holy ones? He 
is described as having been “a crown of ‘honor and beauty” 
and as having walked “in the paradise of God” “without stain.” 
How then can anyone possibly suppose that such a being was 


Book I, Chapter V 63 


not one of those holy and blessed powers which, dwelling as 
they do in a state of blessedness, we must believe are endowed 
with no other honor than this? 

But let us now see what the actual words of the proph- 
ecy teach us. “The word of the Lord,” it says, “came unto 
me, saying, Son of man, take up a lamentation for the prince 
of Tyre, and say unto him, Thus saith the Lord God: Thou 
wert a signet of likeness and a crown of honor in the delights 
of the paradise of God. Thou wast adorned with every fine 
stone and gem, and wast clothed with sardius and topaz and 
emerald and carbuncle and sapphire and jasper, set in gold 
and silver, and with agate and amethyst and chrysolite and 
beryl and onyx; with gold also didst thou fill thy treasuries 
and thy store-houses in thy midst. From the day thou wast 
created with the cherubim, I placed thee in the holy mount 
of God. Thou wast in the midst of the fiery stones, thou wast 
stainless in thy days, from the day thou wast created until the 
time that iniquities were found in thee; from the multitude 
of thy commerce thou didst fill thy storehouses with iniquity, 
and thou didst sin and wast cast wounded out of the mount 
of God. A cherub drove thee forth from the midst of the fiery 
stones. Thy heart was lifted up at thine honor; thy knowledge 
was corrupted with thy beauty; for the multitude of thy sins 
I have cast thee down to the earth in the presence of kings. I 
have given thee for a show and a laughingstock because of the 
multitude of thy sins and thine iniquities. By thy commerce 
thou hast polluted thy holy places. And I will bring forth fire 
from the midst of thee and it shall devour thee, and I will 
give thee for ashes and cinders on the earth in the sight of all 
that see thee; and all who knew thee among the nations shall 
mourn over thee. Thou hast been made a destruction, and 
thou shalt exist no more forever.” (Ez 28:2-19). 


64 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Who is there that, hearing such sayings as this, “Thou wast 
a signet of likeness and a crown of honor in the delights of the 
paradise of God,” or this, “from the time thou wast created 
with the cherubim, I placed thee in the holy mount of God,” 
could possibly weaken their meaning to such an extent as to 
suppose them spoken of a human being, even of a saint, not 
to mention the prince of Tyre? Or what “fiery stones” can he 
think of, “in the midst” of which any man could have lived? 
Or who could be regarded as “stainless” from the very “day 
he was created,” and yet at some later time could have acts of 
unrighteousness found in him and be said to be “cast forth 
into the earth”? This certainly indicates that the prophecy is 
spoken of one who, not being in the earth, was “cast forth into 
the earth,” whose “holy places” also are said to be “polluted.” 

These statements, therefore, from the prophet Ezekiel 
concerning the prince of Tyre, must relate, as we have shown, 
to an adverse power, and they prove in the clearest manner 


that this power was formerly holy and blessed, and that he 


fell from this state of blessedness and was cast down into the 
earth “from the time that iniquity was found in him,” and 


that his fallen condition was not due to his nature or creation. 


We consider, therefore, that these statements refer to some 


. angel, to whom had been allotted the duty of supervising the 


‘Tyrian people, whose souls also were apparently committed 
to his care. But what Tyre, or what souls of Tyrians we ought 
to understand—whether it be the city which is situated in 
the territory of the province of Phoenicia, or some other city 
of which the one we know on earth is a figure, and whether 
the souls are those of the actual Tyrians, or of the inhabitants 
of that Tyre which we understand spiritually,—there seems 
no need to inquire in this place. For we should appear to be 
investigating, in a casual manner, matters whose importance 


Book I, Chapter V : 65 


and obscurity certainly demand a work and treatment of their 
own. 

5. Again, we are taught by the prophet Isaiah the follow- 
ing facts about another opposing power. He says: “How has 
Lucifer, who arose in the morning, fallen from heaven. He 
who assailed all the nations is broken and dashed to the earth. 
Thou saidst indeed in thy heart, I will ascend into heaven; 
above the stars of heaven I will place my throne; I will sit 
upon a lofty mountain above the lofty mountains which are 
toward the north; I will ascend above the clouds; I will be 
like the Most High. But now shalt thou be cast down to the 
lower world, and to the foundations of the earth. All who see 
thee shall be amazed over thee and say: This is the man that 
afflicted the whole earth, that moved kings, that made the 
whole round world a desert, that destroyed cities and did not 
loose those who were in chains. All the kings of the nations 
sleep in honor, each one in his own house; but thou shalt be 
cast forth upon the mountains, as an accursed dead man, with 
the many dead that have been pierced through with swords 
and have descended to the lower world. As a garment clotted 
and stained with blood will not be clean, so too shalt thou 
not be clean, because thou hast ruined my land and killed my 
people. Thou shalt not abide henceforth forever, thou most 


wicked seed. Make ready thy sons for slaughter for the sins 


of their father, thar they rise not up and possess the earth by 
inheritance and fill it with wars. And I will rise up against 
them, saith the Lord of Sabaoth, and I will cause their name 
to perish and their remnant and their seed.” (Is 14:12—22). 
It is most clearly proved by these words that he who for- 
merly was Lucifer and who “arose in the morning” has fallen ¥ 
from heaven. For if, as some suppose, he was a being of dark- 
ness, why is he said to have formerly been Lucifer or light- 
bearer? Or how could he “rise in the morning,” who had in 


oes eet 


66 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


him no light at all? Moreover the Savior teaches us about 
the devil as follows: “Lo, I see Satan fallen as lightning from 
heaven” (Lk 10:18). So he was light once. Further, our Lord, 
who is the truth, compared even the power of his own glorious 
advent to lightning, in the words: “For as the lightning shineth 
from one end of heaven even to the other, so shall also the 
coming of the Son of Man be” (Mt 24:27). Yet he also com- 
pares Satan to lightning, and says that he fell from heaven, in 
order to show thereby that he was in heaven once, and had a 
place among the holy ones, and a share in that light in which 
all the holy ones share, in virtue of which the angels become 
“angels of light” (2 Cor 11:14) and the apostles are called “the 
light of the world” (Mt 5:14) by the Lord. 

In this way, then, even Satan was once light, before he 
went astray and fell to this place, when “his glory was turned 
into dust” (Is 14:11, 12) which is the peculiar mark of the 
wicked, as the prophet also says. And so he is called the “prince 
of this world” (Jn 12:31, 16:11), for he exercises his princely 
power over those who are obedient to his wickedness, since 
“this whole world” (and here I take “world” to mean this 
earthly place) “lieth in the evil one” (Jn 5:19), that is, in this 
apostate. That he is an apostate, or fugitive,” the Lord also says 
in Job, in the following words, “Thou wilt take with a hook 
the apostate dragon” (Jb 40:20), that is, the fugitive dragon. 
And it is certain that the dragon means the devil himself. 

The opposing powers, then, are called by the name of 
“fugitives” and are said to have been at one time “stainless.” 
But to be stainless is a quality which belongs essentially to 
none except the Father, Son and Holy Spirit; for holiness 
is in every created being an accidental quality, and what is 
accidental may also be lost. These opposing powers, however, 
were once stainless and dwelt indeed among those that have 
continued stainless until now. All this shows that no one is 


Book I, Chapter V 67 


stainless by essence or by nature, nor is any one polluted essen- 
tially. Consequently it lies with us and with our own actions . 
whether we are to be blessed and holy, or whether through 
sloth and negligence we are to turn away from blessedness into 
wickedness and loss; the final result of which is, that when 
too much progress, if | may use the word, has been made in 
wickedness, a man may descend to such a state (if any shall 
come to so great a pitch of negligence) as to be changed into 
what is called an opposing power.’ 


Chapter VI 


THE END OR CONSUMMATION 


1. An end or consummation is clearly an indication that 
things are perfected and consummated. This fact is a timely 
reminder to us, that if a man is seized with a desire to read 
and learn about these matters that are so hard and difficult to 
understand, he must bring with him a perfect and instructed and instructed 
mind. Otherwise, if he has had no experience in inquiries of 
this ki kind, they may perhaps appear to him to be vain and 
superfluous; or else, if he has a mind full of prejudice and 
preoccupations in other directions, he may think these inqui- 
ries are heretical and contrary to the faith of the Church, not 
so much because he is convinced by reason as because he 


speak on these subjects with great fear and caution, discussing 
and investigating rather than laying down fixed. and certain 


conclusions. For w previously poihted out what are the 
subjects on which clear doctrinal statements must be made, 


and such stateme ade, I think, to the best of our 


ability, when speaking “of the Trinity.’ Now, however, we are | 


dealing, as well as we can, with subjects that call for discussion 
rather than for definition. 
The end of the world and e consummation will come 


when every soul shall be visited\with the penalties due for 


, = 


ara tan a - 


= 


70 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


its sins. This time, when everyone shall pay what he owes, is 
known to God alone. We believe, however, that the good- 
ness of God through Christ will restore his entire creation 
to one end, even his enemies being conquered and subdued. 
For so says the holy scripture: “The Lord said unto my Lord, 
Sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine enemies the 
footstool of thy feet” (Ps 110:1 [LXX 109:1]). And if it is not 
very evident what the prophetic language here means, let us 
learn from Paul the Apostle, who says more openly, “Christ 
must reign, till he hath put all his enemies under his feet” (1 
Cor 15:25). But if even this clear declaration of the Apostle 
is not sufficient to inform us what is the meaning of “putting 
enemies under his feet,” hear further what he says in the words 
that follow: “For all things must be made subject to him” (1 
Cor 15:27, 28). What then is this “subjection,” by which “all 
things must be made subject” to Christ? In my opinion it is 
the same subjection by which we too desire to be subjected 
to him, and by which the apostles and all the saints who have 
followed Christ were subject to him. For the word subjection, 
when used of our subjection to Christ, implies the salvation, 
proceeding from Christ, of those who are subject; as David 
also said, “Shall not my soul be subject to God? For of him 
cometh my salvation” (Ps 62:1 [LXX 61:1)). 

2. Seeing, then, that such is the end, when “all enemies 
shall have been subjected to Christ,” when “the last enemy 
shall be destroyed, that is, death,” and when “the kingdom 
shall be destroyed, up to God and the Father by Christ, to 
whom all things have been subjected” (cf. 1 Cor 15:24-27), 


let us, I say, from ane is, contemplate the begin- 


_ning of things. For the end is always like the beginning; as 


therefore there is one end of all things, so we must understand 
that there is one beginning of all things, and there is one end 
of many things, so from one beginning arise many differences 


Book I, Chapter VI 71 


and varieties, which in their turn are restored, through God's 
goodness, through their subjection to Christ and their unity 
with the Holy Spirit, to one end, which is like the beginning.’ - 
I refer to all those who, by “bending the knee in the name of 
Jesus” (Phil 2:10) have through this very fact displayed the sign 
of their subjection. These are they who dwell “in heaven and 
on earth and under the earth,” (ibid.) the three terms indicat- 
ing the entire universe, that is, all those beings who started / 
from one beginning but were drawn in various directions by 
their own individual impulses and were distributed through- 
out the different ranks of existence in accordance with their 
merit; for in them goodness does not reside essentially, as it 
does in God and his Christ and in the Holy Spirit. For only 
in this Trinity, which is the source of all things, does goodness 
reside essentially. Others possess it as an accident, liable to be « 
lost, and only then do they live in blessedness, when they par- 
ticipate in holiness and wisdom and in the divine nature itself. 
But’ if they are careless and indifferent about this partic- 
ipation, then each becomes the cause of his own lapse or fall, 
one more quickly and another more slowly, one to a greater 
and another to a lesser extent, by the fault of his own per- 
sonal slothfulness. Now, as we have said, the particular fall 
or lapse by which each one departs from its original state is 
capable of exhibiting the greatest diversity, corresponding to 
the movements of the mind and will, so that one recedes but | 
slightly, another more seriously, to lower things. Here then we 
see the just judgment of God’s providence, that diversity of 
conduct is taken into account and each is treated according 
to the deserts of his departure and defection from goodness. 
Certain of those, indeed, who have continued in that begin- 
ning which we have described as being like the end that is to 
come, have allotted to them in the ordering and arrangement 
of the world, the rank of angel, others that of powers, others 


vitr< 


— lll 


ry) ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


that of principalities, others that of authorities (clearly in order 
to exercise authority over those who “need to have authority 
above their head” [cf. 1 Cor 11:10]); while others have the 
rank of thrones, the duty of judging and ruling those who 
need this, and others have lordship, doubtless over slaves. All 

these privileges the divine providence, by a fair and just judg- 
~ ment, has conferred upon them as a reward for their merit and 
for the progress they have made in imitating and participating 
in God. 

Those, however,‘ who have moved from their state of 
primal blessedness, yet not beyond the possibility of return, 
have been made subject to the rule and governance of those 
holy and blessed orders whom we have just described; and if 
they make use of the help of these and become reformed by 
their precepts and salutary discipline, they may return and 
be restored to their state of blessedness. It is probably from 
among these, so far as I am able to judge, that the order of our 
human race was constituted, in the hope of restoring it in the 
age to come, or in the ages beyond that, when there shall be 
“the “new heaven and new earth” (Is 65:17), of which Isaiah 
speaks, to that unity which the Lord Jesus promises when he 
prays to God the Father for his disciples, “I pray not for these 
alone, but also for all who shall believe on me through their 
word, that they all may be one; as I, Father, am in thee, and 
thou art in me, that so they may be one in us” (Jn 17:20, 21); 
and again when he says, “That they may be one, as we are one, 
I in them, and thou in me, that they also may be perfected 
in one” (Jn 17:22, 23). The Apostle Paul also confirms this 
when he says, “Till we all come to the unity of the faith, to a 
perfect man, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of 
Christ” (Eph 4:13); and the same apostle also exhorts us, who 


even now in the present life have been placed in the Church, 


in which we see an imitation of the future kingdom, to strive 
——— ny 


Book I, Chapter VI 73 


after the same pattern of unity, when he says, “That ye all say 
the same things, and that there be no divisions among you, 
but that ye be perfected in one and the same mind and in one 
and the same judgment” (1 Cor 1:10). 

3. We must know, however, that some of those* who fell 
from that beginning of which we have spoken above, have 
given themselves over so completely to a life of unworthiness 
and wickedness, that they are not only regarded as unworthy 
of this instruction and training whereby through the flesh the 
human race, aided by the heavenly powers, is being instructed 
and trained, but on the contrary become adversaries and oppo- 
nents of those who are being so trained and disciplined. The 
result is that all our mortal life is full of struggles and conflicts, 
since we are resisted and thwarted by those who can see no way 
back to the better state from which they fell, those, namely, 
who are called “the devil and his angels,”® and other orders 
of wicked beings whom the apostle enumerates among the 
opposing powers. 

But’ whether among those orders that live under the chief- 
tainship of the devil and conform to his wickedness there are 
some who will one day in the ages to come succeed in turning 
to goodness by reason of the power of free will which is in 
them, or whether it be true that long-continued and deep- 
rooted wickedness turns at last from a habit into a kind of 


nature, you, reader, must judge; whether, that is, this portion 


of the creation shall be utterly and entirely out of harmony 


even with that final unity and concord, both in the ages that 


<a sy EE KO es ee . » 
are seen’ and “temporal and in those that are “not seen” and 


eternal.* But in the meantime, alike in these ages that are 
“seen” and “temporal” and in those that are “not seen” and 
“eternal” (cf. 2 Cor 4:18) all those beings are arranged in a 


definite order proportionate to the degree and excellence of ,, , 


their merits. And so it happens that some in the first, others 


r 


74 , ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


in the second, and others even in the last times, through their 
endurance of greater and more severe punishments of long 
duration, extending, if I may say so, over many ages, are by 
these very stern methods of correction renewed and restored, 
first by the instruction of angels and afterwards by that of 
powers yet higher in rank, so that they advance through each 
grade to a higher one, until at length they reach the things 
that are “invisible” and “eternal,” having traversed in turn, by 
some form of instruction, every single office of the heavenly 
powers. It appears to follow from this, in my opinion, that 
every rational nature can, in the process of passing from one 
order to another, travel through each order to all the rest, and 
from all to each, while undergoing the various movements of 
progress or the reverse in accordance with its own actions and 
endeavors and with the use of its power of free will. 

4. Now Paul says that there are some things that are “seen” 
and “temporal,” while besides these there are others that are 
“not seen” and “eternal.” We ask therefore in what sense those 
that are “seen” are “temporal”? Does it mean that in all those 
periods and ages to come, in which the dispersion and division 
of the one beginning is to be restored to one and the same end 
and likeness, there will exist nothing whatever corresponding 
to this present world? Or is it rather that while the form of 
the things that are “seen” passes away, their substance is by 
no means destroyed? Now Paul seems to confirm the latter 
explanation when he says; “the form of this world shall pass 
away” (1 Cor 7: 31). Moreover David seems to indicate the 

same truth when he says; “The heavens shall perish, but thou 
shalt remain; and they all shall grow old as a garment, and as 
a cloak thou shalt change them, as a garment they shall be 
changed” (Ps 102:26). For if the heavens shall be “changed,” 
certainly that which is “changed” does not perish; and if “the 


form of this world passes away,” it is not by any means an 


Book I, Chapter VI 75 


annihilation or destruction of the material substance that i is 


indicated, but the occurrence of a certain change of quality : 


and an alteration of the outward form. 

Isaiah too, when he says in prophecy that “there shall fe a 
new heaven and a new earth” (Is 65:17), undoubtedlysuggests 
a similar thought. For the renewal of “heaven and €arth” and 
the transmutation of the “form of this world” and the alter- 
ation of the “heavens” will undoubtedly be accomplished in 
readiness for those who are journeying along the way which we 
have indicated above,’ making for that erid, namely, blessed- 
ness, to which we are told that even God's enemies themselves 


are to be subjected, the end in which God is said to be “all” 
and “in all” (cf. 1 Cor 15:24, 25,/28). And if anyone thinks 


that in this “end” material or bédily nature will utterly per- 
ish, he can provide no answerwhatever to my difficulty, how 


i 


beings so numerous and mighty can exist and live their life _/ 


without bodies; since we/believe that to exist without mate- 
rial substance and apart from any association with a bodily 
element is a thing that belongs only to the nature of God, 

that is, of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. Perhaps 
somebody else will say that in the end every bodily substance 
will be so puse and refined that we must think of it as being 
like the ethér, as it were of a heavenly purity and clearness." 
But exactly how it will be is known to God alone, and to those 
who through Christ and the Holy Spirit are the “friends” of 
God (Jn 15:15; Jas 2:23). 


B1e: 
| Chapter VII 


oe CORPOREAL 
ND INCORPOREAL 


co 


soa 


chapters, after the place in which we set 
t of our ability the doctrine of the Father, the 


_matic statement. Let us now see what are the matters which 
we ought to discuss in the following pages according to our 


All souls and all rational natures, whether holy or wicked, 
were = made 0 or created. All these are incorporeal in respect of 
their proper nature, but though inco they were never- 
theless made. For all things were made/by God) through Christ, « 
as John teaches in general terms in che ospel when he says: 
“In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with 
God, and the Word was God. The same was in the beginning 
with God. All things were made through him, and without 
him nothing was made” (Jn 1:1—3). Further, the apostle Paul 
enumerates created things by their kinds and numbers and 
ranks with the object of proving that all things were made 
through Christ. For he says: “All things were created in him, 

gs in the heaven and things on earth, things visiblvand and 


doctrine, that sparse to the faith of the Church. Fe 2tT 


UE 


7; 


a? 
+ rc 


78 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


invisible, whether thrones, dominions, principalities or pow- 
ers, all were created through him and in him, and he is before 
all creatures, and he is the head” (Col 1:16-18). Plainly, then, 
he declares that all things were made and created “in Christ” 
and “through Christ,” whether they are “visible,” that is, cor- 
poreal, of “invisible” which I take to be none other than the 
incorporeal and spiritual powers. Now it is these creatures, 

, whom, he has spoken of in general terms as being either cor- 
poreal or incorporeal, that he enumerates, as it seems to me, 
under their various kinds in the words that follow, namely, 
“thrones, dominions, principalities, authorities and powers.” 

2. Let these remarks serve as an introduction to our pres- 
ent purpose, which is to come in due order to an inquiry 
~ about the sun, moon and stars by the method of inference. 
We ask whether these bodies ought to be reckoned among 
the “principalities” by reason of the fact that they are said to 
have been made to exercise rulership, that is principality, over 
day and night (cf. Gn 1:16); or whether we must suppose 
that they possess only that “rule over day and night” which 
is involved in their office of giving light and are not princes 
belonging to the order and office of the “principalities.” Now 
when it is said that “all things were made through him” (Jn 
1:3) and “in him were created all things, whether, things in 
the heaven or things on earth” (Col 1:16), we cannot doubt 
that those bodies which are “in the firmament” (this being 
another name for heaven), in which those luminaries are 
said to have been “set” (cf. Gn 1:17), are to be numbered 
among the heavenly things. Then again, since the course of 
our discussion has clearly revealed that all things were made 
or created, and that among the things that were made there 
is nothing which does not admit of good and evil and have 
a capacity for either, how shall we regard as reasonable the 
opinion held by some even of our own people about the sun, 


Book I, Chapter VII 79 


moon and stars, that these are unchangeable and incapable 
of becoming the opposite of what they are? Some too have 
entertained this belief about the holy angels, and there are 
heretics who even apply it to certain souls, which are called 
by them “spiritual natures.”? 

First, then, let us see what reason itself can discover about 
the sun, moon and stars, namely, whether it is correct to sup- 
pose, as some do, that they are exempt from the possibility 
of change;? and so far as we can let us first employ statements 


from the holy scriptures. Now Job appears to show that not 


only is it possible for the stars to be subject to sins, but that 
they are in fact “not clean” from the pollution of sin. For he 
writes as follows: “The stars also are not clean in his sight” (Jb 
25:5).* This is certainly not meant to refer to the brightness 
of their body, as if, for example, one were to say that a cer- 
tain garment was not clean. Were it to be understood thus, 
an injurious reflection would undoubtedly be cast upon the 
Creator by the charge that there was something unclean in the 
brightness of their body. For if the stars are unable either by 
their own diligent efforts to assume for themselves a clearer 
body or by their slackness a less pure one, why are they blamed 
for being “not clean,” since they would receive no praise even 
if they were clean? 

3. To make this point more clearly understood we must 
inquire, first, whether it is right to think of the sun, moon 
and stars as living and rational beings; next, whether their 
souls came into existence along with their bodies or atsome —' 
previous time; and further, whether we are to understand that 
after the consummation of this age their souls will be released 
from their bodies and, just as we cease from this life, so will 
they cease from the work of giving light to the world. It is true 
that to inquire into these matters seems somewhat daring, yet 
impelled as we are by a keen desire to ascertain the truth, we 


1 
+4 


SS SS Ss 


80 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


see nothing unreasonable in examining and testing, by the 
grace of the Holy Spirit, all that lies within our power. 
We think, therefore, that they may be called living beings 

from the fact that they are said to receive commands from 

God:> for commands are not usually given to any but living 

and rational creatures. Now the scripture says . .. command- 

ment:’ “I have given precepts to all the stars” (Is 45:12). What 

then are these precepts? Surely that each of the stars in its own 

order and its own courses should supply the world with bright- 

ness to the extent of what has been bestowed upon it. Now 

those which are called planets move in one kind of course, 

those called fixed stars in another. Here we have a most evident 

reminder of the fact that no movement can take place in any 
body which does not possess life, nor can living beings exist at 
‘any time without movement. And since the stars move with 
such majestic order and plan that never have we seen their 
course deflected in the slightest degree, is it not the height 
of stupidity to say that such order, such exact observance of 
rule and plan, is accomplished by things without reason? In 
Jeremiah indeed the moon is even called by the title “queen 
of heaven” (Jer 44:17—19, 25). But if the heavenly bodies are 
living and rational beings we shall doubtless observe among 
them instances of progress and relapse; for the statement of 
Job, “the stars are not clean in his sight” (Jb 25:5), appears to 
me to suggest some such idea as this. 

4, We must now consider whether these beings, whom 
the course of our discussion has shown to be living and 
rational, would appear to have been endowed with life and 
bodies simultaneously, at the time when, as the scripture 
says, “God made two great lights, the greater light to rule 
the day and the lesser light to rule the night; he made the 
stars also” (Gn 1:16), or whether it was not so, but that God 
put the spirit into them from without after their bodies were 


Book I, Chapter VII i = 81 


made.’ My own opinion is that the spirit was put into them 
from without; nevertheless it will be worthwhile to prove 
this from the scriptures. We shall see that it is easy to prove 
this assertion by inference, but more difficult if we appeal 
to the witness of the scriptures. Now by inferences it may 
be shown to be true in the following way. If the soul of a 
man, which while it remains the soul of a man is certainly 
inferior, can be proved not to have been formed with the. 
body but separately, and placed in the body from without, 
much more will this be the case with the souls of those who 
are called “heavenly beings.” fe C68) 

Now with regard to man, how could it be possible that 


the soul of him who “supplanted his brother in the womb” {£6 


(Gn 25:22-26), that is, Jacob, was formed at the same time 
as his body? Or how could the soul or formative principle of 
him who, while still lying in his mother’s womb, was filled 
with the Holy Spirit, have been formed at the same time as his 


» body? I mean John, who “leaped in his mother’s womb” and 


tossed himself about with great joy because the voice of Mary's 
salutation had sounded in the ears of his mother Elizabeth (cf. 
Lk 1:41, 44). How could the soul and formative principle of 
him who “before he was fashioned in the womb’ is said to 
have been “known by God” and “before he came to the birth 


was sanctified by him” (cf. Jer 1:5), have been formed at the , > dal 
“same time as his body? Otherwise it would ; appear that God 
fills some men with the Holy Spirit regardless of justice and »,- 


their merits and sanctifies them when they have done nothing 
to deserve it. And if that were so, how should we avoid the 


difficulty expresséd in that passage in which it is said, “Is there 
4 unrighteousness. with God? God forbid” (Rom 9:14). Or this, 
“Is there respect of persons with God?” (Rom 2:11). For this 
is the consequence of that line of argument which maintains 
that souls come into existence at the same timéas their bodies. 


ZA 


a 


82 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


(The sun® also, and the moon and the rest of the heavenly 
bodies are living beings; and moreover, just as we men for 


certain sins have been enveloped in these bodies of ours, which 


are gross and heavy, so the lights of heaven have been given 
bodies of one sort or another to enable them to provide more 
or less light, while the daemons, for greater offences, have been 
clothed with aerial bodies.) 

So far, then, as we can draw inferences from a comparison 
with the conditions of human life, it follows, I think, that 
whatever is shown by reason and scriptural authority to be 
true for men ought much more to be regarded as true in the 
case of the heavenly beings.’ : 

5. But let us see whether we can find in holy scripture any 
passages that refer strictly to the heavenly beings themselves. 
Paul the apostle speaks as follows: “the creation was subjected 
to vanity, not of its own will, but by reason of him who sub- 
jected it in hope, because the creation itself also shall be deliv- 
ered from the bondage of corruption into the liberty of the 
glory of the sons of God” (Rom 8:20, 21) To what “vanity,” 
pray, was the creation subjected, and what “creation” is meant, 
and how “not of its own will,” and with what “hope”; how, 
too, shall “the creation itself be delivered from the bondage of 
corruption”? Moreover the same apostle says elsewhere: “the 
expectation of the creation waiteth for the revealing of the sons 
of God” (Rom 8:19). And again elsewhere: “not only so. . . 
but the creation itself groaneth and travaileth together in pain 


’ until now” (Rom 8:23, 22). The question arises, “What is its 
groaning, and what its pains?” But first let us see what is the _ 


“vanity” to which the creation was subjected. My own opinion 


» is, that this is nothing else than the possession of bodies, for 


even though the bodies of the stars are composed of ether, they 
are nevertheless material. This, it seems to me, is the reason 
why Solomon/arraigns the whole bodily universe as being in a 


Book I, Chapter VII 83 


way burdensome and as impeding the activity of spirits, thus: 
“Vanity of vanities, all is vanity, said the Preacher; all is vanity” 
(Eccl 1:2). “For,” he adds, “I looked and I saw all things that 
are under the sun, and behold, all is vanity” (Eccl 1:14). 
This then is the “vanity” to which the creation was sub- 
jected, and above all that creation which is certainly the 
greatest thing in this world and which holds a distinguished 
pre-eminence by reason of its function. That is, the sun, moon 
and stars are said to have been subjected to vanity, because they 
were clothed with bodies and set to perform the task of giving 
light to the human race. And this creation, scripture says, was 
subjected to vanity “not of its own will” (Rom 8:20). For it did 
not undertake a service to vanity by the exercise of free will, 
but in obedience to the wish of him who was subjecting it, 
because he who subjected it promised those who were being 
given over unwillingly to vanity that on the fulfillment of their 
splendid work of service they should be delivered from this 
bondage of corruption and vanity, when the time of redemp- 
tion “of the glory of the sons of God” should have come. 
Having received this hope, and looking for the fulfillment of 


this promise, the entire creation now in the meantime “groans 


together” with us (for it even has sympathy with those whom 


it serves) and “is in pain together,” while in patience it hopes 
for what has been promised (cf. Rom 8:21, 22). 

Consider also the following passage, and see whether this 
other saying of Paul may not perhaps apply to these beings 
who not willingly, but in obedience to the will of him who 
subjected them and with the hope of promises to come were 
subjected to vanity. “I could desire,” he says, “to be dissolved 
(or “to depart”) and be with Christ; for it is far better” (Phil 
1:23). For I think that the sun too might say, “I could desire 
to be dissolved (or “to depart”) and be with Christ; for it is far 
better.” And whereas Paul adds: “But to abide in the flesh is 


84 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


more needful for your sakes” (Phil 1:24), the sun might say: 
“To abide in this heavenly and shining body is more needful 
for the sake of the revealing of the sons of God.” The same 
may well be believed and said of the moon and stars. 

Let us now see what is meant by the “freedom of the 
creation” and its “deliverance from bondage” (cf. Rom 8:21). 
(When' at the end and consummation of the world souls and 
rational creatures have been released as it were from their bars 
and prisons by the Lord, some of them by reason of indolence 
will move but slowly, while others by earnest effort will speed 
along in brisk flight. And since all have free will and of their 
own accord can acquire either virtues or vices, the former will 
be in a much worse condition than they are now, while the 
latter will arrive at a better state. For differences of movement 
and will in either direction will lead to different states; that is, 
angels may become men or daemons, and on the other hand 
daemons may become men or angels.) When Christ “shall 
have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father” (1 
Cor 15:24) then those living beings, because they have before 
this been made part of Christ’s kingdom, shall also be deliv- 
ered up along with the whole of that kingdom to the rule of 
the Father; so that, when “God shall be in all” (1 Cor 15:28), 
they also, since they are a part of all, may have God even in 
themselves, as he is in all things. 


Chapter VIII 


<7 THE ANGELS 


1. A similar course of reasoning must be applied to the angels. 
We must not suppose that it is the result of chance that a par- 
ticular duty is assigned to a particular angel; the work of curing 
and healing, for instance, to Raphael; the supervising of wars 
to Gabriel; the task of attending to the prayers and supplica- 
tions of mortals to Michael.’ We must believe that they have 
obtained these duties for no other reason except their own 
individual merits and that they entered upon them as a reward 
for the zeal and virtue they displayed before the construction 
of this world; after which event this or that kind of duty was 
assigned to each member of the order of archangels, while 
others were counted worthy of being enrolled in the order of 
angels and to act under this or that archangel, or under this 
or that leader or chief of his order. All this, as we have said, 
was arranged not by chance or at random, but by the most 
appropriate and righteous judgment of God, being settled in 
accordance with merit, God himself deciding and approving. 
Thus to one angel would be entrusted the Church of Ephesus, 
to another the Church of Smyrna (cf. Rv 2:1, 8); this angel 
would be Peter's, that Paul’s (cf. Acts 12:7—15, 27:23—24); and 
so on through the entire number of those “least ones” who are 


in the Church it would be decided which of the angels, who 


85 


86 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


daily “see the face of God” (cf. Mt 18:10) must be attached 
to each, and also which angel it must be who was to encamp 
“around them that fear God” (cf. Ps 34:7). Certainly we must 
suppose that all these duties are not performed by accident or 
chance, nor because the angels were naturally created for them, 
_lest in so doing we should charge the Creator with partiality. 
“Rather must we believe that they were conferred in accordance 
with merit and virtue and with the activity and ability of each 
individual spirit, by God the most righteous and impartial 
governor of all things. . . .” 
Concerning those who maintain that spiritual natures are of 
different kinds 
2. (We must take care)‘ not to fall into the silly and impi- 
ous fables of those who pretend that spiritual natures, both 
those belonging to the heavenly orders and those that form 
the human race, are of different kinds and were therefore orig- 
inated by different creators. For while it seems absurd, and 
indeed is absurd, that the differing natures of rational beings 
should be attributed to one and the same creator, nevertheless 
the objectors are ignorant of the cause of these differences. 
( They say)that it seems illogical for one and the same creator, 
quite apart from any reason of merit, to confer on some the 
authority to rule, while others are subjected to rulers, or to 
assign principalities to some, while others are made subject 
to princes. All such opinions, however, are met and refuted 
by the line of reasoning we have set forth above,’ in which 
~the cause of the diversity and variety among these beings is 
shown to be derived not from any unfairness on the part of the 
Disposer but from their own actions, which exhibit varying 
degrees of earnestness or laxity according to the goodness or 
badness of each. 
But to help us perceive more readily that this is the truth 
about the heavenly beings, let us take examples from human 


qc 


Book 1, Chapter VIII of 87 


life, both past and present, in order that by logical inference 
from things visible we may behold even the invisible (cf. Rom 
1:20). Our opponents will admit that Paul and Peter were 
undoubtedly men of “spiritual nature” (1 Cor 2:13-16). 
When therefore we find that Paul did much that was con- 
trary to religion, in having “persecuted the church of God” 
(1 Cor 15:9; Gal 1:13), and that Peter committed so grave a 
sin as to affirm with an oath, when questioned by the maid 
that kept the door, that he did not know who Christ was (cf. 
Mt 26:69-74; Jn 18:17), how comes it that such men, who 
according to our opponents are spiritual, should have fallen 
into sins like these? I ask the more insistently because they are 
in the habit of quoting over and over again the saying, “A good 
tree cannot bring forth evil fruit” (Mt 7:18; Lk 6:43). Well, 
if we grant that “a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit,” 
and yet by their own admission Paul and Peter were certainly 
sprung from the root of a good tree, how can they be imagined 
to have brought forth fruit so evil as this? And if they return 
the answer which they generally contrive, that it was not Paul 
who persecuted but some unknown person who was in Paul, 
and not Peter who denied but sometimes else who denied in 
Peter, then why did Paul say, if he had done no sin, that “I am 
not worthy to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the 
church of God” (1 Cor 15:9)? And why does Peter himself 
“weep bitterly” (Mt 26:75; Lk 22:62) for the sin of another? 
This shows how foolish are all their reasonings. 

3. Our contention is, however, that among all rational 
creatures, there is none which is not capable of both good — 
and evil. But it does not necessarily follow that, because we 
say there is no nature which cannot admit evil, we therefore 
affirm that every nature has admitted evil, that is, has become 
evil. Just as we may say that every human nature possesses the 
capacity to become a sailor, and yet this will not result in every 


88 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


man becoming a sailor; or again that it is possible for every 
man to learn the art of grammar or medicine, and yet this 
does not prove that every man is either a doctor or a school- 
master: so when we say that there is no nature which cannot 
admit evil, we do not necessarily indicate that every nature 
has actually done so; nor on the other hand will the statement 
that there is no nature which may not admit good prove that 
every nature has admitted what is good. Our opinion is that 
not even the devil himself was incapable of good, but the 
fact that he could admit good did not lead him to desire it 
or to take pains to acquire virtue. For, as we learn from the 
passages we quoted out of the prophets, he was at one time 
good, when he dwelt “in the paradise of God,” “in the midst 
of the cherubim” (Ez 28:13ff.). Just as, therefore, he had® in 
himself the power of admitting either good or evil, and falling 
| away from good he turned with his whole mind to evil, so also 
there are other created beings who, while possessing the power 
to choose either, by the exercise of free will flee from evil and 
cleave to the good. 

There is therefore no nature which may not admit good or 
evil, except the nature of God, which is the source of all good, 
and that of Christ; for Christ is wisdom, and wisdom certainly 
cannot admit folly; and he is righteousness, and assuredly righ- 
teousness will never receive unrighteousness; and he is word or 
reason, which certainly cannot become irrational; further, he 
is light, and we are sure that “darkness does not comprehend” 
the light (Jn 1:5). In like manner also the nature of the Holy 
Spirit, which is holy, does not admit pollution, for it is holy 
by nature or essence. 

But if any other nature is holly, it is so because it is made 
holy by the reception or inspiration of the Holy Spirit; the 
possession of this quality does not arise from its own nature, 
but is an accidental addition to it, and being an addition it can 


Book I, Chapter VIII 89 


also become separated and lost. So too righteousness may be 
possessed as an accident, and accordingly this also may be lost. 
And even the wisdom which we possess is still accidental, in 
spite of the fact that it lies within our own power to become 
wise through personal effort and merit, when we pay due 
attention to wisdom; and that while we continue to display 
the requisite zeal we shall always have a share in wisdom, 
which share will be greater or less in proportion to the merit 
of our conduct and the degree of our zeal. For the kindness 
of God, as is worthy of him, incites and attracts all things to 
that blessed end, when “all sorrow and sadness and sighing 
shall flee away” (Is 35:10) and disappear 

4. So far then as I can see, the foregoing discussion has 
sufficiently proved that it is not from any random or chance 
circumstances that the principalities hold their princedoms 
or the other orders are assigned their respective offices, but 
that each has obtained his degree of dignity in proportion to 
his own merits, though it is not our business to know or to 
inquire what the actual deeds were through which they earned 
their entrance into’a particular order. It is enough for us, to 


enable us to establish the impartiality and justice of God, to | “ 


be certain of this, that in accordance with the statement of the 
apostle Paul “there is no respect of persons with God” (Rom 
2:11), who on the contrary dispenses all his gifts in proportion 
to the merits and progress of each recipient. No angelic office, 
therefore, exists except as a reward of merit, nor do authorities 
wield their authority except as a result of their progress, nor do 
those who are called thrones, that is, authorities for judging 
and ruling, administer their functions except as a reward of 
merit, nor do the dominions exercise dominion but by merit; 
for this supreme and most excellent order of rational creatures 
in the heavenly places is thus arranged in a glorious variety 


of offices. 


re £5 
re”g 


90 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


We must think of the opposing powers in precisely the 
same way. These have become attached to their particular place 
or office, so as to be “principalities,” or “powers,” or “rulers of 
the darkness of the world,” or “spiritual hosts of wickedness” 
(cf. Eph 6:12), or “malignant spirits,” or “impure daemons” 
(cf. Lk 7:21, 4:33), not because they hold it essentially nor 
because they were so created; on the contrary, these ranks in 
wickedness have been assigned to them in proportion to their 
bad conduct and the progress they have made in wrong-doing. 
Thus there exists that other order of rational creatures, who 
have so utterly abandoned themselves to wickedness that they 
__ lack the desire, rather than the power, to return, so long as the 
frenzy of their evil deeds is a passion and a delight. 

The third order of rational creatures is composed of those 
spirits who are judged fit by God to replenish the human race. 
These are the souls of men, some of whom, in consequence of 
_ their progress, we see taken up into the order of angels, those, 
~ namely, who have been made “sons of God” or “sons of the 

resurrection” (Lk 20:36; Rom 8:14); or those who forsaking 
the darkness have loved the light and have been made “sons 
of the light” (Lk 16:8); or those who, after winning every 
fight and being changed into “men of peace,” become “sons of 
peace” (Mt 5:9; Lk 10:6) and “sons of God”; or those who, by 
mortifying their members which are upon the earth (Col 3:5) 
and rising superior not only to their bodily nature but even 
to the wavering and fragile movements of the soul itself, have 
“joined themselves to the Lord” (1 Cor 6:17), being made 
wholly spiritual, so as to be always “one spirit” (ibid.), with 
him, judging each individual thing in company with him, 
until they reach the point when they become perfect “spiritual 
men” and “judge all things,” because their mind is illuminated 
in all holiness through the word and wisdom of God, while 


Book I, Chapter VIII 91 


they themselves are utterly incapable of being judged by any 
man (cf. 1 Cor 2:15).’ 

We think® that those opinions, which some are accus- 
tomed unnecessarily to inquire into and uphold, to the effect 
that souls depart so far from their true selves as to forget their 
rational nature and dignity and to sink down into the con- 
dition of irrational animals, like beasts or cattle, ought cer- 
tainly not to be accepted. In support of these opinions they 
are accustomed to quote certain alleged proof passages out of 
the scriptures; the fact, for instance, that a beast to which a 
woman has unnaturally prostituted herself is deemed equally 
guilty with the woman and is ordered to be stoned with her 
(cf. Lv 20:16); or that a “bull that gores” is commanded to 
be stoned (cf. Ex 21:29): or further, that Balaam’s ass spoke, 
when “God opened its mouth” and the “dumb beast of bur- 
den, answering with human voice, reproved the madness of 
the prophet” (cf. Nm 22:28-30; 2 Pt 2:16). For our part we 
beg leave to mention these things not as fixed doctrines, but as 
opinions to be discussed and then rejected. This is our sole rea- 
son for mentioning them, namely, that we should not appear 
to have refused to discuss any question that has been raised. 
But at the proper place and time we will refute and drive away 
this perverse doctrine, and then show how the passages which 
they quote out of the holy scriptures ought to be understood. 


BOOK II 


p 
Chapter b-odrlgty 


evil eget G@—m 


. Tue Worip < ' 


j 1. Although the whole discussion in the spenetlle book has 
been concerned with the world and its arrangement, I think 
that we ought now to follow this up by dealing with a few 
particular questions about the world itself; for instance, about 
its beginning and its end; and about the events which occur 


between the beginning and the end by the ordering of divine 


“providence; and about those which are supposed to occur 


before or after that period. 
In this inquiry one fact appears clear at the outset. The 
entire constitution of the world is various and diverse; for it ~~  °> 


consists of rational beings, and others more divine, and of 

bodies of different kinds; and besides these, of dumb animals, 

that is, wild beasts, cattle, birds and all creatures that live in 

water; then secondly, of places, such as heaven or the heavens, 

earth, water, and also the air which is between these two, or 
that which men call the aether; and finally of all things which 

spring or grow out of the earth. 
Seeing then that the world contains this great vari- 
_ety, and that even among rational beings there is great 


93 


94 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


diversity—which indeed we must suppose to be the object for 
which all the other variety and diversity exists—what cause can 
be given to account for the existence of the world, especially 
when we bear in mind that end in which, as we argued in the 
preceding book’ all things shall be restored to their original 
state? If our argument there is admitted to be sound, what 
other cause can we imagine to account for the great diversity 
of this world except the variety and diversity of the motions 
and declensions of those who fell away from that original unity 
and harmony in which they were at the first created by God? 

These beings, disturbed and drawn away from that state 
of goodness, and then tossed about by the diverse motions 
and desires of their souls, have exchanged the one undivided 
goodness of their original nature for minds that vary in quality 
according to their different tendencies. 

2. But God who, by the unspeakable skill of his wisdom, 
transforms and restores all things, whatever their condition, to 
some useful purpose and the common advantage of all, recalls 
these very creatures, so different from each other in mental 
quality, to one harmony of work and endeavor; so that, diverse 
though the motions of their souls may be, they nevertheless 
combine to make up the fullness and perfection of a single 
world, the very variety of minds tending to one end, perfec- 
tion. For there is one power which binds and holds together 
all the diversity of the world and guides the various motions 
to the accomplishment of one task, lest so immense a work 
as the world should be dissolved by the conflicts of souls. It is 
for this reason, we think, that God, the parent of all things, 
in providing for the salvation of his entire creation through 
the unspeakable plan of his word and wisdom, has so ordered 
everything that each spirit or soul, or whatever else rational 
existences ought to be called, should not be compelled by force 
against its free choice to any action except that to which the 


Book II, Chapter I 95 


motions of its own mind lead it,—for in that case the power of 
free choice would seem to be taken from them, which would ~ 
certainly alter the quality of their nature itself—and at the 
same time that the motions of their wills should work suit- 
ably and usefully together to produce the harmony of a single 
world, some being in need of help, others able to give help, 
others again to provide struggles and conflicts for those who 
are making progress, whose diligence will be accounted the 
more praiseworthy and whose rank and position recovered 
after their victory will be held the more securely, as it has been 
won through difficulty and toil. E 
3. Although therefore the whole world is arranged in 
diverse parts and functions, we must not suppose that its con- 
dition is one of discord and self-contradiction; but as our “one 
body” is composed of “many members” (cf. 1 Cor 12:12) and 
is held together by one soul, so we should, I think, accept the 
opinion that the universe is as it were an immense, monstrous 
animal, held together by the power and reason of God as by 
one soul.” This truth is, I believe, referred to by holy scripture 
in the following passage spoken through the prophet, “‘Do 
not I fill heaven and earth?’ saith the Lord” (Jer 23:24). And 
again, “Heaven is my throne, and earth is the footstool of 
my feet” (Is 66:1); and in what the Savior said, when he tells 
us not to swear, “neither by heaven, for it is the throne of 
God, neither by the earth, for it is the footstool of his feet” 
(Mt 5:34ff.); and further, in what St. Paul says in his oration 
to the Athenians, “in him we live and move and have our 
being” (Acts 17:28). For how do we “live and move and have 
our being in God” except through the fact that he binds and 
holds together the universe by his power? And how is heaven 
the “throne of God” and earth the “footstool of his feet,” as 
the Savior himself declares, except through the fact that alike 
in heaven and in earth God's power fills all things, as he says, 


96 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


“Do not I fill heaven and earth?’ saith the Lord” (Jer 23:24). 
I do not think, therefore, that anyone will find it difficult to 
admit, from the passages we have quoted, that God, the parent 
of all things, fills and holds together the entire universe with 
the fullness of his power. 

And now, since the argument of the preceding discussion 
has shown that the diverse motions of rational creatures and 
their varying opinions have given rise to the diversity of this 
world, we must see whether it may not be appropriate that 
the world should have a conclusion similar to its beginning.’ 
Now there is no doubt that its end must be looked for in 
much diversity and variety, and this variety, when found to 
exist at the end of this world, will in its turn provide causes 
and occasions of diversity in that other world which is to come 
after this; for clearly the end of this world is the beginning of 

_the world to come. 

4. If the course of our discussion has revealed this to 
be the case, it seems to follow that, as the diversity of the 
world cannot exist apart from bodies, we should discuss the 
question of bodily nature. It is evident from the observation 
of ordinary things that bodily nature admits of diverse and 

_ various changes; to such an extent that it can undergo every 
kind of transformation; for example, wood turns into fire, 
fire into smoke and smoke into air; and even oil, a liquid, 
-. changes into fire.* Do not also articles of food whether used 
by men or by animals, exhibit the same fact of change? For 
whatever it is that we take as food, it turns into the substance 
of our body. Moreover it would not be difficult to explain the 
way in which water changes into earth or air, and air again 
into fire, or fire into air or air into water; in the present place, 
however, it is enough simply to mention these facts, as our 
purpose is to discuss the question of bodily matter. Now by 
matter we mean that which underlies bodies, namely, that 


Book II, Chapter I 97 


from which they take their existence when qualities have been 
applied to or mingled with them.> We speak of four qualities, 
heat, cold, dryness, wetness. These qualities, when mingled 
with the Ayle or matter (which matter is clearly seen to have 
an existence in its own right apart from these qualities we 
have mentioned), produce the different kinds of bodies. But 
although, as we have said, this matter has an existence by its 
own right without qualities, yet it is never found actually 


_ existing apart from them. gen hs 


\_ In regard then to this matter, which is so great and won- rif 
de erful as to be sufficient for all the bodies in the world, which 
_God willed to exist, and to be at the call and servi 
~ Creator in all things for the fashioning of whatever forms and 
species he wished, receiving into itself the qualities which he 


had willed to i it, I cannot understand how s 


many y distinguished en have supposed it to be uncreated, », 
that is, not made by God himself the Creator of all =e 

in its nature and power the result of chance.° I wonder, too, 

how such men can find fault with those who deny that God is 

the Maker of this universe or that he providentially cares for it, / 
and can charge them with impiety for believing that so greata_/ 
work as the world exists without a Maker or Sustainer, when 

they themselves are guilty of a like impiety in saying that mat 

ter is uncreated and co-eternal with the uncreated God. Their 
theory is as follows: if we suppose for the sake of argument 

that matter did not exist, then, they say, since God could not 
make anything when nothing existed, he would undoubtedly 

have been idle, having no matter on which to work; but they ¢ ¢, p 
believe that this matter was at his hand by chance, and not bits * 
his own provision, and they think that this thing which was i 
discovered by chance was able to suffice him for so immense a 

work and for the exercise of his mighty power, so as to subserve 

the plan of all his wisdom and be separated and formed into a 


"e 


3 


98 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 
world. This seems to me to be very absurd and character 
of men who are utterly ignorant of the power and in nce 
of an uncreated being. va 
But in order to look more carefully into theplan of things, 
let it be granted that for a little while matter did not exist, 
and that God, when nothing existed before; caused to exist 
“the the thingswhich he desired. What shall we think? Would 
“God have created a matter that should be better or greater 
or of a kind other than that which he did produce from his 
own power and wisdom, in order that things which before 
were not might exist? Or would he have created it worse and 
inferior? Or would he have created it like to and the same as 
that matter which these men call uncreated? I think anyone 
can easily discern that neither a better nor an inferior matter 
could have assumed the forms and species of the world, but 
only such a matter as that which did assume them. How then 
will it seem anything but impious to call that uncreated which, 
if we believe it to be made by God, is found beyond a doubt 
to be exactly the same as that which is said to be uncreated? 
5. To obtain scriptural authority for believing that this is 
so, hear how the doctrine is confirmed in the book of Macca- 
bees, where the mother of the seven martyrs is exhorting one 
of her sons to endure the tortures. She says: “I pray you, my 
son, look at heaven and earth and all that is in them, and when 
you see all this, remember that God made it when it did not 
_exist” (2 Mc 7:28). Further, in the book of The Shepherd. in 
the first commandment, it says as follows: “First of all believe 
that God is one, who created and set in order all things and 
caused the universe to exist out of nothing.”’ Perhaps also that 
passage which occurs in the Psalms refers to this doctrine: “He 
spake and they were made; he commanded and they were 
created” (Ps 148:5). For the statement “he spake and they 
were made” seems to point to the substance of things that 


j Invi dbl 


oh fh ing § 


/ lexis) whereas “he commanded and they were crated” seems “7 (S| 


Book II, Chapter I oe ee 99 
b> | 


to be spoken of the qualities by which the substance itself was 
molded into form. 


Chapter II 


THE PERPETUITY OF 
BopDILy NATURE 


1. At this point some are wont to inquire whether, as the 
Father begets an only begotten Son and brings forth a Holy 
Spirit, not as beings who did not exist before, but in the sense 
that the Father is the origin and source of the Son or the Holy 
Spirit and no thought of before or after can be entertained 
in respect of them, some similar kinship or close connection 
may not be understood to exist also between rational natures 
and bodily matter. In order to examine this question with 
due care and completeness they are wont to direct the begin- 
ning of their discussion to the inquiry whether this bodily“ 
nature, which supports the lives and upholds the movements 
of spiritual and rational minds, will last eternally like them 
or whether in fact it will be destroyed and utterly perish. And 
that “this may be determined more precisely a previous inquiry 
seems necessary, namely, whether it is possible for rational 
beings to endure altogether without bodies when they have 
reached the height of holiness and blessedness,—a thing which 
to me indeed seems very difficult and well-nigh impossible— , 
or whether it is necessary that\they should always be joined 
to bodies. If then anyone could show a reason whereby it 
was possible for them to do without bodies of any kind, the 


101 


47 


a 


102 nt’ va ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


conseq nce would seem to be that just as bodily nature was 
created out of nothing after a space of time and brought into 
being from non-existence, so tog it might cease to exist when 
the neéd it had served had passed away. IS 

2. But if it is impossible by any means to‘maintain this 
proposition, namely, that any being, with the exception of 
the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, ive apart from a body, 
then logical reasoning compels ux 
original creation was of ration: beings, it is only in idea and 
thought that a material substance ‘is separable from them, and 
that though. this substance'seems to have been produced for 


them or after them, yet never have they lived or do th live 
without it; for we shall be right in believing that life without 


. a body is found in the Trinity alone.' Now as we have said 
above, material substance possesses such a nature that it can 


undergo every kind of transformation. When therefore it is 


drawn down to lower beings it is formed into the grosser and ~ 


more solid condition of body and serves to distinguish the 
visible species of this world in all their variety. But when it 
ministers to more perfect and blessed beings, it shines in the 
splendor of “celestial bodies” (1 Cor 15:40) and adorns either 
the “angels of God” or the “sons of the resurrection” (cf. Lk 
20:36; Mt 22:30) with the garments ofa “spiritual body” el 
Cor 15:44). All these beings go to make up the diverse and 
varied condition of the one world. 

If you wish to discuss these questions more fully, it will be 
necessary to examine the divine scripttires very intently and 
diligently, with all reverence and fear of God, to see whether 
there can perchance be found in them any secret and hidden 
meaning, anything spoken in deep or veiled language (the 
Holy Spirit making the meaning clear [cf. Heb 9:8] to those 
who are worthy) about matters such as these, after more testi- 
monies have been collected that bear on this particular point. 


Chapter III 


THE BEGINNING OF THE WORLD 
AND ITs CAUSES 


>f 4X 2 


1. It remains to inquire next, whether there was another world 
| before the one which now exists;' and if there was, whether 
it was of the same kind as the present world, or slightly dif- 
ferent or inferior; or whether there was no world at all, but 
something like that “end” which we understand will exist at 
the conclusion of all things, “when the kingdom is delivered 
up to God, even the Father” (1 Cor 15:24); and whether this 
“end” was in its turn the end of another world, obviously of 
that which preceded the beginning of the present one, and 
whether it was the varying falls of intellectual beings which 
provoked God to form a world of such variety and diversity 
as this. 

Further, I think that the following point also calls for sim- 
ilar inquiry, whether after this world there will be a course of 
healing and improvement, very severe no doubt and full of 
pain to thosewwho have refused: to obey the word of God, yet 
a process of instruction and rational training through which 
those who in this present life have devoted themselves to these 
pursuits and, being made purer in mind, have attained here 
and now to a capacity for divine wisdom, may advance to a 
richer understanding of truth; and whether after this the end 


103 


———————s—<—isCS 


104 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


of all things follows immediately. Or again, whether for the 
correction and improvement of those who need it there will 
be yet another world, either similar to the one that now exists, 
or better than it, or possibly much worse; and how long will 
the world that comes after this exist, of whatever sort it be, 
or whether it will exist at all; and if there will ever be a time 
when there will be no world anywhere, or if there ever was a 
time when there was no world at all; or if there have been, or 
shall be, many worlds; or if it will ever happen that one world 
will turn out to be equal to another and similar in all respects 
and indistinguishable from it.’ 

2. To make it the more clear, then, whether bodily mat- 
ter exists but for a space of time and whether, just as it did 
hot exist before it was made, so it will be again resolved into 
non-existence, let us first see if it can possibly happen for any 
being to live without a body. For if any being can live with- 
out a body, then it is possible for all things to exist without 
bodies, since our previous chapter has shown that all things 
work towards one end.? But if all things can exist without 
bodies, doubtless bodily substance will cease to exist when 
there is no use for it.* Yet how are we to understand the words 
spoken by the apostle.in the passage where he discusses the 
resurrection of the dead? For he says, “This corruptible must 
put on incorruption and this mortal must put on immortality. 
But when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption and 
this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall come 
to pass the saying that is written: Death is swallowed up in 
victory. O death, where is thy victory? O death, where is thy 
sting? The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the 
law” (1 Cor 15:53-56). Some such meaning as the following 
seems to be suggested by the apostle. When he speaks of “this 
corruptible” and “this mortal,” with the air of one who is as 
it were touching and displaying something, to what else can 


Book II, Chapter III 105 


it apply except bodily matter? This matter of the body, then, 
which now is corruptible, shall put on incorruption when a 
perfect soul, instructed in the doctrines of incorruption, has 
begun to use it. > vt 
And I would not have you be surprised that we should 
use the metaphor of bodily clothing to describe a perfect soul, 
which on account of the word of God and his wisdom is here 
called “incorruption.” For indeed Jesus Christ himself, who is 
the Lord and Creator of the soul, is said to be the “clothing” 
of the saints, as the apostle says, “Put ye on the Lord Jesus 
Christ” (Rom 13:14). As therefore Christ is the clothing of the 
soul, so by an intelligible kind of reasoning the soul is said to 
be the clothing of the body; for it is an ornament of the body, 
covering and concealing its mortal nature. When therefore the 
apostle says, “This corruptible must put on incorruption,” it 
is as if he said, “This body, with its corruptible nature, must 
receive the clothing of incorruption, that is, a soul that pos- 
sesses in itself incorruption, by virtue of the fact that it has 
put on Christ, who is the wisdom and the word of God.” And 
when this body, which one day we shall possess in a more glo- 
rious form, shall have become a partaker of life, it will then, 
in addition to being immortal, become also incorruptible. For 
whatever is mortal is on that very account also corruptible, 
but we cannot say that what is corruptible is also mortal. For 
instance, we call a stone or a log corruptible, but it will not 
follow that we also call them mortal, for they have never lived. 
But since the body partakes of life, we call it mortal because 
the life can be and is separated from it, while in another sense 
we also call it corruptible. 

A wonderful insight is therefore revealed in the following 
words of the holy apostle. Referring in the first place to bodily 
matter in general, that matter which, in whatever form it is 
found, whether carnal as now or as hereafter in the subtler and 


——— _—@_eo—«—“—_ 


106 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


purer form which is called spiritual, the soul always makes use 
of, he says, “This corruptible must put on incorruption.” In 
the second place, referring to the body in particular he says, 
“This mortal must put on immortality.” Now what else can 
this “incorruption” and “immortality” be except the wisdom 
and word and righteousness of God, which mould and clothe 
and adorn the soul? This is the meaning of the saying that 
the corruptible puts on incorruption and the mortal puts on 
immortality. For now, although we may make great progress, 
still since “we know in part and we prophesy in part” and even 
those things which we seem to understand are seen “through 
a glass darkly,” (cf. 1 Cor 13:9, 12) “this corruptible” does not 
yet “put on incorruption,” nor is “this mortal” encompassed 
with “immortality”; and since undoubtedly this training of 
ours in the body extends over a very long period, namely, up 
till the time the bodies themselves with which we are encom- 
passed are found worthy of incorruption and immortality by 
reason of the word and wisdom and perfect righteousness of 
God, on this account it is said that “this corruptible must put 


on incorruption and this mortal must put on immortality.” _ - 
3. Nevertheless, those who belieye* that rational creatures ; 


can ever lead a life apart from the body may at this point 
raise such questions as the following. If it is true that “this 
corruptible shall putjon Gncorruption and this mortal shall 
q put on immortality” and that in the end “death shall be swal- 
_ © lowed up,” this is nothing else but a declaration that material 
nature is to be destroyed; for it is on material nature that 
death can have its effect,° during the time that those who are 
in the body have their powers of mind blunted, as it appears, 
by the nature of bodily matter. If, however, they exist apart 
from the body, they will then escape all the trouble that comes 
from this kind of disturbance. But since they could not of a 
sudden escape from all bodily clothing, they must first be 


Book II, Chapter Ill 107 


L~—-—— 
supposed to abide in bodies moré\pure and subtle, which have 


in addition the property of not being conquered by death or 
pierced by “death's sting” (1 Cor 15:55, 56), so that finally 


when( material naturé-has gradually teased to be, death may 
be “swallowed up” and destroyed “in the end,” and all its sting 


entirely blunted through the divine grace, which the soul has 


become capable of receiving and has thereby proved itself wor>—— 


3a 
224129 


thy of obtaining “incorruption” and “immortality.” And then 
all will indeed be able to say, “O death, where is thy victory? 
O death where is thy sting. The sting of death is sin” (1 Cor 
15:55, 56). If therefore these“Conclusions appear logical,’ it 
follows that we must believe that our condition will at some 
future time be incorpdreal; and if this is admitted, and it is said 
that all must be subjected to Christ, it is necessary that this 


incorporeal condition shall be the privilege of all who come 


i 
within the scope of this subjection to Christ, since all®who 


have been subjected to Christ will in the end be subje€ted also 


@) 


to God the Father,’ to whom it is said that Christ will deliver 


up the kingdom. Thus it appears that then even the use of ~ 


bodies will cease; and if this happens, bodily nature returns 


to non-existence, just as formerly it did not exist. <— 70% 
-____ But let us see what those who make these assertions have 


to face. It will be seen to be a necessity that, if bodily nature 


» were to be destroyed, it must be restored and created a second 


time. For it is apparently possible that rational creatures, who 
are never deprived of the power of free will, may once again 
become subject to certain movements. This power is granted 
them by God lest, if they held their position forever irremoy- 
ably, they might forget that they had been placed in that final 
state of blessedness by the grace of God and not by their own 
goodness. These movements would again undoubtedly be 
followed by a variety and diversity of bodies, out of which 


a world is always composed; for it could never exist except 


F 


- 


_— 


19% 


Ar’ 


. 


“<- 


108 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


as a result of variety and diversity, and this can in no way be 
produced apart from bodily matter. 

4. Moreover, as for those who maintain that worlds similar 
to each other and in all respects alike sometimes come into ~ 


existence, I do not know what proofs they can bring in sup- 


port of this theory. For if it is said that there is to be a world 
similar in all respects to the present world, then it will happen 
that Adam and Eve will again do what they did before, there 
will be another flood, the same Moses will once more lead a 
people numbering six hundred thousand out of Egypt, Judas 
also will “twice betray his Lord, Saul will a second time keep 
the clothes of those who are stoning Stephen, and we shall 
say that every deed which has been done in this life must be 
done again.”!° I do not think that this can be established by.< 
any reasoning, if souls are actuated by freedom of choice and 
“maintain their progress or the reverse in accordance with the 
power of their own will. For souls are not driven on some 
revolving course which brings them into the same cycle again 
after many ages, with the result that they do or desire this or 
that, but they direct the course of their deeds towards whatever 
end the freedom of their individual minds may aim at. 
What these men say, however, is the same as if one were 
to maintain that if a bushel of corn were poured out on the 
ground it could happen that on two occasions the grains 
would fall in exactly the same positions, so that each single 
grain would lie the second time next to that grain besides 
which it was thrown at the first, and the bushel would be 
scattered in the same order and with the same marks as for- 
merly. Certainly this is an utterly impossible thing to happen 
with the innumerable grains of a bushel, even if they were to 
be poured out again and again without ceasing for countless 
ages. It seems to me, then, impossible that the world could 
be restored again a second time with the same order and the 


} 


Ww 


Book II, Chapter III 109 


same number of births, deaths and actions; but worlds may 
exist that are diverse, having variations by no means slight, so 
that for certain clear causes the condition of one may be better, 
while another for different causes may be worse, and another 
intermediate. What may be the number or measure of these 
worlds I confess I do not know; but I would willingly learn, 
if any man can show me. ) 
5. This world, however, which is itself called an “age” (Wis 
13:9 [LXX and RV marg.]), is said to be the end of many ages. ~. ef 
Now the holy apostle teaches that Christ did not suffer in the 
age that was before this, nor yet in the age before that; and I 
do not know whether it is in my power to enumerate all the f+, 
previous ages in which he did not suffer. I will, however, quote 
the statements of Paul from which I have arrived at this point 
of knowledge. He says: “But now once at the consummation 
of the ages he has been manifested to put away sin by the sacri- 
fice of himself” (Heb 9:26). He says that Christ has become a 
“sacrifice” once, and that “at the consummation of the ages he 
has been manifested to put away, sin.”"! But after the present 
age, which is said to have been. made for the consummation 
‘Of other ages, there will yet be further “ages to come”; for we 
learn this plainly from Paul himself when he says, “that in the 
ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace 
in kindness towards us” (Eph 2:7). He did not say, “in the 
age to come”; nor, “in two ages”; but, “in the ages to come.” 
I think, therefore, that the indications of this statement point / -.° 
to many ages. 
If, however, there is something greater than the ages,—so 
that among created beings we think of ages, but dmong those 
who exceed and surpass visible created beings, something still 
greater—which will perhaps exist at the “restitution of all 
things” (Acts 3:21), when the universe reaches its perfectend, #» 
then possibly that period in which the consummation of all 


110 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


things will happen is to be understood as something more than 
an age. In regard to this I am influenced by the authority of 
holy scripture, which says, “For an age, and still more.”'* Now 
when it says “still more,” undoubtedly it wishes something 
more than an age to be understood. And see whether that 
” saying of the Savior, “I will that, where I am, these also may 
be there with me” and, “as I and thou are one, that they also 
may be one in us” (Jn 17:24, 21), does not seem to point to 
something more than an age or ages, perhaps even more than 
the “ages of the ages” (Gal 1:5; 1 Tm 1:17), to that period, 

namely, when all things are no longer in an age, but “God is 
all and in all” (1 Cor 15:28). 

6. Now that we have discussed to the best of our ability 
these questions about the system of the world, it seems not 
inappropriate to inquire into the meaning of the actual term 

“world”; for it is a term which is frequently shown in the holy 
scriptures to possess different significations. That which in 
Latin we speak of as mundus, in Greek is called kosmos; and 
kosmos signifies not only the world, but also an ornament. For 
instance in Isaiah, where a reproving speech is addressed to the 
“chief daughters of Sion” (cf. Is 3:17) and the prophet says, 
“Instead of an ornament of gold for thy head thou shalt have 
baldness on account of thy works” (Is 3:24), he uses for orna- 
ment the same word as for world, namely, kosmos. It is said also 
that a representation of the world was to be seen on the gar- 
ment of the high priest, as we find in the Wisdom of Solomon 
when it says, “Upon the garment was the entire world” (Wis 
18:24). This earth of ours together with its inhabitants is also 
called the world, as when the scripture says, “The whole world 
lieth in the evil one” (1 Jn 5:19). Clement indeed, a disciple 
of the apostles, mentions those whom the Greeks call “people 
of the opposite earth,” and speaks of other parts of the wotld 


which none of our people can reach, nor can any of those who 


mrs 
i 


Book II, Chapter III 111 


live there cross over to us; and these parts themselves he called 

“worlds,” when he says, “The ocean is impassable to men, and 
the worlds beyond it are governed by the same ordinances 
of God the Ruler.” This universe which consists of heaven 
and earth is also called a world, as Paul says, “The fashion of 
this world will pass away” (1 Cor 7:31). Our Lord and Savior 


indeed alludes to yet another world, which it is difficult to ’ 


describe and depict in actual truth, beyond this visible one. 
For he says, “I am not of this world” (Jn 17:14, 16); and the 
words, “I am not of this world,” suggest that he was of some 
other world. We have already said that it is difficult for us to 
explain this other world; and for this reason, that if we did so, 
there would be a risk of giving some men the impression that 


we were affirming the existence of certain imaginary forms { ‘ 


which the Greeks call “ideas.” For it is certainly foreign to 
our mode of reasoning to speak of an incorporeal world that 
exists solely in the mind’s fancy or the unsubstantial region 
of thought; and how men could affirm that the Savior came 
from thence or that the saints will go thither I do not see (cf. 
Jn 17:24). 

There is no doubt, however, that the Savior alludes to 
something more glorious and splendid than this present world, 
and invites and exhorts all who believe in him to direct their 
course towards it. But whether that world, which he wishes us 
to know of, is one that stands widely apart and separate from 
this in space and quality and glory, or whether, as seems to me 
more likely, it excels in quality and glory but is nevertheless 
contained within the limits of this world, is uncertain, and in 
my opinion an unsuitable subject for the mind and thoughts 
of men. But from what Clement appears to allude to when he 
says, “The ocean, which is impassable to men, and the worlds 
beyond it,”'* where he uses the plural “worlds” and indicates 
that they are all directed and ruled by the same providence of 


112 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


the most high God, he would seem to throw out to us some 
germs of an opinion such as this, that the entire universe of 
things that exist, both celestial and supercelestial, earthly and 
infernal may be spoken of in a general way as a single perfect 
world, within which or by which those other worlds that are 
in it must be supposed to be contained. 

Accordingly there are some who would apply the term 
“world” to the spheres of the moon and the sun and the heav- 
enly bodies called “planets” or wanderers; and further, they 
would maintain that the uppermost sphere itself, which they 
call “fixed,” is rightly termed a world. Finally they appeal to the 
book of the prophet Baruch to bear witness to this assertion, 
because in it there are very clear indications of the seven worlds 
or heavens.'> They would maintain, however, that above the 
sphere which they call “fixed” there is another; and that, just 
as in our system the heaven contains all things that are under 
it, so this sphere, with its immense size and indescribable span, 
encloses the vast extent of all the other spheres in its yet more 
magnificent circuit, so that all things are within it as this earth 
of ours is under the heaven." They believe that this sphere is 
called in the holy scriptures the “good land” and the “land of 
the living” (cf. Ex 3:8; Dt 8:8; Jer 11:19; Ps 27:13, 142:5), and 
that it has its own heaven, the one we have before spoken of, 
in which the names of the saints are said to be written, or to 
have been written, by the Savior (cf. Lk 10:20). This heaven 
it is which contains and encloses that “earth” which the Savior 
in the gospel promises to the “meek” and gentle (cf. Mt 5:4). 
Further, they would say that this earth of ours, which was 
formerly called “dry land,” took its new name from that earth, 
just as our firmament was called “heaven” after the designation 
of that heaven (cf. Gn 1:10, 8).!7 But we have treated more 

fully of such opinions in the place in which we inquired into 
the meaning of the passage, “In the beginning God made the 


Book II, Chapter III 113 


heaven and the earth.”'* For it was shown that there is another 
“heaven” and another “earth” besides the firmament, which 
is said to have been made after the second day, and the “dry 
land,” which was afterwards called “earth.” 

Certainly what some say of this world, that it is corrupt- 
ible because it was made, and yet does not go to corruption 
because the will of God, who made it and preserves it from 
being mastered by corruption, is stronger and more powerful 
than corruption, may more rightly be believed of that world 
which we have above called a “fixed” sphere, because by the 
will of God it is in no way “subject to corruption” (cf. Rom 
8:20, 21), for the reason that it has not admitted the causes 
of corruption. For indeed it is a world of saints and of those 
who have been completely purified and not of the wicked, as 
our world is. Now we must see whether the apostle may not 
have been thinking of that world when he said, “While we 
look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which 
are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal; but 
the things which are not seen are eternal. But we know that if 
the earthly house of this our tabernacle be dissolved, we have 
a building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal in 
the heavens” (2 Cor 4:18, 5:1). For when it is said elsewhere, 
“Because I shall see the heaven, the works of thy fingers” (Ps 
8:3 AV and RV),'? and when God said through the prophet 
about all visible things that “My hand made all these” (cf. Is 
66:2), he declares that that “eternal house” which he promises 
to the saints in heaven was not “made with hands,” which 
undoubtedly signifies a difference in creation between the 
“things which are seen” and the “things which are not seen.” 
Now the phrase “things which are not seen” does not mean 
the same as “things which are invisible.” For the things which 

are invisible are not only not seefi, but do not even possess 


a nature which admits of their being seen; they are what the 
i en \ 


i) 


114 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Greeks have called asomata or incorporeal.” But the things of 
which Paul said, “they are not seen,” possess a nature which 
admits of their being seen; he is explaining, however, that they 
are not yet seen by those to whom they are promised. 

7. We have outlined, then, to the best of our knowledge, 
these three opinions”' about the end of all things and the 
supreme blessedness. Each of our readers must judge for him- 
self, with all care and diligence, whether one of them may 
be approved and adopted. We have said that either we must 
suppose it possible to lead a bodiless existence, after “all things 
have been subjected to Christ” and through Christ to God the 
Father, when God shall be “all and in all” (cf. 1 Cor 15:27, 
28); or that when the universe has been subjected to Christ 
and through Christ to God, with whom it becomes “one 
spirit” (1 Cor 6:17) in view of the fact that rational beings 


are spirits, then also the bodily substance itself, being united / 
to the best and purest spirits, will be changed, in proportion/ 


to the quality or merits of those who wear it, into an ether 
condition, according to the apostle’s saying, “and we shall be 
changed” (1 Cor 15:52), and will shine with light; or else that 
when the fashion of those things which are seen passes away 
(cf. 1 Cor 7:31; 2 Cor 4:18) and all their corruptible nature 
has been banished and purified, and the entire condition of 
the world we know, in which the spheres of the planets are 
said to be, is left behind and superseded, there exists above 
that sphere which is called “fixed” an abiding place for the 
pious and blessed, in as it were a “good land” and a “land of 
the living,” which the “meek” and gentle will receive for an 
inheritance. To this land or earth belongs that heaven which, 
with its more magnificent circuit, surrounds and confines it, 
and this is the true heaven and the first to be so called. 

In this heaven and earth the end and perfection of all 
things may find a safe and most sure abode. There, for 


Book II, Chapter III 115 


instance, those who have for their offences endured the sharp 
reproof of punishments by way of purgation and have ful- 
filled and discharged every obligation may be found worthy 
of a dwelling-place in the earth; while those who have been 
obedient to the word of God and have already here by their 
submission shown themselves receptive of his wisdom may be 
said to gain the kingdom of that heaven or heavens. Thus a 2) 
worthier fulfillment may be found for the saying, “Blessed are 
the meek, for they shall inherit the earth,” and “Blessed are the“ 
poor in spirit, for they shall inherit the kingdom of heaven” 
(cf. Mt 5:5, 3), and for what was said in the psalm, “He shall ’ 
exalt thee, that thou shalt inherit the earth” (Ps 37:34). For we 
speak of descending to this earth, but of being “exalted” to that 


one, which is on high. In this way, therefore, there seems to 


be opened a road for the progress of the saints from that earth °° 


to those heavens, so that they would appear not so much to 
remain permanently in that earth as to dwell there in the hope 
of passing on, when they have made the requisite progress, to 
the inheritance of the “kingdom of heaven.” 


of 
cre frerece f/ 


Chapter IV 


| THAT THE Gop OF THE Law 
| AND THE PROPHETS, AND THE 
FATHER OF OuR LorRD JEsusS 


CuristT, Is ONE . 
| Ms 6/497 


; 

1. Now that we have, to the best of our ability, discussed these 
matters briefly in order, it follows from the plan which we 
adopted at the beginning that we proceed to refute those who tho 
think that the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is a different b7 
God from him who gave Moses the sayings of the law and 
sent the prophets, and who is the God of the fathers Abraham, 

Isaac and Jacob.' For it is of prime necessity that we should be 
firmly grounded in this article of our faith. We will consider, 
then, that statement which occurs frequently in the gospels 
and is attached to various acts of our Lord and Savior: “That 
it might be fulfilled which was spoken through ‘this or that’ 
| prophet” (cf. Mt 2:15; 4:14; 8:17) where it is evident that 
| these are prophets of that God who made the world. From 

this follows the conclusion that he who sent the prophets 

himself foretold what was to be foretold of Christ, and there 

is no doubt that it was the Father of Christ, and not some 
different being, who foretold these things. Further, the fact 

| that illustrations are frequently drawn from the Old Testament 


117 


118 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


by the Savior and his apostles can only indicate that they both 
attach authority to the ancient writers. And further, the fact 
that when urging his disciples to the exercise of kindness, the 
Savior says, “Be ye perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect, 
who bids his sun rise on the good and on the evil, and sends 
rain on the just and on the unjust,” (Mt 5:48, 45) suggests 
even to a man of the smallest intelligence this most obvious 
meaning, that he is putting before his disciples as a pattern 
for imitation no other God than the maker of heaven and the 
giver of the rain. 

Again, when he says that those who pray must say, “Our 
Father, who art in heaven” (Mt 6:9), what does he appear to 
be indicating, if not that God must be sought for in the better 
parts of the world, that is, of his own creation? When, too, 
in laying down those most admirable rules about oaths he 
says that we are not to swear, “neither by heaven, because it is 
God’s throne, nor by the earth, because it is the footstool of 
his feet” (cf. Mt 5:34, 35), does he not appear to be in most 
open agreement with the words of the prophet, “Heaven is 
my throne, and the earth is the footstool of my feet” (Is 66:1) 
Further, when he cast out of the temple those who were sell- 
ing “oxen and sheep and doves” and overturned the “tables of 
the moneychangers” and said, “Take these things hence; and 
make not my Father's house a house of merchandise” (cf. Jn 
2:14-16), he was undoubtedly calling that God his Father, 
to whose name Solomon had built the magnificent temple. 

Again, the saying, “Have ye not read what was said by God 
to Moses; I am the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and 
the God of Jacob; he is not the God of the dead, but of the 
living” (Mt 22:31, 32), teaches us most clearly that he called 
the God of the patriarchs, because they were holy and living 
men, “the God of the living,” the same God indeed who had 
said in the prophets, “I am God, and there is no God beside 


Book II, Chapter IV 119 


me” (Is 46:9). For if the Savior, knowing that he who is written 
of in the law is the God of Abraham, and that it is the same 
God who says, “I am God, and there is no God beside me,” 
confesses that this very God who, as the heretics suppose,” is 
ignorant that there is another God above him, is the Father, 
he is absurdly declaring that being to be the Father who is 
ignorant of the existence of a higher God. If, however, God 
is not ignorant, but is deceiving us when he says, “There is 
no God beside me,” it is a greater absurdity still, to think that 
the Savior should confess that his Father was a liar. From all 
these considerations the mind is led to this conclusion, that 
the Savior knows no other Father except God the founder and 
creator of all things. 

2. It would be a long business if we were to gather out 
of every passage in the gospels the proofs by which we are 
taught that the God of the law and the gospels is one and 
the same. Let us, however, touch briefly on the Acts of the 
Apostles, where Stephen and the apostles direct their prayers 
to that God “who made heaven and earth” and who “spoke 
by the mouth of his holy prophets,” calling him “the God of 
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,” the God who led his people out 
of the land of Egypt (cf. Acts 4:24, 25; 3:13; 5:30; 7:2, 32, 
34). These expressions undoubtedly direct our minds to faith 
in the Creator and implant an affection for him in those who 
have piously and faithfully accepted this truth about him; in 
accordance with the words of the Savior himself who, when 
he was asked what was “the greatest commandment in the 
law,” answered, “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all 
thy heart and with all thy soul and with all thy mind.” And a 
second is like unto it: “Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thy- 
self”; to which he added, “On these two commandments hang 
all the law and the prophets” (Mk 12:28, 30, 31; Mt 22:36, 
37, 39, 40). How is it, I ask, that he commends to the man 


120 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


whom he was instructing and leading on to discipleship this 
commandment above all others, as a means undoubtedly of 
kindling affection for the God of the old law, since both com- 
mandments had been previously laid down by the law in those 
very words? 

Nevertheless, let it be granted in spite of all these most 
evident proofs that it is about some other and unknown God 
that the Savior says, “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with 
all thy heart,” and the rest. Now if the law and the prophets 
come, as they say,’ from the Creator, that is, from another 
_ God than him whom they call good, how can it be logical 
to add as he does, “On these two commandments hang the 
law and the prophets.” For how can that which is strange and 
foreign to God depend upon him? And when Paul says, “I give 
thanks to my God, whom I serve from my forefathers with a 
pure conscience” (2 Tm 1:3), he shows with perfect clearness 
that in coming to Christ he did not come to any new God. 
For what other “forefathers” of Paul can we think of except 
those of whom he says, “Are they Hebrews? So am I. Are they 
Israelites? So am I” (2 Cor 11:22). 

Further, does not the introduction to his Epistle to the 
Romans show precisely, to all who know how to understand 
Paul's letters, the very same thing, namely, what God Paul is 
preaching? For he says, “Paul a servant of Jesus Christ, called 
to be an apostle, separated unto the gospel of God, which he 
promised before by his prophets in the holy scriptures con- 
cerning his Son, who was born of the seed of David according 
to the flesh, but foreordained to be the Son of God with power, 
according to the spirit of sanctification and the resurrection 
from the dead of Jesus Christ our Lord” (Rom 1:1—4), and 
the rest. There is also the passage which says, “Thou shalt not 
muzzle the mouth of the ox when he treadeth out the corn. 
Is it for the oxen that God careth? Or saith he it altogether 


Book I, Chapter IV 121 


for our sake? Yea, for our sake it was written, because he that 
plougheth ought to plough in hope, and he that thresheth to 
thresh in hope of partaking” (1 Cor 9:9-10). Here he shows 
clearly that God who gave the law says the words “Thou shalt 
not muzzle the mouth of the ox when he treadeth out the 
corn” for our sake, that is, for the sake of the apostles, and that 
his care was not for the oxen but for the apostles, who were 
preaching the gospel of Christ. In other passages, too, Paul 
himself appropriates a promise of the law, speaking as follows: 
“Honor thy father and mother, which is the first command- 
ment with promise, that it may be well with thee, and thou 
mayest live long in the land, the good land, which the Lord 
thy God will give thee” (Eph 6:2, 3; Ex 20:12). In these words 
Paul undoubtedly declares that the law, and the God of the 


law, and his promises, are pleasing to him. 


3. But since the stipporters of this heresy’are sometimes 


wont to beguile the hearts of very simple people by certain 
fallacious sophistries, I think it not unreasonable to bring for- 
ward the points raised in their arguments and to refute their 
deceit and falsehoods. They say that it is written, “No man 
hath seen God at any time” (Jn 1:18); yet the God whom 
Moses proclaims was seen by Moses himself and before that 
by his fathers, whereas the God who is announced by the Sav- 
ior has been seen by no one at all. Let us then ask them-this 
question, whether the Being, whom they profess to be God 


and who they say is different from God the Creator, is visible — 7 


or invisible. If they should say that he is visible, they will not will not 
only be proved to be in opposition to that passage of scripture 
which says of the Savior that he is “the image of the invisible 
God, the firstborn of all creation” (Col 1:15), but besides 
this, they will run into the absurdity of saying that God has a 
body.# For in no other way can anything be seen except by its 
shape and size and color, which are properties of bodies. And 


TDS 


122 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


if God is declared to be a body, then, since every body is made 
of matter, we shall find that God is made of matter too; and 
if so, then, since matter is undoubtedly corruptible, God will 
according to them be corruptible. Again, we will ask them this 
question also. Is matter made or uncreated, that is, not made? 
If they should say that it is unmade, that is, uncreated, we shall 
inquire whether one part of matter is God, and another part 
the world. But if they should answer that matter is made, it 
will follow undoubtedly that they confess that he whom they 


call God is made, which certainly neither their reason nor 


ours will admit.° But they will say, “God is invisible.” Now | 


what are you to do? If you say that he is invisible ave na’ 
of this God the Father o St is said to be seen; for Christ 
says, “He who hath seen the Son hath seen the Father also” 
(Jn 14:9). This certainly involves you in serious difficulties, 
whereas we interpret it more correctly as referring not to sight 
but to understanding. For he who has understood the Son 
has understood the Father also. It is in this manner then that 
, We must suppose Moses to have seen God, not by looking at 
“him with eyes of flesh, but by understanding him with the 
vision of the heart and the perception of the mind, and even 
this in part only. For it is well-known that he, that is, the one 
who gave the oracles to Moses, says, “Thou shalt not see my 
face, but my back” (Ex 33:23). Certainly these statements 
must be understood by the aid of that symbolism which is 
appropriate to the understanding of divine sayings, and those 
old wives’ fables, which ignorant people invent on the subject 
of the front and back parts of God, must be utterly rejected 
and despised. Nor indeed must anyone suppose that we have 
entertained some impious thought in saying that the Father is 
™ not visible even to the Savior, but he must consider the exact 
meaning of the terms we use in controverting the heretics. For 
Or 


Book II, Chapter IV 123 


we have said that it is one thing to see and be seen, another to 
perceive and be perceived or to ‘know and be known. To see 
and be seen is a property of bodies, which it would certainly 
not be right to apply either to the Father or to the Son or to 


the Holy Spirit in their relations one with another. For the 
‘Trinity by its nature transcends the limits of vision, although it 


grants to those who are in bodies, that is, to all other creatures, 
the property of being seen one by another. But incorporeal, 
and above all intellectual nature is capable of nothing else but 
to know and be known, as the Savior himself declares when he 
says, “No one knoweth the Son save the Father, neither doth 
any know the Father save the Son, and he to whom the Son 
willeth to reveal him” (Jn 14:9). It is clear, then, that he did 
not say, “No one seeth the Father save the Son,” but “No one 
knoweth the Father save the Son.” 

4. If, however, they think that in those statements which 
are made in the Old Testament to the effect that God is angry 
or repents, or is subject to any other human emotion, they are 
provided with material for refuting us with the assertion that 
God must be believed to be entirely without passion and des- 
titute of all these emotions, we must show them that similar 
statements are to be found even in the parables of the gospel, 
as when it says that God “planted a vine” and “let it out to 
husbandmen,” which husbandmen killed the servants who 
were sent to them, and when at last the Son was sent they put 
him to death too, wherefore God is said to have become angry 
and to have taken away the vineyard from them and to have 
delivered the wicked husbandmen to destruction and given the 
vineyard to others who would “render him the fruits in their 
season” (cf. Mt 21:33-41). Again, in the case of those citizens 
who, when the father of the household set out to “receive for 
himself a kingdom,” “sent messengers after him saying, We 
will not have this man to reign over us,” on the father’s return 


124 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


after having obtained his kingdom he was angry, and com- 
manded them to be slain before him and their city to be burnt 
by fire (cf. Lk 19:12-27). For ourselves, however, whenever 
we read of the anger of God, whether in the Old or the New 
Testament, we do not take such statements literally) but look 
for the spiritual meaning in them, endeavoring to understand 
them in a way that is worthy of God. But we dealt with these 
points, according to our poor ability, when expounding that 
verse of the second Psalm in which it says, “Then shall he speak 
unto them in his wrath, and trouble them in his fury,” where 
we showed, as best we could, in what way this ought to be 
understood (cf. Ps 2: 5). y j 


v] 


Chapter V 


THE JUST AND THE GOOD 


ews 


1. But some are influenced by the fact that the leaders of this 


; heresy appear to have made for themselves a distinction, say- 


ing ing that the just is one thing and the good another, and have 
applied this distinction even to the divine nature, asserting 
that the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is a good God but 
not just, whereas the God of the law and prophets is just but 
not good.’ I think it necessary, sherelore to answer this point 
as briefly as I can. 

». They reckon, then, that goodness is that sort of disposition 
by which. one is led to do good to all, even when the recipient 
of the benefit is unworthy and does not deserve our kindness. 
But, as it appears to me, they have not rightly applied this 
definition, for they think that no good is done to him who 
is visited with any sorrow or hardship. Justice, however, they 
suppose to be the sort of disposition which renders to every 
man according to his deserts. Yet here again they do not rightly 
interpret the meaning of their own definition. For they think 


that justice is to do evil to the evil and good to the good; that 


is, according to their meaning, that one who is just will not 
show himself well disposed to the evil, but will behave towards 
them with a kind of hatred;? and they collect all the stories 
they can find in the Old Testament to support this view, such 


125 


Py 


126 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


for example, as the story of the flood and the punishment of 
those who are said to have been drowned in it (cf. Gn 7:4, 
21-23), or how Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed by a 
devastating rain of fire and brimstone (cf. Gn 19:24, 25), or 
how all the children of Israel died in the desert on account of 
their sins, so that not one of those who had set out from Egypt 
was found to enter the promised land except Joshua and Caleb 
(cf. Nm 14:11—24, 30). From the New Testament, however, 
they gather those sayings of pity and gentleness which the 
Savior uttered when teaching his disciples and in which he is 
found to declare that “none is good save one, God the Father” 
(cf. Mk 10:18; Lk 18:19). Relying on this they have dared to 
call the Father of our Savior Jesus Christ the good God, but 
to say that the God of the world is a different being, whom 
they are pleased to term just, but not good. 

2. Now first of all we must, I think, demand of these 
people an answer to the following question. How, according 
to their own definition, can they show the Creator to be just 
in punishing according to their deserts those who perished at 
the time of the flood, or the men of Sodom, or those who set 
out from Egypt, when we sometimes see far more wicked and 
heinous crimes committed than those for which the above 
mentioned people were destroyed, but do not yet see every 
sinner paying the just penalty of his deeds? Will they say that 
he who once was just has now become good? Or will they 
prefer to adopt this opinion, that he is just now, but patiently 
bears with man’s offences, whereas then he was not even just, 
when he exterminated innocent children and babes at the 
breast along with monstrous and impious giants? (Gn 6:1-7, 
17; 7:21 ff)? 

But they believe as they do because they are ignorant how 


, to interpret any passage except literally. If this is not so, let 


them show how it is just, in a literal sense, for the sins of the 


Book II, Chapter V 127 


parents to be visited on the heads of the children, and on 
the children’s children after them, to the third and fourth 
generation? (cf. Ex 20:5, 34:7; Dt 5:9). We, however, do not 
understand such sayings in a literal sense, but as Ezekiel taught 
when he uttered his well-known “proverb” (cf. Ez 18:2, 3), we 
inquire what is the inner meaning of the proverb. Further, they 
ought also to explain this, how he can be just and one who | 
“rewards every man according to his deserts” (Ps 62:12), when 
he punishes earthly-minded men and the devil, though they 
have committed nothing deserving of punishment; for if, as 
these men say, they were beings of an evil and ruined nature, 
they could not do anything good. And as for their calling him 
a judge, he would seem to be a judge not so much of deeds 
as of natures, if it be a fact that an evil nature cannot do good 
nor a good nature evil. 

Then in the next place, if he whom they call good is good 
to all, undoubtedly he is good even to those who are destined 
to perish. Why then does he not save them? If he is unwilling, 
then he will not be good; if he is willing but cannot, he will 
not be almighty. On the other hand let them hear from the 
gospels how the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ “prepares fire 
for the devil and his angels” (Mt 25:41). How can a work like 
that, so punitive and sorrowful, be associated with the good 
God according to their interpretation? Further, the Savior 
himself, the Son of the good God, openly declares that “if 
signs and wonders had been done in Tyre and Sidon they 
would have repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes” 
(Mt 11:21). Yet when he came quite near to those very towns 
and had entered into their “borders” (cf. Mt 15:22), why, I ask, 
did he decline to enter their actual territories and show their 
people an abundance of “signs and wonders,” if it had been 
certain that as a result of such actions they would “repent in 
sackcloth and ashes”? As he certainly does not do this, without 


KK 


128 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


doubt he is abandoning to destruction men whom his very 
remark in the gospels shows not to have been of an evil and 
ruined nature; for he points out that they could have repented. 

Moreover, in one of the gospel parables, when “the king 
enters in to see the guests” who had been invited, he sees “one 
not wearing a wedding garment” and says to him, “Friend, 
how earnest thou in hither not having on a wedding garment?” 
Then he says to the servants, “Bind him hand and foot and 
cast him forth into the outer darkness; there shall be weeping 
and gnashing of teeth” (cf. Mt 22:11—13). Let them tell us; 
who is this “king” who entered in to see the guests, and find- 
ing one in mean garments commands him to be bound by 
his servants and thrust into the outer darkness? Is it indeed he 
whom they call “just”? If so, why had he ordered “good and 
bad” to be invited, and not directed his servants to inquire 
‘into their merits? This conduct certainly indicates the dis- 
position not, as they say, of one who is merely just and who 
“rewards according to merit” (cf. Ps 62:12), but of one who 
shows impartial kindness to all. If, however, it is necessary to 
understand this passage as referring to the good God, that is, 
either to Christ or to the Father of Christ, what more is there 
to object to even in the just God? Nay, what action is there 
which they can charge against the God of the law comparable 
to this, that he commanded the man, who had been invited 
by the servants sent by himself to call both good and bad, to 
be bound hand and foot and flung into the outer darkness, 
because of the mean garments he was wearing? 

3. These arguments, which we have drawn from the 
authority of the scriptures, ought to suffice for the refutation 
of those points which the heretics are accustomed to urge. It 
will not seem unfitting, however, if we discuss the matter with 
them in a few words from the standpoint of logical reasoning 
also. Let us ask them, therefore, whether they know what 


Book II, Chapter V 129 


theory of virtue and wickedness is held by men, and whether 
it seems logical to speak of virtues in God, or, as they think, 
in these two gods. Let them also answer this question: if they 
think that goodness is one virtue, which I take it they will 
undoubtedly admit, what do they say about justice? They will 
certainly never be so foolish, I think, as to deny that justice is 
a virtue. Therefore, if a virtue is something good, and justice 
is a virtue, undoubtedly justice is goodness. If, however, they 
should say that justice is not something good, the alternative 
is either something bad, or something indifferent. Now I con- 
sider it would be stupid to answer men who said that justice 
was something bad; I should appear to be answering either 
senseless arguments or men of unsound mind. For how could 
that be something bad, which, as even our opponents will 
admit, can render good to those who are good? But if they 
should say it is a thing indifferent, it follows that, since justice 
is indifferent, then temperance and prudence and the rest of 
the virtues will also be accounted indifferent. What then shall 
we reply to Paul when he says, “If there be any virtue, if there 
be any praise, think on these things, which ye both learned 
and received and heard and saw in me” (Phil 4:8, 9). 

Let them, therefore, search the divine scriptures and tell 
us what the various virtues are, and not hide behind this 
statement of theirs that the God who “renders to each man 
according to his desert” renders ill to the evil out of hatred 
towards them; when the truth is that those who have sinned 
need severer remedies for their cure, and it is for this reason 
that he brings upon them the afflictions which, though aim- 
ing at improvement, seem at the moment to convey a sense 
of pain. They do not read what is written about the hope of 
those who perished in the flood, of which hope Peter in his 
first epistle speaks as follows: “Because Christ was put to death 
in the flesh, but quickened in the spirit; in which he went and 


130 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


preached to the spirits who were held in prison, who were 
aforetime disbelieving, when the long-suffering of God waited 
in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein 
few, that is eight souls, were saved by water, as also by a like 
figure baptism now saves you” (1 Pr 3:18—21). 

And in regard to Sodom and Gomorrah, let them tell 
us whether they believe the words of the prophets to come 


~ from God the Creator, from him, that is, who is related to 


have “rained upon them a shower of fire and brimstone” (Gn 
19:24). What does the prophet Ezekiel say of them? “Sodom 
shall be restored to her former estate” (Ez 16:55). And when 
God afflicts those who deserve punishment, how else is it 
except for their good? It is he who says to the Chaldaeans: 
“Thou hast coals of fire; sit upon them; They shall be a help 
to thee” (Is 47:14, 15 [LXX]). Further, let them hear what 
is related in the seventy-seventh psalm, which is ascribed to 
Asaph, about those who fell in the desert; it says, “When he 
slew them, then they sought him” (Ps 78:34). It does not say 
that some sought him after others had been killed, but that 
those who were slain perished in such a manner that when 
put to death they sought God. From all these illustrations it 
is plain that the just and good God of the law and the gospels 
punishes in kindness, since neither goodness without justice 
nor justice without goodness can describe the dignity of the 
divine nature. 

Let us add also the following remarks, which are neces- 
sitated by their subtle arguments. If the just is different from 
the good, then since evil is the opposite of good and unjust 
of just, undoubtedly the unjust will be different from the evil; 
and as the just man according to you is not good, so neither 
will the unjust man be evil; and again, as the good man is not 
just, so also the evil man will not be unjust. And how can it 


Book II, Chapter V 131 


be anything but absurd that the good God should have an 
opponent who is evil, whereas the just God, whom they say is 
inferior to the good one, has no opponent? For Satan is called 
evil, but there is no other corresponding to him who is called 
unjust. What then shall we do? Let us retrace the steps of our 
argument to the point from which we started. They will not be 
able to say that the evil man is not unjust and the unjust man 
not evil? If, however, in these opposites injustice is inseparably 
associated with evil and evil with injustice, then undoubtedly 
the good man will be inseparably associated with the just and 
the just with the good; so that as we call evil and injustice one 
and the same wickedness, we should hold goodness and justice 
to be one and the same virtue. 

4. But once again they recall us to the words of scripture, 
quoting that famous question of theirs. They say: it is written 
that “a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can 
an evil tree bring forth good fruit; for a tree is known by its 
fruit."* What do you make of this, they say? What sort of a 
tree the law is, is shown by its fruits, that is, by the words of 
its precepts. For if the law is found to be good, undoubtedly 
we shall believe that he who gave it is a good God; if, however, 
it is just rather than good, we shall think of God as a just 
lawgiver. But Paul the apostle says in no roundabout terms, 
“The law then is good, and the commandment holy and just 
and good” (Rom 7:12). It is plain from this that Paul had not 
learned the doctrines of those who separate the just from the 
good, but had been instructed by that God and illuminated 
by the spirit of that God who is at the same time both “holy 
and good and just,” and that it was through his spirit that 
he spoke when he said that “the commandment of the law 
is holy and just and good.” And in order to show the more 
clearly that goodness was in the commandment to a greater 
degree than justice and holiness, in repeating the passage he 


132 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


used goodness alone instead of the three words, when he says, 
“Is then that which is good death to me? God forbid” (Rom 
7:13). He knew, of course, that goodness is the general term 
for the virtues, while justice and holiness are particular kinds 
of goodness; and so, where in his former words he had men- 
tioned the general together with the particular, in repeating 
the passage he fell back on the general term alone. 

Further, in the words that follow Paul says, “Sin worked 
death in me through that which is good” (Rom 7:13). Here 
he includes in the general term that which before he had 
described by means of the particular terms. It is in this way 
also that we must understand the saying, “the good man out 
of the good treasure of his heart brings forth good, and the 
evil man out of his evil treasure brings forth evil” (Lk 6:45); 
for here, too, good and evil are taken in the general sense, the 
term “good man” undoubtedly indicating both justice and 
temperance, prudence and piety and everything which can be 
spoken of or understood as good. Similarly also does it speak 
of the “evil man,” who undoubtedly would be unjust and 
impure and everything else that in different ways disfigures 
the “evil man.” For just as nobody thinks anyone to be an evil 
man, nor can he be evil, apart from these works of wickedness, 
so it is certain that nobody will be thought to be good apart 
from the opposite virtues. ~~ 

There still remains to them the passage in the gospel, 
which they think is as it were specially given to them for a 


Book II, Chapter V 133 


good. What is it that is said in the Psalms, “How good is God 
to Israel, to the upright in heart!” (Ps 73:1) and, “Let Israel 
now say that he is good, that his mercy endureth forever” (Ps 
118:2). And in the Lamentations of Jeremiah it is written, 
“The Lord is good to those who wait for him, to the soul that 
seeketh him” (Lam 3:25). As then God is frequently called 
good in the Old Testament, so too the Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ is called just in the gospels. Indeed, in the gos- 
pel according to John our Lord himself when praying to the 
Father says, “O just Father, the world hath not known thee” 
(Jn 17:25). And lest they should say that it was the creator of 
the world whom our Lord, because he had taken human flesh, 
called Father, and that it was he whom he termed just, they are 
prevented by the sentence which immediately follows; for he 
says, “The world hath not known thee.” For according to them 
it is only the good God whom the world does not know; it 
most certainly recognizes its founder, as the Lord himself says, 
“The world loves what is its own” (Jn 15:19). Clearly, then, 
he whom they think to be the good God is said in the gospels 
to be just. And when time permits we shall be able to collect 
still more passages where in the New Testament the Father 
of our Lord Jesus Christ is called just, and where in the Old 
Testament the creator of heaven and earth is called good, so 
that the heretics, convinced by the multitude of proofs, may 
at length perchance blush for shame. 


il 
| ~ shield, where the Lord said, “None is good save one, God 
bers? the Father” (cf Mk 10:18; Lk 18:18).> This, they say, is the 
| 7 proper description of the Father of Christ, who is a different 
being from God the creator of all things, to which creator 
Christ gave no title indicating goodness. Let us see, therefore, 
) whether in the Old Testament the God of the prophets and 
the creator of the world and the lawgiver is not spoken of as ‘| 


I a ata tse 
' : p22, 4 = ' 


412 
MUS P { 
r | Ap j 
| fii | | 3-4 p. sec 
| | Op. see i 
Chapter VI i haber, maa 


st Jf 
j Le a | 
J 
| 


THE INC ear OF CHRI 
\ : Cara / 


AZ 


1. Now that these points nate been discussed, it is time to 
| “resume our inquiry into the incarnation of our Lord and Say- 0 Peat 
ior, how he became man and dwelt among men. We have 
. / considered, to the best of our small ability, the divine nature, \).).,. 
} from a contemplation of his own works rather than from our 
feelings, and while beholding his visible creatures we have 
also by faith contemplated those that are invisible. For human 
frailty can neither see everything wi h the eyes nc nor compre- 
hend everything by Feas0D, Since men are- beings weaker 
. and frailer than all a rational creatures, those that dwell in 
. “heaven or above the heavens surpassing us in excellence, Our 
- = next task is to inquire about him who stands midway between 9 « 
these creatures and God, that is, the Mediator (cf. 1 Tm 
. 2:5), whom the apostle Paul declares to be the “firstborn of all 
Tl creation” (Col 1:15). And when we see what is related in the_ 
. holy scriptures of his majesty, and perceive that he is called the ~~ 2 £ 
“image of the invisible God” and the “firstborn of all creation,” 
and that “in hima were created all things visible and invisible, 
i whether thrones or dominions or r principalities or powers, all 
were created thr him andin in n him, and he is before all, and 
‘in hinvall things consist” Col 1:15-17), who is the “head 
of all,” having as hi only God the Father, as it is written, 


' oS 5, S@e Comm Mathew 
Cee P: ES = a 
S444 oeraan frac, 242 


74 p. @ Y 47.42 


% 
136 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


“the head of Christ is God” (cf. 1 Cor 11:3); and when we 
see too that it is written, “No man knoweth the Father save 
the Son, nor doth any know the Son save the Father” (Mt 
11:27)—for who can know what “wisdom” is, except him 
who brought it into being; or who knows for certain what 
“truth” is, except the Father of truth; who indeed could trace 
out the universal nature of his “Word” and of that God who is 
from God except God alone “with whom the Word was” (cf. 
Jn 1:1)?—we ought to hold it as certain that none else save 
the Father alone knows this Word (or reason, if he should be 
so called), this wisdom, this truth, of whom it is written, “I 
suppose that not even the world itself could contain the books 
which should be written” (Jn 21:25), about the glory, that is, 
and about the majesty of the Son of God: For it is impossible 
to put into writing all that belongs to the Savior's\glory. 
When, therefore, we consider these great and marvelous 
truths about the nature of the’ Son of God; we are lost in the 
deepest amazement that such a being, towering high above all, 
Should ave "emptied himself” (Phil 2:7) of his majestic con- 
dition and become man and dwelt among men, a fact which 
is evidenced by the “grace poured upon his lips” (Ps 45:3) and 
by the witness which the heavenly Father bore him (cf. Mt 
3:17; Lk 3:22) and confirmed by the signs and wonders and 
mighty deeds which he did. And before that personal appear- 


ance which he manifested in the body, he sent the prophets as , 


heralds and messengers of his coming; while after his ascension 
) into the heavens he caused the holy apostles, unlearned and 
~ ignorant men from the ranks of tax-gatherers or fishermen but 
filled with his divine power, to travel throughout the world, 
in order to gather together out of every nation and all races a 
people composed of devout believers in him. 

2. But of all the marvelous and splendid things about 
him there is one that utterly transcends the limits of human 


_ Same person, in such a way 


> t nothing unworthy or unfitting 
may be thought to reside in that divine and ineffable existence, 
nor on the other hand may the events of his life be suppose 


Book II, Chapter VI | 137° 


wonder and is beyond the capacity of our weak mortal intel- 
ligence to think of or understand, namely, how this mighty 
power of the divine majesty, the very word of the Father, and 
the very wisdom of God, in which were created “all things vis- 
ible and invisible” (Col 1:16), can be believed to haye existed 
within the compass of that m ag who appeared in Judaea; yes, 
and how the wisdom of God | 
womb and been born as a lit 
those of crying children; Crisbe, how it was that he was 
troubled, as we are told, in the hour of death, as he himself 
confesses when he says, i soul is sorrowful even unto death” 


a entered into a woman's 


e child and uttered noises like 


(Mt 26:38; Mk 14:34); and how at the last he was led to that 
death which is consider¢d by men to be the most shameful of 
all,—even though on the third day he rose again. 

When, therefore/ we see in him some things so human 
that they appear in no way to differ from the common frailty 
of mortals, and some things so divine that they are appropriate 


> 

v* Prove 
Orig 29 
p 90 


to nothing else but the primal and ineffable nature of deity, Nel to 


the human i se with its narrow limits is baffled 
and struck with amazement at so mighty a wonder knows” 
not which way to turn, what to hold to, or whither to betake 


itself. If it thinks of God, it sees a man; if it thinks of a fan, / 


it beholds one returning from the dead with spoils after van/ 
quishing the kingdom of death. For this reason we must pur- 
sue our contemplation with all fear and reverence, as we seek 


to be the illusions caused by deceptive fantasies.’ But to utter 
these things in human ears and to explain them by words far 
exceeds the powers we possess either in our moral worth or in 
mind and speech. I think indeed that it transcends - capacity 


N40) @ 


? FA 


to prove how the reality of each nature exists infone)and the. , 


, Sbe 


Ste 2 4 


2F 


138 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


even of the holy apostles; nay more, perhaps the explanation 


of this mystery lies beyond the reach of the whole creation of 
heavenly beings. It is then in no spirit of rashness, but solely 


in response to the demands of our inquiry at this stage, that 
» we Shall state\in the fewest possible words that we may term 
athe content of our ir faith’ concerning him rather than anything 


/ which needs to be proved by arguments of human reason, 


bringing before you our suppositions rather than any clear 
affirmations. / 

3. The only-begotten Son of God, therefore, through 
whom, as the course of our discussion in the previous chapters 
has shown, “all things visible and invisible were made” (Col 
1:16), according to the teaching of scripture both made all 
things and “ISves what he made” (cf. Wis 11:24). For since he 
is the invisible * image” of the “invisible God” (Col 1:15), he 
granted invisibly to all rational creatures whatsoever a partic- 
ipation in himself, in such a way that each obtained a degree 
of participation proportionate to the loving affection with 
which he had clung to him. But whereas, by reason of the 
faculty of free will, variety and diversity had taken hold of 
individual souls, so that one was attached to its author with 
a warmer and another with a feebler and weaker love, that 
soul of which Jesus said, “No man taketh from me my soul” 
(Jn 10:18),? clinging to God from the beginning of the cre- 
ation and éver afterin a union inseparable and indissoluble, 
as being the soul of the wisdom and word of God and of the 
truth and the true light, and receiving him wholly, and itself 
entering into his light and splendor, was made with him in a 
pre-eminent degree one spirit, just as the apostle promises to 
them whose duty it is to imitate Jesus, that “he who is joined 
to the Lord is one spirit” (1 Cor 6:17). This soul soul; then, act- 
ing as a medium between ted and the flesh flesh (for i it was not 
possible for the nature of God to mingle with a body apart 


8 go 


wo 
+s 


f\) 14o 


x 


Book I], Chapter VI 139 


from some medium), there is born, as we said, the God-man, 
the medium being that existence to whose nature it was not 
contrary to assume a body. Yet neither, on the other hand, was 
it contrary to nature for that soul, being as it was a rational 
existence, to receive God, into whom, as we said above, it had 
already completely entered by entering into the word and 
., wisdom and truth. 
Tris therefore right that thi 
wholly in the Son of God, 


Sul either because it was 
or because it received the Son of 


} have died, in vir that nature. 
d certainly admit of death, while he of whom it 
is proclaimed that “he shall come in the glory of God the 
Father with the holy angels”-is.called the Son of man (cf. Mt 

16:27; Mk 8:38; Lk 9:26).° And for this reason, throughout 
the whole of scripture, while the divine nature is spoken of in 
human terms the human nature is in its turn adorned with 
marks that belong to the divine prerogative. For to this more 
than to anything else can the passage of Scripture be applied, 
“They Shall both be in one flesh, and they are no longer two, 
but one flesh” (cf. Mt 19:5, 6; Gn 2:24). For the Word of 
God is to be thought of as being more “in one flesh” with his 
soul than a man is with his wife. Moreover what could more 
appropriately be “one spirit” (cf. 1 Cor 6:17) with God than 
» this soul, which joined itself so firmly in love to God as to be 

worthy of being called “one spirit” with him? 

4, To* prove that it was the perfection of his love and 
the sincerity of his true affection which gained for him this 
inseparable unity with God, so that the taking up of his soul 


G 


ae 


tig ctm + Mie VA2etitwvi 
< yt > if v 
\ 


A) )39 
140 / ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 
Jesus / Chpist / 
was neither accidental nor the result of personal preference, 
but was/a privilegé conferred upon it as a reward for its vir- 
tues, listen to the prophet speaking to it thus; “Thou hast 
loved righteousness and hated iniquity; wherefore God hath 
anointed thee, thy God with the oil of gladness aboy 
fellows” (Ps 45: 7). 
As a reward for its love; therefore, it is anointed with the 
“oil of gladness,” that is the soul with the word of God is 


by $reneh Dpanc 


- fnatle Christ; >for to be anointed with the oil of gladness means 


nothing else but to be filled with the Holy Spirit. And when 
he says, “above thy fellows,” he indicates that the grace of the 
Spirit was not given to it as to the prophets, but that the essen- 
tial “fullness” of the Word of God himself was within it, as the 
apostle said, “Tn 1 him dwelletk im dwelleth all the fullness of the godhead 
bodily” (Col 2: 2:9). Finally, this is the reason why he not only 
said, “Thou hast loved righteousness,” but added, “and hated 
iniquity.” For to hate iniquity is the same thing which the 
scripture says of him: “He did no sin, neither was guile found 
in his mouth” (1 Pt 2:22); and again, “He was tempted in all 
points like as we are, yet without sin” (Heb 4:15). Further, 
the Lord himself says, “which of you convicteth me of sin?” 
(Jn 8:46). And again he says of himself, “Lo, the prince of this 
world cometh and findeth nothing in me” (Jn 14:30). All of 
which shows that no consciousness of sin’existed in him. And 
the prophet, in order the more clearly to point out this fact, 
that the consciousness of iniquity had never entered his mind, 
says, “Before the boy could know how to call for his-father or 
mother, he turned himself from iniquity” (Is 8:4, 7:16). 


5. But if the above argument, that there exists in Christ ~~ 


a rational soul, should seem to anyone to constitute a ea difi- 

culty, on the ground that in the conrse of our discussion we 
have often shown that souls are by their nature capable of 
good and evil,? we shall resolve th ateutey in the following 


y 
a 


} 
' 


wh Hadfhe 
Germ™ thaesl 190 ?- Ae. -pregre CA 
body sf Chri : 
I, Chapter VI | 141 


x 
A > 4 ren »e2u 


anner. It cannot be doubted that the nature of his Stiee was 
the same as that of all souls; otherwise i it could not be called 
a soul, if it were not truly one. But since the ability to choose 
/ good or evil is within the rates reach of all, this soul 


which belongs to Christ so chose to love righteousness as to 
cling to it unchangeably and inseparably i in accordance with 
the immensity of its love; thd result being that by firmness 


of purpose, immensity of affection and an inextinguishable 
warmth of love all susceptibi 
destroyed, and what formérly de ende upon the: will was by 
the influence of lon§ custom ch i 
must believe that there/did exist in 
nal soul, and yet not suppose that it 
or possibility of sin. 


pres 


hrist a human and ratio- 
any susceptibility to 


6&/ 


/absurd if we use an illustration, although on so high and dif- 
/ ~ ficult a subject there is but 4 small supply of suitable examples. 

However, if we may usé this one without offence, the metal 
_iron is susceptible ofboth cold and heat. Suppose then a lump 


“oF ir iron be placed fo or some time in a fire.\It receives the fire in * 


Afar truer to say of it, what indeed we often detect happening 


y burning can ever admit cold? aaa not; it is 


because we can discern nothing else in it except fire. Further, 


if anyone were to try to touch or handle it, he would feel the 
\ me of the fire, not of the iron. In this manner, then, that 
so 


G hich, like a piece of iron in the fire, was forever placed 


in\the word, forever i in the wisdom, forever i in God, i is God in 


ci te Pt teas, 


to change or alteration was < 


6. To explain th it wi 
explain the matter more a it will not appear | 


in furnaces, that it has been completely changed into fire, ° 


naghia 


all its acts and feelings and thoughts; a and therefore it cannot : 


sh) ott ne 


> 


41a 123 


t Aira f 


142 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


be called changeable or alterable, since by being ceaselessly 
kindled it came to possess unchangeability through its unity 
with the word God. And while, indeed,some warmth of the 
Word of God must be thought to have teached all the saints, 


» in this soul we must believe that the divine fire itself essentially 


rested, and that it is from this that some warmth has come 
to all others. 

The very fact, too, that it says, “God anointed thee, thy 
God with the oil of gladness above thy fellows” (Ps 45:7), 
shows that that soul is anointed with the “oil of gladness,” that 
is, with the word of God and with wisdom, in one way, and his 
“fellows,” it is, the holy prophets and apostles, in another. For 
the latter are said “to have run in the odor of his ointments” 
(cf. Sg 1:3 [Vulg.]), but that soul was the vase containing the 
ointment itself, of whose glowing effluence all the prophets 
and apostles became worthy partakers. As therefore the odor 
of the ointment is one thing and the substance of the ointment 
another, so Christ is one thing and his fellows another. And as 
the vessel which contains the substance of the ointment can 
by no means admit any foul smell, whereas it is possible for 
those who share in its odor, if they move a little farther away 


from its glowing effluence, 
them, so it was impossible for Christ, who is like the vase itself 
in which the substance of the ointment lay, to admit an odor 
of an opposite kind, whereas his fellows will be partakers and 
receivers of his odor in proportion to their nearness to the vase. 
7. I think, too, that the prophet Jeremiah understood what 
is the nature of the wisdom of God in him, which was also the 
nature he had assumed for the salvation of the’world, when 
he said: “The breath of our countenance is Christ the Lord, 
of whom we said that we shall live under his shadow among 
the nations” (Lam 4:20). For just as the shadow of our body is 
inseparable from the body and unswervingly undertakes and 


p ra fy wt A oF 


it any foul smell that meets 


Book II, Chapter VI ee ny 
performs the movemténts and gestures of the body, so I think 
the prophet wished to allude to the action and movement 
of Christ’s soul, which was inseparably attached to him and 


perform ed everything in accordance with his own movement / es 
and volition, and that it was this which he called the “shadow 


of Christ” the Lord, under which shadow we were to “live 


among the nations.” For the nations which imitate that soul | 


through faith and so reach salvation, live in the mystery of 
this assumption. Moreover when David says, “Be mindful of 
my reproach, O Lord, wherewith they have reproached me in 
the stead of thy Christ” (Ps 89:51, 52 [Vulg. 88:51, 52]), he 
appears to me to allude to the same thing. And what else does 
Paul mean when he says, “Our life is hid with Christ in God” 
(Col 3:3). Also in another place he says, “Do you ou seek a proof 
of him who speaks in me, that is, Christ?” (2 Cor 13: 3). Yet 
again, he says that Christ is “hid in God” (Eph 3:9). Unless 
the meaning of this expression be something like that which, 
as we said above, was indicated by the prophet in the phrase 
“the shadow of Christ,” it probably exceeds the comprehension 
of the human mind. 

_ We see moreover many other statements in the divine 


_ scriptures which bear upon the interpretation of the word 


“shadow”; such as that in the gospel according to Luke, where 
Gabriel says to Mary, “The Spirit of the Lord shall come upon 
thee and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee” (Lk 
1:35). The apostle also, speaking in regard to the law, says 
that they who hold to the circumcision of the flesh “serve a 
copy and shadow of the heavenly things” (Heb 8:5). And in 
another place it says, “Is not our life on the earth a shadow?” 
(cf. Jb 8:9). If then both the law which is on the earth is a 
“shadow,” and we are to live among the nations in the “shadow 
of Christ,” we must consider whether the truth of all these 


shadows will not be learned in that revelation when, no longer 


FF 


p- 


144 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


“through a mirror and in a riddle” but “face to face” (cf. 1 Cor 
13:12), all the saints shall be counted worthy to behold the 
glory of God and the causes and truth of things. And seeing 
that a pledge of this truth has already been received through 


_ the Holy Spirit (cf. 2 Cor 5:5) the apostle said, “Even if we <, 
~ have formerly known Christ after the flesh, yet henceforth we 
-¥ know him so no more” (2 Cor 5:16). 


In the meantime, these are the thoughts which occur to 
us at the moment in our discussion of such very difficult sub- 
jects as the incarnation and deity of Christ. If there be anyone 
who can discover something better and prove what he says by 
clearer statements out of the holy scriptures, let his opinion 
be accepted in preference to mine. 


A. 


Chapter VII 


THE HOoLy sna 


ALS 


Fonehnn 


1. After the first discussions which, a§ the subject demanded, 
we entered into at the beginning éoncerning the Father, the 
Son and the Holy Spirit, it seerped that we ought to go back 
again and prove that the same God was creator and founder 
of the world and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, shar is, that 
there is one and the same God of the law, the prophets and 
the gospels. Then ‘also in regard to Christ, who had previously 
been shown to be the word and wisdom of God, we had to 
demonstrate in the succeeding chapters how he became man. 
Our remaining task is to return as briefly as possible to the 
subject of the Holy Spirit. 

It is time, therefore, for us to discuss to the best of our 
ability a few points about the Holy Spirit, whom our Lord and 
Savior in the gospel according to John called the Paraclete (Jn 
14:16, etc.). Now just as it is the same God himself and the 

<j 
same Christ himself, so also it is theSame Holy Spirit himself 
who was i in the prophets and the apostles, that is, both in 


those who believed in God be! e the coming of Christ and 
in those who have taken re in God through Christ. We 
have heard of f heretics who ha to say that there are two 


Gods or two Christ, but wehave ever heard it maintained by by 
anyone that there are two’Holy Spirits.' For how could they 


aty 145 292 


“~~ 


146 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


affirm this from the scriptures, or what distinction could they 
make between one Holy Spirit and the other, even supposing 
it were possible to discover any definition or description of 
the Holy Spirit? For granting that Marcion or Valentinus can 
draw distinctions in regard to deity and describe the nature 
of the good as one thing and the nature of the just as another, 
what reasonings or devices will warrant their introducing dis- 
tinctions into the Holy Spirit? I think they can find nothing 
that points to any distinction whatsoever. 

2. Now we are of opinion that every rational creature 
receives without any difference a share in the Holy Spirit just 
as in the wisdom of God and the word of God.’ I see, however, 
that the special coming of the Holy Spirit to men is declared 
to have happened after Christ's ascension, into heaven rather 
than before his coming into the world. Before that time the 
gift of the Holy Spirit was bestowed on prophets only and on 
a few others among the people who happened to have proved 
worthy of it; but after the coming of the Savior it is written 
that “the saying was fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet 
Joel,” namely, that “it shall come to pass in the last days, that I 
will pour out my spirit upon all flesh and they shall prophesy” 
(Acts 2:16, 17; Jl 2:28); which indeed is similar to that other 
saying, “All nations shall serve him” (Ps 72:11). 

Through the grace of the Holy Spirit, then, along with 
many other results, this most splendid fact is revealed, that 
whereas the truths written in the prophets and the law of 
Moses were formerly understood by very few, namely by the 
prophets alone, and scarcely anywhere was there one out of 
the whole people who could get beyond the literal meaning 
and perceive something greater, that is, could detect a spiritual 
sense in the law and prophets, now there are innumerable mul- 


- titudes of believers who, although unable to explain logically 


and clearly the process of their spiritual perception, have yet 


Book II, Chapter VII 147 


almost to a man the firm conviction that circumcision ought 
not to be understood literally, nor the Sabbath rest, nor the 
pouring out of an animal’s blood, nor the fact that oracles 
were given by God to Moses on these points; and there is no 
doubt that this discernment is suggested to them all by the 
power of the Holy Spirit.’ 

3. But just as there are many ways of apprehending Christ, 
who although he is wisdom, does not exert or possess the 
power of wisdom in all men, but only in those who apply 
themselves to wisdom in him; nor, although he is called a phy- 
sician, does he act as such towards all men, but only towards 
those who have realized their feeble and sick condition and 
fly to his compassion in the hope of obtaining health; so, too, ; 


T think, is it the case with the Holy Spirit, in whom is every 


manner of gift. For to some is granted by the Spirit the word 
of wisdom, to others the word of knowledge, to others faith; 
and thus to each individual man who is able to receive him 
the same Spirit becomes and is apprehended as the very thing 
of which he, who has been deemed worthy to partake of him, 
stands in need (cf. 1 Cor 12:8, 9). 

These divisions and distinctions are unperceived by those 
who, hearing him called in the gospels the Paraclete (Jn 14:16, 
etc.), but not considering from what work or activity he takes 
this name, have likened him to some common spirits or other 
and by so doing have tried to disturb the churches of Christ 
even to the point of arousing no small dissensions among 
the brethren. But the gospel shows him to be of such power 
and majesty that it says the apostles could not yet receive 
those truths which the Savior wished to teach them until the 
time “when the Holy Spirit should come” (Jn 16:12-14), 
who would pour)himself into their souls and to enlighten - 
them, concerning the nature and faith of the Trinity. The 
mes in question, however, owing to the poverty of their 


148 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


understanding, which renders them not only incapable of 
logically setting forth the truth themselves, but unable even 
to pay proper attention to what is said by us, have entertained 
low and unworthy views of his deity and so delivered them- 
selves over to errors and deceits under the malign influence of 
some spirit of error rather than the wise precepts of the Holy 
Spirit, according to the saying of the apostle, “Following the 
doctrine of daemon spirits, who forbid to marry,” “to the ruin 
and destruction of many,” and “urging to abstain from meats” 
_ | (cf. 1 Tim 4:1 and Lk 2:34 [Vg.]), in order that by the outward 
show of stricter observances they may lead astray the souls of 
the innocent. 

4. We must know, therefore, that the Paraclete is the Holy 
Spirit, who teaches truths greater than can be uttered by the 
voice, truths which are, if I may so say, “unspeakable,” and 
which “it is not lawful for a man to speak” (2 Cor 12:4), that 
is, which cannot be indicated in human language. For the 
phrase “not lawful” was spoken, we believe, by Paul as the 
equivalent of “not possible,” as in the place where he says, “all 
things are lawful, but all things do not edify” (1 Cor 10:23). 
Those things, that is, which are within our power because we 
can have them, he speaks of as being “lawful” for us. But the 
Paraclete, who is called the Holy Spirit, is so called from his 
work of “consolation” (paraclesis being termed in Latin consola- 
tio); for anyone who has been deemed worthy to partake of the 
Holy Spirit, when he has learned his unspeakable mysteries, 
undoubtedly obtains consolation and gladness of heart. Since 
by the Spirit's guidance he has come to know the reasons for 
all things that happen, and why and how they happen, his 
soul can never be in any way disquieted or admit any feeling 
of sadness (cf. Jn 14:26, 27); nor is it in anything affrighted, 


_. for it clings to God’s word and wisdom and “in the Holy Spirit 


calls Jesus Lord” (cf. 1 Cor 12:3). 


Book II, Chapter VII 149 


We have made mention, then, of the Paraclete and to the 
best of our ability have explained how we ought to think about 
him. But in the epistle of John our Savior is also called a “para- 
clete,” when it says, “If any man sin, we have a paraclete with 
the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitia- 
tion for our sins.”* Let us then consider whether perhaps this 
title “paraclete” means one thing when applied to the Savior 
and another when applied to the Holy Spirit. Now in regard to 
the Savior “paraclete” seems to mean intercessor; for in Greek 
it bears both meanings, comforter and intercessor, but accord- 
ing to the phrase that follows, in which it says that “he is the 
propitiation for our sins” (1 Jn 2:1, 2), it seems that in the case 
of the Savior the word “paraclete” must be understood rather 
in the sense of intercessor, for he is said to intercede with the 
Father “for our sins.” When used of the Holy Spirit, however, 
the word “paraclete” ought to be understood as “comforter,” 
because he provides comfort for the souls to whom he opens 
and reveals a consciousness of spiritual knowledge.” 


Chapter VIII 


THE SOUL 


1. After this, the course of our inquiry demands that we should 
deal in a general way with the soul, beginning with souls of a 
lower and rising to those of a higher order. No one, I suppose, 
will doubt that all living creatures whatever, even those that 
live in water, have souls. This view is supported by the general 
opinion of men and confirmed in addition by the authority of 
holy scripture, when it says that “God made great whales and 
every soul of the living creatures that swim, which the waters 
brought forth after their kind” (Gn 1:21). It is confirmed also, 

from the common light of reason, by those who lay down 
a definition of the soul in precise terms. For soul is defined 
thus, as an existence possessing imagination and desire, which 
qualities can be expressed in Latin, though the rendering is 
not so apt as the original, by the phrase, capable of feeling and 
movement.' This may be said of all living creatures, including 
those that live in water, and the same definition of soul may be 
shown to apply to birds also. Scripture, too, adds the authority 
of another pronouncement when it says, “Ye shall not eat the 
blood, for the soul of all flesh is its blood, and ye shall not 
eat the soul with the flesh” (cf. Lv 17:14); in which it most 
plainly describes the blood of all living creatures as their “soul.” 
And if, in regard to the saying that “the soul of all flesh is its 


151 


152 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


blood,” anyone should now raise the question of bees, wasps 
and ants, as well as those creatures that live in water, oysters, 
cockles and the rest, which have no blood and yet are most 
clearly seen to be living creatures, we must reply that the same 
force which in others is due to the energy of the red blood is 
exerted in creatures of this kind by that fluid which exists in 
them, though it be of a different color; for it matters not at 
all what color it is, so long as the substance is endowed with 
life. As for beasts of burden and cattle, however, even common 
opinion has no hesitation in admitting that they possess souls. 
~ Nevertheless the teaching of scripture is clear, when God says, 
“Let the earth bring forth the living soul after its kind, four- 
footed beasts and creeping things and beasts of the earth after 
their kind” (Gn 1:24). Then in regard to man, although no 
one has any doubt nor could anyone raise a question about it, 
yet the divine scripture declares that “God breathed into his 
face the breath of life, and 1 man became a living soul” (Gn 2:7). 
It remains for us to inquire concerning the order of angels, 
whether they too possess souls or are souls, and also concerning 


» the other divine and heavenly beings including the opposing ; 
powers. Nowhere do we find any authority of divine scripture — 


for saying that either an; angels or any other divine beings who 
are God's “ministering spirits” (Heb 1:14) possess souls or 
are called souls; and yet they are believed by very many to be 
endowed with souls. But in regard to God we find it written 
as follows: “And I will put my soul upon that soul that has 
eaten blood, and I will root it out from among my people” (Lv 
17:10). And again elsewhere: “Your new moons and sabbaths 
and great days I will not accept. Your fasts and holidays and 
feast days my soul hateth” (Is 1:13, 14). And in the twenty-first 
psalm it speaks thus of Christ—for it is certain that this psalm 
is composed in the person of Christ, as the gospel bears wit- 
ness (cf. Mk 15:34 and par.)—“But thou, Lord, be not far 


Book II, Chapter VIII / 153 
/ 


from my help, look to my defense; deliver my soul from the 
sword, my beloved one from the hand of the dog” (Ps 22:20, 
21 [Eng.]). There are, however, many other testimonies to the 
soul that Christ had when he dwelt in the flesh. 

2. But all question about the soul of Christ i is removed 
when we consider the nature of the incarnation. For just as 
he truly had flesh, so also he truly had a soul. As for that, 
jablced which t callstinthten patter the nul of God" Gi 
1:14; 42:1, etc.), it is difficult both to think and to state how 
it ought to be understood; for at the same time we declare 
that the nature of God is simple and has no intermixture of 
any additional substance. Still, however we are to think of it, 
the fact remains that it is apparently called “the soul of God.” 
In regard to Christ, however, there is no doubt. And on that 
account I see no absurdity in holding or expressing some sim- 
ilar view concerning the holy angels and the other heavenly 
powers, if we grant that the above-mentioned definition of the 


soul appears to apply to them. For who can rationally deny 
that they are capable of feeling and of movement? If then the 
definition, that an existence which is rationally capable of feel- 
ing and movement is called a 1 soul, appears to be correct, the 
same definition appears to apply to the angels also. For what 
else is there in them but rational feeling and movement? And 
things which have one definition have also undoubtedly the 
same substance. The apostle Paul indeed intimates that there 
is a kind of soul-like man, whom he says “cannot receive the 
things of the Spirit of God” (cf. 1 Cor 2:14),? but to whom 
the doctrine of the Spirit of God appears foolish, and he can- 
not understand it because it is “spiritually discerned.” Also in 
another place he says: “It is sown a soul-like body” and rises 


a “spiritual body” (1 Cor 15:44), thus showing that at the 


resurrection of the just there will be nothing soul-like in those |« vs 


who have been counted worthy of the life of the blessed. 


154 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


On this account we ask whether there is not some sub- 


stance which, in so far as it is soul, is imperfect. But whether it 


is imperfect for this reason, that it falls away from perfection, 
or whether it was so made by God, we shall inquire when each 
separate point begins to be discussed in order. For if the soul- 
like man “does not receive the things of the Spirit of God,” and 
just because he is soul-like cannot receive the knowledge of a 
better nature, namely the divine, here is perhaps the reason 
why Paul, in his desire to teach us plainly what it is through 
which we can understand the things of the Spirit, that is, 
spiritual things, joins and associates the mind rather than the 
soul with the Holy Spirit. For this is what I suppose him to 
indicate when he says, “I will pray with the spirit, I will pray 
with the mind also. I will sing a psalm with the spirit, I will 
sing a psalm with the mind also” (1 Cor 14:15). He does not 
say, I will pray with the soul, but with the spirit and the mind; 
not, sing with the soul, but sing with the spirit and the mind. 

3. But perhaps it will be asked: If it is the mind, which 


‘= with the spirit prays and sings, and the mind also which 


receives perfection and salvation, how is it that Peter says, 
“Receiving the end of our faith, the salvation of our souls” (1 
Pt 1:9)? If the soul neither prays nor sings with the spirit, how 
shall it hope for salvation? Or, if it should attain to blessedness, 
will it no longer be called a soul? Let us see whether, perhaps, 
this point may be answered in the following manner, that just* 
as the Savior came to save that which was lost (cf. Lk 19:10), 
and then when it is saved, that which was said to be lost is 
not lost; so also perhaps that which is being saved is called a 
soul, but when it has been saved it will be called by the name 
of its'more perfect part. Some, too, will think that this point 
can be added, that just as that which was lost, undoubtedly 
existed before it was lost, when it was something, I know not 
what, other than lost, and just as there will also certainly be 


\ } s 
4 


aes ai 


Book II, Chapter VIII 155 


a time when it will not be lost; so the soul, which is said to 
have become lost, will apparently have been something at a 
time when it was not yet lost and may have been called a soul 


~ from the fact of its becoming lost, but when delivered from 


its lost condition it can once again be that which it was before 
it became lost and was called a soul. a 
Further, certain careful investigators have concluded that 
an interpretation of no slight importance is suggested by the 
very meaning of the word soul as indicated in its Greek form. 
For a divine saying speaks of God as a fire, saying, “Our God 


.|is a consuming fire” (Heb 12:29; Dt 4:24, 9:3). Moreover, 


* Scripture also speaks as follows concerning the nature of the 
angels: “Who maketh his angels spirits and his ministers a 
burning fire” (Heb 1:7; Ps 104:4); and elsewhere, “The angel 
of the Lord appeared in a flame of fire in a bush” (Ex 3:2). In 
addition we have received a command to be “fervent in spirit” 
(Rom 12:11), by which expression undoubtedly the word of 
God is proved to be hot and fiery. Further, the prophet Jer- 
emiah hears from him who gave him the oracles, “Behold, I 
have put my words in thy mouth as fire” (Jer 5:14). 

As therefore God is “fire” and the angels “a flame of fire” 
and the saints are all “fervent in spirit,” so on the contrary those 
who have fallen away from the love of God must undoubtedly 
be said to have cooled in their affection for him and to have 
become cold. For the Lord also says, “Because iniquity has 
multiplied, the love of the many shall grow cold” (Mt 24:12). 
And further, all those things, whatever they may be, which 
in the holy scripture are likened to the adverse power, you 
invariably find to be cold. For the devil is called a “serpent” 
and a “dragon” (cf. Rv 12:9, 20:2), and what can be found 
colder than these? Again, a dragon, an allusion, certainly, to 
one of the wicked spirits, is said to reign in the waters, while 
a prophet declares him to live in the sea (cf. Ez 29:3, 32:2). 


a ee eee 


156 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


And elsewhere a prophet says, “I will draw my holy sword 
upon the dragon, the flying serpent, upon the dragon, the 
crooked serpent, and it shall slay him” (Is 27:1); and again 
it says, “Even though they hide from mine eyes and descend 
into the depth of the sea, there will I command the dragon 
and he shall bite them” (Am 9:3). In Job also he is said to be 
the “king of all things which are in the waters” (cf. Jb 41:25 
[26] LXX). A prophet declares that “evils shall be kindled 
from the north upon all who dwell on the earth” (cf. Jer 1:14). 
Now the north wind is described in the scriptures as cold, as 
it is written in Wisdom, “the cold north wind” (Sir 43:20). 
This then must undoubtedly be understood of the devil. If 
therefore the things which are holy are termed fire and light 
and fervent things while their opposites are termed cold, and 
the love of sinners is said to grow cold, we must ask whether 
perhaps even the word soul, which in Greek is psyche, was not 
formed from psychesthai, with the idea of growing cold after 
having been in a diviner and better state, and whether it was 
not derived from thence because the soul seems to have grown 
cold by the loss of its first natural and divine warmth and on 
that account to have been placed in its present state with its 
present designation.° 

Finally, see whether you can easily find in the holy scrip- 
tures a place where the soul is described in real terms of praise. 
Expressions of blame, on the contrary, occur frequently, as 
here: “An evil soul destroys him that possesses it” (Sir 6:4), 
and, “The soul that sinneth it shall die” (Ez 18:4). For after 
it has been said, “All souls are mine; as the soul of the father, 
so the soul of the son is mine” (Ez 18:4), it certainly seems to 
follow that he would say, “The soul that doeth righteousness, 
it shall be saved, and the soul that sinneth, it shall die.” Yet in 
this instance we see that he has associated with the soul the fact 
of blame, but as to anything worthy of praise he is silent. We 


Hat returns to the condition of being a mind.* 


_ All these considerations seem to show that when the 


~ vigor, ills others retain none or only a very little. 


rye 4 


Book II, Chapter VIII 8 157 


must see, therefore, whether perchance, as we said was made 
clear by its very name, the psyche or Soul was so called from its 
having cooled from the fervor of the righteous® and from its 
participation in the divine fire, and yet has not lost the power 
of restoring itself to that condition of fervor in which it was 


at the beginning. Some such fact the prophet appears to point 
to when he says, “Turn unto thy rest, O my on (P1167) 


departed from its original condition and digni 


4. Now if this is so, it seems to me that the departure 


reason why some are found right from their earliest y 
of ardent keenness, while others are duller, and some are born 
extremely dense and altogether unteachable. This statement 
of ours, however, that mind is changed into soul, or anythin 

else that seems to point in that direction, the reader must 
carefully consider and work out for himself; for we must not 
be supposed to put these forward as settled doctrines, but as 


“subjects for inquiry and discussion. 


The reader must also take this point into consideration, 
that of the passages in the gospels which concern the soul of 
the Saviour, it is noticeable that some refer to it under the 
name of soul and others under the name of spirit. When scrip- 
ture wishes to indicate any suffering or trouble that affected 
him, it does so under the name soul, as when it says: “Now 
is my soul troubled” (Jn 12:27), and “My soul is sorrowful 
even unto death” (Mt 26:38 and par.), and “No one taketh 
my soul from me, but I lay it down of myself” (Jn 10:18). On 


158 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


the other hand he commends “into his Father’s hands” not his 
soul but his spirit (cf. Lk 23:46); and when he says the “flesh 
is weak” he does not say the “soul” is “willing” but the “spirit” 
(Mt 26:41 and par.); from which it appears as if the soul were a 
kind of medium between the weak flesh and the willing spirit. 

5. But perhaps someone may meet us with those objec- 
tions of which we ourselves have given warning in our own 
arguments, and may say, “How then is mention made even 
of God’s soul?” To him we shall reply as follows. Just as in all 
bodily expressions that are applied to God, such as his fingers 
or hands or arms or eyes or mouth or feet, we do not mean 
these parts of the human body, but we indicate by such bodily 
terms certain of God’s powers,"° so also we must suppose that 
there is some other object which is indicated by this term, the 
soul of God. And if it is lawful for us to dare to say anything 
further on such a subject, the “soul of God” may perhaps be 
understood to mean his only-begotten Son. For as the soul, 
implanted throughout the whole body, is the source of all 
movement and directs every operation of the body, so also the 
only-begotten Son of God, who is his word and wisdom, is in 
close touch and association with every power of of God) being 
implanted i in him. And perhaps it is as an indication of this 
mystery that God is spoken of or described j in the scriptures 
as a body," / cte 


not be this additional reason for understanding God’s soul 
to mean his only-begotten Son, namely, that it was he who 
came “to this place of affliction” and “descended into the vale 
of tears” and into the place of our humiliation, as it says in 
the Psalm: “Because thou hast humiliated us in the place of 
affliction” (Ps 43:20 [LXX], 84:6). Finally, I know some who} 
in expounding the passage which is spoken by the Savior in the 
gospel, “My soul is sorrowful even unto death” (Mt 26:38 and 


Frewe LBS nc 


We must consider, indeed, whether perhaps there may’ 


Book II, Chapter VIII 159 


par.), have interpreted it of the apostles, whom he might have 
termed his soul because they were better than the rest of his 
body. For they say that “the multitude of believers is called his 
body” (cf. 1 Cor 12:27; Eph 4:12, 5:30), and that the apostles, 


‘because they are better than the remaining multitude, ought 


to be regarded as his soul. 

These points about the rational soul we have brought for- 
ward to the best of our ability rather as matters for discussion 
by our readers than as definite and settled doctrines. As for 
the souls of cattle and other dumb creatures, let those remarks 
suffice which we have made above in general terms.'* 


Chapter IX 


THE WORLD, AND THE 
MOVEMENTS OF RATIONAL 
CREATURES BOTH GOOD 
AND EVIL, AND THE CAUSES OF 
THESE MOVEMENTS 


wt 


1. Now, however, let us return to the order which we fixed 
upon for our discussion and contemplate the beginning of 
creation, so far as it is possible for the mind to contemplate 
the beginning of God's creative work. 

We! must suppose, therefore, that in the beginning God 
made as large'a number of rational and intelligent beings, or 
whatever the before-mentioned minds 0 
he foresaw would be sufficient. It is certain that he made them 
according to some definite number foreordained by himself; 
for we must not suppose, as some would, that there is no end 
of created beings, since where there is no end there can neither 
be any comprehension nor limitation. If there had been no 
end, then certainly created beings could neither have been 
controlled nor provided for by God. For by its nature whatever 
is infinite will also be beyond comprehension. . . . 

Moreover when the scripture says that God created all 
things “by number and measure” (Wis 11:20), we shall be 


161 


Creatleg 


344 p. 


167- 


Coote x¥ 


—_— ——— a ee a ee | 


162 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


sight in applying the term “number” to rational creatures or 
minds for this very reason, that they-are so many as can be 


provided for and ruled and controlled by the providence of « 


God; whereas “measure” will correspondingly apply to bodily 
matter, which we must believe to have been created by God 
in such quantity as he knew would be sufficient for the order- 
ing of the world. These then are the objects which we must 
believe were created by God in the beginning, that is, before 
everything else. And it is this truth which we may suppose to 
be indicated also in that beginning which Moses somewhat 
obscurely introduces when he says, “In the beginning God 
made the heaven and the earth” (Gn 1:1). For it is certain 
that these words refer not to the “firmament” nor to the “dry 


land,” but to that heaven and earth from which the names oa 


the ones we see were afterwards borrowed (cf. Gn 1:6). 

2. But since these rational beings, which as we said above? 
were made in the beginning, were made when before they 
did not exist, by this very fact that they did not exist and 
then began to exist they are of necessity subject to change 
and alteration. For whatever may have been the goodness that 
existed in their being, it existed in them not by nature but as a 
result of their Creator’s beneficence. What they are, therefore, 


is something neither their own nor eternal, but given by God. 


For it did not always exist, and everything that is given can also 
be withdrawn and taken away. But the cause of the withdrawal 
will lie in this, that the movements of their minds are not 
rightly and worthily directed. For the Creator granted to the 
minds created by him the power of free and voluntary move- 
ment, in order that the good that was in them might become 
their own, since it was preserved by their own free will; but 
sloth and weariness of taking trouble to preserve the good, 
coupled with disregard and neglect of better things, began the 
process of withdrawal from the good. Now to withdraw from 


~ 


5 


tee 


Book II, Chapter IX 163 


the good is nothing else than to be immersed in evil; for it 
is certain that to be evil means to be lacking in good. Hence 
it is that in whatever degree one declines from the good, one 
descends into an equal degree of wickedness. And so each 
mind, neglecting the good either more or less in proportion to 
its own movements, was drawn to the opposite of good, which 
undoubtedly is evil. From this source, it appears, the Creator 
of all things obtained certain seeds and causes of variety and 
diversity, in order that, according to the diversity of minds, 
that is, of rational beings (which diversity they must be sup- 
posed to have produced from the causes we have stated above) 
he might create a world that was various and diverse. What , 
we mean by various and diverse it is now our wish to explain.* 

3. By the world we now mean all that is above the heavens, 
or in them, or on the earth, or in what are called the lower 
regions, or any places that exist anywhere; together with the 
beings who are said to dwell in them. All this is called the 
world. In this world some creatures are said to be “superceles- 
tial,”> that is, placed in the more blessed abodes and clothed 
with the brighter and more heavenly bodies; and among these 
many differences are revealed, as for instance when the apos- 
tle said, “There is one glory of the sun, another glory of the 
moon, and another glory of the stars, for one star differeth 
from another star in glory” (1 Cor 15:41). 

Some creatures, however, are called “earthly” (1 Cor 
15:40), and among these, too, that is, among men, there are 
no small differences, for some are barbarians, others Greeks, 
and of the barbarians some are wilder and fiercer, whereas 
others are more gentle. Some moreover employ laws of the 
highest excellence, others poorer and ruder ones, while others 
follow inhuman and savage customs rather than laws. Some 
men are from the very moment of their birth in a humble 
position, brought up in subjection and slavery, placed under 


164 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


lords and princes and tyrants; whereas others are brought up 
with more freedom and under more rational influences. Some 
have healthy bodies, others from their earliest years are inva- 
lids; some are defective in sight, others in hearing and speech; 
some are born in such a condition, others lose the use of one 
faculty or another soon after birth or else suffer a like mis- 
fortune when fully grown. But what purpose is there in my 
unfolding and enumerating the tragic tale of human miseries, 
from which some are free while others are involved in them, 
when every man can weigh and ponder over all these matters 
for himself?* There are also certain invisible powers, to which 
the management of things upon earth is entrusted; and we 
must believe that among these, too, no small differences exist, 
just as is found to be the case among men. The apostle Paul 
indeed intimates that there are also certain “infernal” powers’ 
and among these in like manner a condition of variety must 
undoubtedly be looked for. As for dumb animals and birds 
and creatures that live in water, it seems superfluous to inquire 
about them, since it is certain that they should be regarded as 
of contingent and not primary importance. 

4. Now we are told that all things which were made, were 
made through Christ and in Christ, as the apostle Paul most 
clearly intimates when he says, “For in him and through him 
were all things created, whether things in heaven or things on 
earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or dominions or 
principalities or powers; all were created through him and in 
him” (Col 1:16). Moreover John in the gospel reveals precisely 
the same when he says, “In the beginning was the Word, and 
the Word was with God, and the Word was God; the same 
was in the beginning with God. All things were made through 
him, and without him was nothing made” (Jn 1:1). Further, 
in the Psalms it is written, “Thou hast made all things in wis- 

om” (Ps 104:24). 


Book II, Chapter IX 165 


Seeing then that Christ, as he is the Word and wisdom, is 
also “righteousness” (cf. 1 Cor 1:30), it will follow undoubt- 
edly that those things which were made in the Word and in 
wisdom may be said also to have been made in that “righteous- 
ness” which Christ is; whence it will be apparent that in the 
things which were made there was nothing unrighteous, noth- 
ing accidental, but all will be shown to be such as the principle 
of equity and righteousness demands. How then then this great 
variety and diversity of things can be understood to be most 
righteous and equitable it is, I am sure, impossible for human 
thought or speech to explain, inless as prostrate suppliants we 
beseech the Word himself, the “wisdom and righteousness” 
(cf. 1 Cor 1:30), who is the only-begotten Son of God, that 
he, pouring himself by his grace into our minds, may deign 
to enlighten what is dark, to open what is shut, to reveal what 
is secret; which he will do if only we are found seeking, or 
asking, or knocking so worthily as to deserve to receive when 
we seek, to find when we ask and to have the door opened in 
response to our knock (cf. Mt 7:7, 8; Lk 11:9, 10). Relying, 
therefore, not on our own intelligence, but on the help of that 
wisdom which made all things, and that righteousness which 
we believe to be implanted in all created beings, even though 
we are for the moment unable to declare the answer, we shall 
nevertheless, trusting in his mercy, endeavor to search out 
and discover how the great variety and diversity of the world 
is consistent wink the hole prinaiple of righteousness 
man would demand a special justification for every single case 
and only a fool would offer to give it. 

5. But when we say that the world is arranged in this 


_variety, in which as we have explained above it was made by 


God,® the God whom we call good and righteous and abso- — 


lutely fair, the following objection is wont to be raised by 


a] 


166 i aa ee ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 
; ihe cA 

/ many, and particilarly by those who come from the schools 

of Marcion, Valentinus and Basilides and who assert that souls 

/ _ are in their natures diverse. They ask how it is consistent with 

/ the righteousness of God who made the world that on some he 

/ should bestow a habitation in the heavens, and not only give 

them a better habitation, but also confer on them a higher and 

more conspicuous rank, favoring some with a “principality,” 

others with “powers,” to others again allotting “dominions” 

(cf. Col 1:16), to others presenting the most magnificent seats 

in the heavenly courts, while others shine with golden light 

and gleam with starry brilliance, there being “one glory of 

the sun, another glory of the moon, and another glory of the 

stars, for one star differeth from another star in glory” (cf. 1 

Cor 15:41). To sum it up briefly, they ask what reason there 

could be, supposing that God the Creator lacks neither the 

will to desire what is good and perfect nor the power to pro- 

duce it, that when creating rational natures, that is, beings of 

whose existence he himself is the cause, he should make some 

/ of higher rank and other of second and third and many still 
lower and less worthy degrees? 

47 Finally, they raise an objection on the score of the dif- 

f ferences that exist among men on the earth. Some, they say, 

| \| x inherit at birth a happier lot, as for example the one who 

Z springs from Abraham and is born by promise (cf. Gn 17:16; 

12% al 4:23), and the other, the child of Isaac and Rebecca who, 

sy while yet lying in the womb, supplants his brother and is said, 

" before he is born, to be loved by God (cf. Gn 25:21-26; Rom 

¢ 9:10—13); and, speaking generally, one man is born among 

the Hebrews, with whom he finds instruction in the divine 

law, another among the Greeks who are themselves men of 

wisdom and no small learning, another among the Ethiopians, 

whose custom is to feed on human flesh, others among the 

Scythians, where parricide is practiced as if sanctioned by law, 


a 


zoe 


‘Y 


Book II, Chapter IX 167 


or among the Taurians, where strangers are offered in sacrifice.” 
If then, they ask us, this great diversity and these various and 
different conditions of birth, in which certainly the power of 


—» free will has no place—for a man does not choose for himself. 


either where or in what nation or what state of life he shall 
be born,—if, they say, all this is not caused by a diversity 
in the natures of souls, that is, a soul with an evil nature is 
destined for an evil nation and a good one for a good nation, 
what alternative is there but to suppose that it is the result of 
accident or chance? Now if this were admitted, we should no 
longer believe the world to have been made by God nort nor to be 
ruled by his providence, and consequently it would seem that 
no judgment of God on every man’s deeds is to be looked for. 
But in this matter what is clearly the truth of things is for him 
alone to know who “searches all things, even = ie things 
of God” (1 Cor 2:10). 

6. We, however, speaking simply as men, will, in order 
not to nourish the insolence of the heretics by being silent, 
to the best of our ability reply to their:objections with such 
arguments as may occur to us, as follows. We have frequently 
shown in the preceding chapters, by declarations which we 
were able to quote from the divine scriptures, that God the 
Creator of the universe is both good and just and omnipo- 
tent.'° Naw when “in the beginning” (Gn 1:1) he created what 

& wished: O create, that is ational beings; he had no othet 


SS 


As therefore he himself i in whom was nathesstfiaion nor 


change nor lack of power,-was-the Cause - of alll that was to be 

created, he created all his creatures equal and alike, for the sim- 

ple reason that ‘there was i in him no cause that could give rise 

to variety and diversity. But since these rational creatures, as 

we have frequently shown and will show yet again in its proper 

place,!” were endowed with’ the power of free will, it was this 
\ 309 


ae heed ove 


‘Cele u 66, uy 69 


¥ ae 


@ 
ty 


168 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


freedom which induced each one by his own voluntary choice 
either to make progress through the imitation of God or to) 
deteriorate through negligence. This, as we have said before," 


was the cause of the diversity among rational creatures, a cause 


that takes its origin not from the will or judgment of the 
Creator, but from the decision of the creature's own freedom. 
God, however, who then felt it just to arrange his creation 


according to merit, gathered the diversities of minds into the 
harmony of a single world, so as to furnish, as it were, out of 
these diverse vessels or souls or minds, one house, in which 
there must be “not only vessels of gold and silver, but also 
of wood and of earth, and some unto honor and some unto 
dishonor” (2 Tm 2:20). 

“> These were the reasons, as I think, which gave rise to the 
diversity of this world, wherein divine providence arranges all 
creatures individually in positions corresponding to the varia- 
tion in their movements and the fixed purpose of their minds. 
For this reason the Creator will not appear to have been unjust 
when, according to the above principles, he placed everyone in 
a position proportionate to his merit; nor will the happiness 
or unhappiness of anyone's birth, or any condition whatever 
that may fall to his lot, be supposed to be due to chance; nor 
will it be believed that there are different creators or souls that 
are diverse by nature. , 166 

7. But even holy scripture does not séem to me to be alto- 
gether silent on the nature of this secret, as when the apostle 

Paul, arguing on the subject of Esau and Jacob, says: “For 
when they were not yet born and had done nothing either 
good or evil, that the purpose of God which was formed 


according to election might stand, not from works but from 


him who called them, it was said that the elder should serve 
the younger, as it is written, Jacob I loved, but Esau I hated” 
(Rom 9:11—13). And after this he addresses himself and says: 


iin 


Book II, Chapter IX 169 


“What shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness with God?” 
And in order to give us an occasion of inquiring into these 
matters and discovering how they are not outside all reason, 
he replies to himself and says, “God forbid” (Rom 9:14). For, 
as it appears to me, the same question which faces us in con- 
nection with Esau and Jacob may also be raised in regard to all 
the heavenly beings and all creatures on earth and in the lower 
regions; and, it seems to me, just as it says there, “When they 
were not yet born and had done nothing either good or evil,” 
so, too, can it be said about all the rest. For “when they were 
not yet” created “and had done nothing either good or evil, 
that the purpose of God according to election might stand” 
(Rom 9:11—13), then, as certain men think, some were made 
heavenly, others of the earth and others of the lower regions, 
“not from works,” as the aforesaid men think, “but from him 
who called them” (Rom 9:11). “ Ww na then shall we say,” if this 
is so? “Is there then unrighteousn s with God? God forbid” 
(Rom 9:14). Aan eae ae ee 

As, therefore, when the scriptures are examined with much 
diligence in regard to Esau and Jacob, it is found that there 
is “no unrighteousness with God” in its being said of them, 
before they were born or had done anything, in this life of 
course, that “the elder should serve the younger,” and as it is 


found that there is no unrighteousness in the fact that Jacob i 


supplanted his brother even in the womb, provided we believe, / 
that by reason of his merits in some previous life Jacob had 
deserved to be loved by God to such an extent as to be wor- 
thy of being preferred to his brother, so also it is in regard to 
the heavenly creatures, provided we note that their diversity 
is not the original condition of their creation, but that for 
antecedent causes a different position of service is prepared 
by the Creator for each one in proportion to the degree of his 
merit, which depends on the fact that each, in being created 


ALs 
% fe, 


Coote, 


Pr 


... may be said to possess within himself the causes of diversi 


170 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


by God as a mind or rational spirit, has personally gained for 
himself, in accordance with the movements of his mind and 
the disposition of his heart, a greater or less share of merit, 
and has rendered himself either lovable or it may be hateful to 
God. We must also note, however, that some beings who are 
of higher merit are ordained to suffer with the rest and to per- 
form a duty to those below them, in order that by this means 
they themselves may become sharers in the endurance of the 
Creator, according to the Apostle’s own words, “The creature 
was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him 
who subjected it, in hope” (Rom 8:20).'° 

Bearing in mind, then, this sentiment, “Is there unrigh- 
teousness with God? God forbid” (Rom 9:14), which the 
apostle uttered when expounding the birth of Esau and Jacob, 
I think it right that the same sentiment should be employed in 
considering the case of all creatures, since, as we said above, the 
righteousness of the Creator ought to be apparent in all. And 
this, it appears to me, will only be shown with real clearness, 
if each being, whether of heaven or earth or below the earth, 


antecedent to his birth in the body, For all things were created 
by the Word of God and by his wisdom, and were set in order 
through the operation of his righteousness; and in his gracious 
compassion he provides for all and exhorts all to be cured by 
whatever remedies they may, and incites them to salvation. 
8. As, then, without any doubt it will happen in the day 
of judgment that the good will be separated from the evil and 
the righteous from the unrighteous and every individual soul 
will by the judgment of God be allotted to that place of which 
his merits have rendered him worthy, a point which, if God 
will, we shall prove in the pages that follow," so also in the 
past some such process, I think, has taken place. For we must 
believe that God rules and arranges the universe by judgment 


Book II, Chapter IX 171 


at all times. And the teaching of the apostle, when he says that 


“in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and silver, 


but also of wood and of earth, and some unto honor, and 
some unto dishonor,” with the additional words, “if a man 
purge himself, he shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified and 
meet for the master’s use, prepared unto every good work” (2 
Tm 2:20, 21), undoubtedly proves this point, that whoever 
purges himself when placed in this life, will be prepared for 


every good work in the future, whereas he who does not purge ©‘ 


himself will be, in accordance with the extent of his impurity, 
-: 


a “vessel unto dishonor,” that is, an unworthy one. O¢er 


In this way it is possible for us to understand that even 


before the present life there were rational vessels, either wholly 
purged or less so, that is, vessels which had purged them- 


selves or had not, and that from this circumstance each vessel 
received, according to the measure of its purity or impurity, its 
place or region or condition in which to be born or to fulfill 
some duty in this world. All these, down to the very least, God 
supervises by the power of his wisdom and distinguishes by the 
controlling hand of his judgment; and thus he has arranged 
the universe on the principle of a most impartial retribution, 
according as each one deserves for his merit to be assisted or 
cared for. Herein is displayed in its completeness the principle 
of impartiality, when the inequality of circumstances preserves 
an equality of reward for merit. But the grounds of merit in 
each individual are known with truth and clearness only to 
God, together with his only-begotten Word and Wisdom and 
his Holy Spirit. 


lap 


Chapter X 


THE RESURRECTION 
AND THE JUDGMENT 


1. But since our discourse has reminded us of the judgment 
to come and of retribution and the punishment of sinners, in 
accordance with the threatenings of the holy scriptures and 
the contents of the Church's teaching! to the effect that at the 
time of the judgment “eternal fire” and “outer darkness” and 
a “prison” and a “furnace” and other similar things have been 
prepared for sinners (cf. Mt 25:41, 8:12; 1 Pr 3:19), let us see 
what we ought to believe about these matters also. 

Now to approach them in the requisite order we must 
first, it seems to me, begin a discussion on the resurrection, in 
order to learn what it is that shall come either to punishment 
or to rest and blessedness. On this matter we have already 


™S argued more fully in the other books which we have written 


on Tesurrection}.and have shown what were our views about it. 
Now, howeves, for the sake of logical continuity in this treatise, 
it seems not unreasonable to repeat a few of the arguments 
from our former works, particularly because some make this 
objection to the faith of the church, that our beliefs about the 
resurréétion are altogether foolish and silly.’ 

The chief objectors are the heretics, who must, I think, 
be answered in the following manner. If they admit, with 


173 


174 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


us, that there is a resurrection of the dead, let them answer 
this question: “What was it that died? Was it not a body?” If 
so, there will be a resurrection of the body. Then again, let 
them say whether they believe that we are to possess bodies, 
or not. I submit that, seeing that the apostle Paul says, “It is 
sown a natural body, it will rise again a spiritual body” (1 Cor 
15:44), these men cannot deny that a body rises or that in 
the resurrection we are to possess bodies. What then? If it is 
certain that we are to possess bodies, and if those bodies which 
have fallen are declared to rise again—and the expression “rise 
again” could not properly be used except of that which had 
previously fallen—then no one can doubt that these bodies 
rise again in order that at the resurrection we may once more 
be clothed with them. The one thing, therefore, is bound up 
with the other. For if bodies rise again, undoubtedly they rise 
again as a clothing for us, and if it is necessary, as it certainly 
is, for us to live in bodies, we ought to live in no other bodies 
but our own. And if it is true that they rise again and do so 
as “spiritual,” there is no doubt that this means that they rise 
again from the dead with corruption banished and mortality 
laid aside; otherwise it would seem vain and useless for a man 
io rise from the dead in order to die over again. Finally, this 
can be the more clearly understood by carefully observing 
what is the quality of the “natural body” which, when sown in 
the earth, can reproduce the quality of a “spiritual body.” For 
it is from the natural body that the very power and grace of 
the resurrection evokes the spiritual body, when it transforms 
it from dishonor to glory. 

2. Since the heretics, however, think themselves most 
learned and wise, we shall ask them whether everybody has 
some form, that is, whether it is fashioned in some shape? If 
they say there is a body which is not fashioned in some shape, 
they will show themselves the most ignorant and foolish of 


Book II, Chapter X 175 


men; for no one, except an utter stranger to all learning, will 
deny that a body has a shape.* But if they give the logical 
answer and say that everybody is fashioned in some definite 
shape, we shall inquire of them whether they can explain and 
describe to us the shape of a “spiritual body”; which they cer- 
tainly will in no way be able to do. Further, we shall ask them 
for an explanation of the differences among those who rise 


again. How will they prove the truth of the saying: “there is 


~ one flesh of birds, another of fishes; there are also bodies celes- 


tial and bodies terrestrial; but there is one glory of heavenly 
beings, another of earthly, one glory of the sun, another glory 
of the moon, another glory of the stars, for one star differeth 
from another star in glory; so also is the resurrection of the 
dead” (1 Cor 15:39-42)? Let them show us, therefore, that 
the differences of glory among those who rise are comparable 
to these gradations among the heavenly bodies; and if by any 
means they have tried to think out some system along the lines 
of the differences among the heavenly bodies, we shall request 
them also to mark the differences in the resurrection indicated 
by the comparison drawn from earthly bodies. 

We indeed understand the matter thus: the apostle, when 
he wished to describe how great were the differences among 
those who rise in glory, that is, the saints, drew a compari- 


‘son from the-heavenly bodies, saying, “One glory of the sun, 


another glory of the moon, another glory of the stars.” When, 
on the other hand, he wished to teach. us the differences 
among those who shall come to the r¢surrection without being 
purified in this life, that is, as sinners, he draws an illustration 
from earthly creatures and says, “One flesh of birds, another 
of fishes.” For heavenly things are worthy of being compared 

with the saints, and earthly with sinners. Let this be said in 
opposition‘to those who deny the resurrection of the dead, 
that is, the resurrection of bodies. 


176 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


3. We now direct the discussion to some of our own 


People, who either from poverty of intellect or from lack of 


“instruction introduce an exceedingly low and mean idea of the 
resurrection of the body. We ask these men in what manner 
they think that the “natural body” will, by the grace of the 
resurrection, be changed and become “spiritual”; and in what 
manner they believe that what is “sown in weakness” will be 
“raised in power,’ and what is sown “in dishonor” is to “rise 
in glory,” and what is sown “in corruption” is to be trans- 
formed into “incorruption” (cf. 1 Cor 15:42—44)? Certainly 
if they believe the apostle, who says that the body, when it 
rises in glory and in power and in incorruptibility, has already 
become spiritual, it seems absurd and contrary to his mean- 
ing to say that it is still entangled in the passions of flesh and 
blood, seeing that he says plainly, “Flesh and blood shall not 
inherit the kingsionn of God, neither shall corruption inherit 
incorruption” (1 Cor 15:50).° Further, how do they take the 
passage in which the apostle says, “We shall all be changed” 
(1 Cor 15:51)? This change, the character of which we have 
before spoken of,° we must certainly look forward to, and we 
are undoubtedly right in expecting it to consist in some act 
that is worthy of the divine grace; for we believe that it will 
be a change of like character to that in which, as the apostle 
describes it, “a bare grain of wheat or of some other kind” is 
sown in the earth, but “God giveth it a body as it pleased him” 
(1 Cor 15:37, 38), after the grain of wheat itself has first died 
(cf. Jn 12:24). 

So must we suppose that our bodies, like a grain of corn, 
fall into the earth, but that implanted in them is the life- 
principle which contains the essence of the body; and although 
the bodies.die and are corrupted and scattered, nevertheless 
by the word of God that same life principle which has all 
along been preserved in the esence of the body raises them 


YY 


Book II, Chapter X / 177 
up from the earth and restores and refashions them, just as 
the power which exists in a grain of wheat refashions an 
restores the grain, after its corruption and death, into a body 


“with stalk and ear.” And so in the case of those who shall be 


counted worthy of obtaining an inheritance in the kingdom 
of the heavens, the life-principle before mentioned, by which 
the body is refashioned, at the command of G fefashions 
out of the earthly and natural body a spiritual body, which 
can dwell in the Keavens; while to those who have proved of 
inferior merit, or of something still meaner than this, or even 
of the lowest and most insignificant grade, will be given a body 
of glory and dignity corresponding to the dignity of each one’s 
life and soul; in such a way, however, that even for those who 
are to be destined to “eternal fire” or to “punishments” (cf. Mt 
25:41, 46), the body that rises is so incorruptible, through the 
transformation wrought by the resurrection, that it cannot be 
corrupted and dissolved even by punishments. . . .* 

4. If then this is the character of the body which rises 
from the dead, let us now see what is the meaning of the 
threatened “eternal fire” (cf. Mt 25:41, 46). Now we find in 
the prophet Isaiah that the fire by which each man is punished 
is described as belonging to himself. For it says, “Walk in the 
light of your fire and in the flame which you have kindled , 
for yourselves” (Is 50:11). These words seem to indicate that 
every sinner kindles for himself the flame of his own fire, and 
is not plunged into a fire which has been previously kindled 


by someone else or which existed before him. Of this fire the 


food and material are our sins, which are called by the apostle 
Paul ood and hay and stubble (cf. 1 Cor 3:12). And I think 
that just as in the body an abundance of eatables or food that 
disagrees with us either by its quality or its quantity gives 
rise to fevers differing in kind and duration according to the 
degree in which the combination of noxious elements supplies 


178 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


material and fuel for them—the quality of which material, 
made up of the diverse noxious elements, being the cause 
which renders the attack sharper or more protracted—so when 
the soul has gathered within itself a multitude of evil deeds and 
an abundance of sins, at the requisite time the whole mass of 
evil boils up into punishment and is kindled into penalties; at 
which time also the mind or conscience, bringing to memory 
through divine power all things the signs and forms of which 
it had impressed upon itself at the moment of sinning, will 
see exposed before its eyes a kind of history of its evil deeds, 
of every foul and disgraceful act and all unholy conduct. Then 
the conscience is harassed and pricked by its own stings, and 
becomes an accuser and witness against itself. 

This, I think, was what the apostle Paul felt when he said, 
“Their thoughts one with another accusing or else excusing 
them . . . in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men, 
according to my gospel, by Jesus Christ” (Rom 2:15, 16). 
From which we understand that in the very essence of the 
soul certain torments are produced from the harmful desires 
themselves that lead us to sin.? 

5. But to prevent your thinking that this explanation of 
the matter is somewhat difficult to grasp, we can consider the 
effect of those faults of passion which often occur in men, 
as when the soul is burnt up with the flames of love, or tor- 
mented by the fires of jealousy or envy, or tossed about with 
furious anger, or consumed with intense sadness; remembering 
how some men, finding the excess of these ills too heavy to 
bear, have deemed it more tolerable to submit to death than 
to endure such tortures. You will ask, indeed, whether for 
men who have been entangled in the ills which arise from the 
above-mentioned faults and have been unable all the time 
they were in this life to secure for themselves any amelioration 
and have so departed from this world, it will be a sufficient 


Book I, Chapter X 179 


punishment that they should be tortured by the long contin- 
uance in them of those harmful desires, whose deadly poison 
was in this life assuaged by no healing remedy; or whether 
when these desires have been changed they will be tormented 
by the stings of a general punishment. 

Now I think that another species of punishment may be 
understood to exist; for just as, when the limbs of the body 
are loosened and torn away from their respective connections, 
we feel an-intense and excruciating pain, so when the soul is_ 
found apart from that order and connection and harmony in ~ 
which it was created by God for good action and useful expe- 
rience and not at concord with itself in the connection of its 
rational movements, it must be supposed to bear the penalty 
and torture of its own want of cohesion and to experience the 
punishment due to its unstable and disordered condition. But 
when the soul, thus torn and rent asunder, has been tried by 
the application of fire, it is undoubtedly wrought into a con- 
dition of stronger inward connection and renewal. 

6. There are many other matters, too, which are hidden 
from us, and are known only to him who is the physician of 
our souls. For if in regard to bodily health we occasionally find 
it necessary to take some very unpleasant and bitter medicine 
as a cure for the ills we have brought on through eating and 
drinking, and sometimes, if the character of the ill demands 
it, we need the severe treatment of the knife and a painful 
operation, yes, and should the disease have extended beyond 
the reach even of these remedies, in the last resort the ill is 
burnt out by fire, how much more should we realize that God 
our physician, in his desire to wash away the ills of our souls, 
which they have brought on themselves through a variety of 
sins and crimes, makes use of penal remedies of a similar sort, 
even to the infliction of a punishment of fire on those who 


have lost their soul’s health. 


180 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Allusions to this are found also in the holy scriptures. 
For instance, in Deuteronomy the divine word threatens that 
sinners are to be punished with “fevers and cold and pallor,” 
and tortured with “feebleness of eyes and insanity and paralysis 
and blindness and weakness of the reins” (cf. Dr 28:22, 28, 
29). And so if anyone will gather at his leisure from the whole 
~ of scripture all the references to sufferings which in threats 

against sinners are called by the names of bodily sicknesses, he 
will find that through them allusion is being made to either 
the ills or the punishments of souls. And to help us understand 
that as physicians supply aids to sufferers with the object of 
restoring them to health through careful treatment, so with 
the same motive God acts towards those who have lapsed and 
fallen into sin, there is proof in that passage in which, through 
the prophet Jeremiah, God’s “cup of fury” is commanded “to 
be set before all nations” that “they may drink it and become 
mad and spew it out” (cf. Jer 25:15, 16, 27). In this passage 
there is a threat which says, “If anyone refuse to drink, he shall 
not be cleansed” (cf. Jer 25:28, 29); from which certainly we 
understand that the fury of God’s vengeance ministers to the 
purification of souls. 

Isaiah teaches that even the punishments which are said to 
be inflicted by fire are meant to be applied as a help, when he 
speaks thus about Israel: “The Lord will wash away the filth of 
the sons and daughters of Sion, and will purge away the blood 
from the midst of them by the spirit of judgment and the 
spirit of burning” (Is 4:4). And of the Chaldaeans he speaks 
thus: “Thou hast coals of fire, sit upon them; they shall be to 
thee for a help” (Is 47:14, 15 [LXX)),'° and in other places 
he says: “The Lord shall sanctify them in burning fire” (cf. Is 
66:16, 17), and in the prophet Malachi it speaks as follows: 
“The Lord shall sift and refine his people as gold and silver; 


Book II, Chapter X 181 


he shall refine and purify and pour forth purified the sons of 
Judah” (Mal 3:3). 

7. Moreover, the saying in the gospel about unjust stew- 
ards, who must be “cut asunder” and “their portion placed 
with the unbelievers” (cf. Lk 12:42—46), as if the portion 
which was not theirs were to be sent somewhere else, undoubt- 
edly alludes to some sort of punishment, as it seems to me, 


which falls on those whose spirit has to be separated from their _ 
> soul. Now if we are to understand this spirit as belonging to * 
the divine nature, that is, as being the Holy Spirit, we shall | 


perceive that the passage relates to the gift of the Holy Spirit. 
It tells us that when, whether through baptism or the grace of 
the Spirit, the “word of wisdom” or the “word of knowledge” 
(cf. 1 Cor 12:8) or of any other endowment has been given to 
a man as a gift and not rightly used, that is to say, either “hid- 
den in the earth” or “bound up in a napkin” (cf. Mt 25:25; 
Lk 19:20), the gift of the Spirit will surely be withdrawn from 


his soul, and the portion which remains, namely the essence 


of the soul, will be placed with the unbelievers, cut asunder 
and separated from that Spirit with whom, by joining itself to 
the Lord, it ought to have been “one spirit” (cf. 1 Cor 6:17). 


> If, however, we are to understand the spirit as being not 


the Spirit of God but the nature of the soul itself, then that 


F portion of it will be called the better, which was made in the 


“image and likeness” of God (cf. Gn 1: :26), whereas the: other 
portion will be that which afterwards ‘through the misuse of 


: inchaenapahddpeeitenaiisisel bias hone - mobo bameansioccio 
free will was received in a condition contrary to the nature of 


its original purity; and this portion, as being the friend and 


beloved companion of the material body, is visited with the 


fate of the unbelievers. But the cutting asunder may also be 


, understood in a third sense, namely, that whereas each of the 


faithful, though he be the least in the Church, is we are told 
attended by an angel who is declared by the Savior always 


182 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


to “behold the face of God the Father” (cf. Mt 18:10), this 
angel of God, who was certainly one with him over whom he 
was set, is to be withdrawn from him if by disobedience he 
becomes unworthy; and in that case “his portion,” that is the 
portion consisting of his human nature, being torn asunder 
' from God’s portion, is to be numbered with the unbelievers, 
seeing that he did not faithfully observe the warnings of the 
angel allotted to him by God (cf. Lk 12:46). 

8. The “outer darkness” (Mt 8:12, etc.), too, is in my opin- 
ion not to be understood as a place with a murky atmosphere 
and no light at all, but rather as a description of those who 

through their immersion in the darkness of deep ignorance 
have become separated from every gleam of reason and intel- 
ligence. We must also see whether possibly this expression 
does not mean that just as the saints will receive back the very 
bodies in which they have lived in holiness and purity during 
their stay in this life, but bright and glorious as a result of the 
resurrection, so, too, the wicked, who in this life have loved 
the darkness of error and the night of ignorance, will after the 
resurrection be clothed with murky and black bodies, in order 
that this very gloom of ignorance, which in the present world 
has taken possession of the inner parts of their mind, may in 
the world to come be revealed through the garment of their 
outward body. (Perhaps,'’ however, the “gloom and darkness” 
[cf. Mt 8:12, etc.] should be taken to mean this coarse and 
earthly body, through which at the end of this world each man 
that must pass into another world will receive the beginnings 
of a fresh birth). . .. The expression “prison” (1 Pr 3:19)'? must 
be thought of in a similar way." 
Let these remarks,'* which we have made at this point, 


to preserve the order of our discourse, in the fewest possible 
words, suffice for the present. 


Chapter XI 


THE Promises! 


1. Let us now consider briefly what we ought to believe about 
the promises. _ 

It is certain that no Kring c creature can be altogether 
inactive and immovable, but that it is eager for every kind 
of movement and for continual action and volition; and it 
is clear, I think, that this nature resides in all living beings. 
Much more then must a rational being such as man be always 
engaged in some movement or activity. And if a man forgets 
himself and is unaware of what befits him, his whole purpose 
centers around bodily experiences and in all his movements he 
is occupied with the pleasures and lusts of the body. If, how- 
ever, he is one who strives to care or provide for the common 
good, he applies himself either to serving the State or obeying 
the magistrates or to whatever else may seem to be clearly of 
benefit to people generally. But if there be a man who can 
discern something better than these activities, which appear 
to be connected with the body, and can give diligent attention 
to wisdom and knowledge, he will undoubtedly direct all his 


efforts towards studies of this sort, with the object oflearning, ___. 


through inquiry into truth, what are the causes and reason 
of things.” As therefore in this life one man decides that the 
highest good is the pleasure of the body, another the service 


183 


184 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


of the State, and another devotion to studies and learning, so 
we seek to know whether i in that life which is the true one, 


the life which is said to be “hid with Christ in God” (cf. Col 


,, 3:3), that is, in the eternal life, there will be for us any such 


order or condition of existence. 

2. Now some men, who reject the labor of thinking and 
seek after the outward and literal meaning of the law, or rather 
give way to their own desires and lusts, disciples of the mere 
letter, consider that the promises of the future are to be looked 
for in the form of pleasure and bodily luxury. 3 And chiefly on 
this account they desire after the resurrection to have flesh of 


_ such a soft that they will never lack the power to eat and drink 


| 
¥ 


and to do all things that pertain to flesh and blood, not follow- 
ing the teaching of the eee Paul about the resurrection of 


say that even after the resurrection there will be engagements 
to marry and the procreation of children, for they picture to 
themselves the earthly city of Jerusalem about to be rebuilt 
with precious stones laid down for its foundations and its walls 
erected of jasper and its battlements adorned with crystal; it 
will also have an outer wall composed of different precious 
stones, namely, jasper, sapphire, chalcedony, emerald, sardius, 
onyx, chrysolite, chrysoprase, hyacinth and amethyst (cf. Rv 
21:10-21; Is 54:12; Ez 28:13). Then, too, they suppose that 
“aliens” are to be given them to minister to their pleasures, 
and that they will have these for “plowmen” or “vinedressers” 
or “wall-builders” (cf. Is 61:5, 60:10), so that by them their 
ruined and fallen city may be raised up again; and they con- 
sider that they are to receive the “wealth of nations” to live on 
and that they will have control over their riches, so that even 
the camels of Midian and Ephah will come and bring them 
“gold, incense and precious stones” (cf. Is 61:6; 60:5, 6). 


Book II, Chapter XI 185 


a 
All this they try to prove on prophetic authority from 
those passages of scripture which describe the promises made 
to Jerusalem; where it is also said that “they who serve God 
shall eat and drink, but sinners shall hunger and thirst,” and 
that “the righteous shall enjoy gladness, but confusion shall 
possess the wicked” (cf. Is 65:13, 14). From the New Testa- 
ment, too, they quote the Savior's saying, in which he makes 
a promise to his disciples of the gladness that wine brings; “I 
will not drink of this cup until the day that I drink it new with 
you in my Father’s\kingdom” (Mt 26:29). They add also the 
following, that the Savior calls those blessed, who now hun- 
ger and thirst, and promises them that they shall be filled (cf. 
Mt 5:6; Lk 6:21); and they quote from the scriptures many 
other illustrations, the force of which they do not perceive! 
must be figurative and spiritual. Then, too, after the fashion 
of what happens in this life, and of this world’s positions of 
dignity or rank or supreme power, they consider that they 
will be kings and princes, just like the corresponding earthly 
rulers, relying on the saying in the gospel, “Thou shalt have 
authority over five cities” (cf. Jer 17:25; Lk 19:19). And, to 
speak briefly, they desire that all things which they look for 
in the promises should correspond in every detail with the 
course of this life, that is, that what exists now should exist 
again. Such are the thoughts of men who believe indeed in 
Christ, but because they understand the divine scriptures in 


a Judaistic sense, extract from them nothing that is worthy of 
ho divine praioes O7 

3. Those, however, who accept a view of the scriptures 
which accords with the meaning of the apostles, do indeed 
hope that the'saints will eat; but they will eat the “bread of life” 
(Jn 6:35), which is to nourish the soul and enlighten the mind 
with the food of truth and wisdom and to cause it to drink 


from the cup of divine wisdom, as the divine scripture says: 


186 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


“Wisdom has prepared her table, she has slain her victims, 
she has mingled her wine in the bowl and cries with a loud 
voice, Turn in to me and eat the bread which I have prepared 
for you, and drink the wine which I have mingled for you” 
(cf. Prv 9:2—5). The mind, when nourished by this food of 
wisdom to a whole and perfect state, as man was made in the 
beginning, will be restored to the “image and likeness” (Gn 
1:26) of God; so that, even though a man may have departed 
out of this life insufficiently instructed, but with a record of 
acceptable works, he can be instructed in that Jerusalem, the 
city of the saints, that is, he can be taught and informed and 
fashioned into a “living stone,” a “stone precious and elect” 
(cf. 1 Pt 2:46), because he has borne with courage and endur- 
ance the trials of life-and the struggles after piety. There, too, 
he will come to a truer and clearer knowledge of the saying 
already uttered here, that “man does not live by bread alone, 
but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God” 
(Mt 4:4; Dt 8:3). Moreover, the princes and rulers must be 
understood to be those who both rule over the souls of lower 
condition and also instruct and teach them and initiate them 
into things divine. 
4. But if these considerations seem scarcely able to produce 
a worthy desire in minds that hope for literal promises, let us 
continue our inquiry a little, and see how an eager longing for 
the reality of things is natural to us and implanted in our soul; 
“ so that we may at last be able, by following outa spiritual view 
of scripture, to describe as it were the true forms of the “bread 
of life” and the quality of that “wine” and the characteristics of 
the “principalities” (cf. Jn 6:35; Prv 9:2, 5; Lk 19:17, 19). As, 
then, in those arts, which are accomplished by manual labor, 
the design, the why or how or for what uses a thing is made, 
lies in the mind, but its practical efficacy is unfolded through 
the help of the work of our hands, so we must believe that in 


Book II, Chapter XI 187 


regard to God’s works, which have been made by him, their 
design and meaning remain a secret. Now when our eye sees 
the works of the craftsman, if it observes an article which has 
been made with unusual skill, immediately the mind burns 
to discover of what sort it is and how and for what uses it was 
made. Much more, and beyond all comparison, does the mind 
burn with unspeakable longing to learn the design of those 
things which we perceive to have been made by God. ‘This 
longing, this love has, we believe, undoubtedly been implanted 
in us by God; and as the eye naturally demands light and 
vision and our body by its nature desires food and drink, so 


our mind cherishes a natural and appropriate longing to know | 


God's truth and to learn the causes of things. MD 

Now we have not received this longing from God on the 
condition that it should not or could not ever be satisfied; for 
in that case the “love of truth” (cf. 2 Thes 2:10) would appear 
to have been implanted in our mind by God the Creator to 


no purpose, if its gratification is never to be accomplished. So” 


when even in this life men devote themselves with great labor 


to sacred and religious studies, although they obtain only some 


small fragments out of the immeasurable treasures of divine 
knowledge (cf. Col 2:2, 3), yet [they gain this advantage,]* 
that they occupy their mind and understanding with these 


questions and press onward in their eager desire. Moreover - 


they derive much assistance from the fact that by turning their 


mind to the study and love of truth they render themselves __,, ' 
» more capable of receiving instruction in the future. Forwhen , ./, 


a man wishes to paint a picture, if he first sketches with the 
faint touch of a light pencil the outlines of the proposed fig- 
ure and inserts suitable marks to indicate features afterwards 
to be added, this preliminary drawing with its faint outline 
undoubtedly renders the canvas more prepared to receive the 
true colors. So it will be with us, if only that faint form and 


188 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


outline is inscribed “on the tablets of our heart” (cf. 2 Cor 3:3) 
by the pencil of our Lord Jesus Christ. This is perhaps the rea- 
son why it is said, “To every one that hath shall be given and 
added” (Mr 25:29). It is clear, then, that to those who have 
now in this life a kind of outline of truth and knowledge there 


, shall be added in the future the beauty of the perfect image. 


5. Such was, I think, the “desire” indicated by him who 
said, “I am in a strait between two, having a desire to depart 


_ and be with Christ; for this is far better” (Phil 1:23). He knew 


Persie teted gone back to Christ he would learimore 
clearly the reasons for all things that happen on earth, that is, 


the reasons which account for man, for his soul or his mind, or 
whichever of these constitutes man,> and what is the meaning 
of the “ruling spirit,” and of the “spirit who works,” and of 
the “living spirit,”® and of thegrace of the Holy Spirit which 
is given to the faithful. Then also-he will understand the sig- 
nificance of the name Israel, and of the diversity of races; and 
also of the twelve tribes contained in Israel, and of the people 
of each several tribe. He will also understarid the reasons for 
the priests and Levites and for the different priestly orders, and 
whose type it was that was seen in Moses; and he will learn, 
too, what is the true meaning in God’s sight of the jubilées and 
the weeks of years. Further, he will see the reason of the feast 


days and the holy days and will perceive the causes of all the » 


sacrifices and purifications. He will observe the reason for the 
cleansing after leprosy and for the different kinds of leprosy, 
and the meaning of the purification of those who suffer an 
emission of seed. He will learn about the good powers, what 
they are, and their greatness and qualities, and likewise about 
the opposite kind, and the explanation of the love which the 
former bear towards mankind and of the persistent jealousy 
of the latter.’ He will perceive what is the reason of souls* and 


the meaning of the diversity among animals, whether those 


Book II, Chapter XI 189 


that live in water, or birds, or beasts; and for what cause each 
genus is divided into so many species; and what purpose of 
the Creator or what indication of his wisdom is concealed in 
each individual thing. Further, he will learn the reason why 
certain properties are attached to certain roots and herbs; and 
what is the reason of the fallen angels, and for what cause 
they are allowed to flatter in some respects those who do not 
despise them with complete faith and to exist for the purpose 
of deceiving and leading men astray. He will learn the judg- 
ment of divine providence about each individual thing; about 
things which happen to men, that they happen not by chance 
or accident, but by a reason so carefully thought out, and so 
high above us, that it does not overlook even the number 
of the hairs of our head, and that not of the saints only but 


probably of all men; the scope of which providence extends |) 


even to the “two sparrows” (cf. Mt 10:30, 31) which are sold 
for a penny, whether “sparrows” is to be understood spiritually 
or literally. For now in this present life we seek, but there we 


* shall see plainly (cf. 1 Cor 13:12). 


6. All this leads us to suppose that no small interval of 
time may pass before the reason merely of things on earth can 
be shown to worthy and deserving men after their departure 
from life, in order that through their acquaintance with it all 
and the grace of full knowledge they may enjoy an indescrib- 
able gladness. So then, if the air between heaven and earth is 
not devoid of living and even rational beings, as the apostle 


“said, “Wherein in times past ye walked according to the course 


of this world, according to the prince of the power of this air, 
the spirit who new worketh in the children of disobedience” 
(Eph 2:2), and again; “We shall be caught up in the clouds to 
meet Christ in the air, and-so shall we ever be with the Lord” 
(1 Thes 4:17), we must suppose that the saints will remain 
there for some time, until they learn the reason of the ordering 


190 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


of all that goes on in the air, in its two-fold form. By two-fold 
form I mean, for example; when we were on earth we saw 
animals or trees and we perceived the differences among them 
and also-the very great diversity among men. But when we saw 
these things we did not understand-the reasons for them; but 
this alone was suggested to us by the very diversity. of whatwe 
saw, that we should search out and inquire for what reason all 
these were created diverse and arranged in such variety; and 
if we have cherished'on earth a 2eal and love for this kind of 
knowledge, there will be given to us after death an acquain- 
tance with and understanding of that reason, if indeed the 
matter turns out as we should wish. When therefore we have 
comprehended that in its fullness, we shall comprehend in 
two-fold form the things we saw on earth. 

We may speak in some such way also about the abode in 
the air. I think that the saints as they depart from this life will 
remain in some place situated on the earth, which the divine 
scripture calls “paradise” (cf. Gn 2:8, etc. [LXX]; Lk 23:43). 
This will be a place of instruction and, so to speak, a lecture 
room or school for souls, in which they may be taught about 

that they had seen on earth and may also receive some 
indications of what is to follow in the future; just as when 
placed in this life they had obtained certain indications of the 
future, seen indeed “through a glass darkly,” and yet truly seen 
“in part” (cf. 1 Cor 13:12), which are revealed more clearly 
and brightly to the saints in their proper times and places. If 
anyone is “pure in heart” (Mt 5:8) and of unpolluted mind 
and well-trained understanding he will make swifter progress 
and quickly ascend to the region of the air, until he reaches the 
kingdom of the heavens, passing through the series of those 
“abiding places” (cf. Jn 14:2),” if I may so call them, which 
the Greeks have termed spheres, that is, globes, but which 
the divine scripture calls heavens. In each of these he will first 


_ Book II, Chapter XI 191 


observe all that happens there, and then learn ee, ee why 
it happens; and thus he will proceed in Sa 
stage, following him who has “entered into the heavens, Jesus 
the Son of God” (Heb 4:14), and who has Said, “I will that, 
where I am, they also may be with me” (Jn 17:24). Further, 
he alludes to this diversity of places when he says, “In my 
Father’s house are many abiding-places” (Jn 14:2). He him- 
self, however, is everywhere and runs through all things; nor 
are we any longer to think of him as being confined within 
those narrow limits in which he once lived for our sakes, that 


is, not as being in that I circumscribed condition which was » 


his when he dwelt on earth, among men in a body like ours, 
so that it was then possible to think of him as being enclosed 
insomeone place. | ~ 
7. When the saints have reached the heavenly places, then 
they will see clearly the nature of the stars, one by one, and 
will understand whether they are living creatures or whatever 
may be truth about them."° They will also perceive the other 
reasons for God’s works, which he himself shall reveal to them. 
For now he will show to them, as to sons, the causes of things 
and the perfection of his creation, teaching them why one 
star is placed in its particular position in the sky and why 
it is separated from another by so great an interval of space; 
what would happen, for example, if it were nearer or farther 
away; or if this star had been greater than that, how the entire 
universe would not retain its identity but everything would 
be changed into another form. And when they have gone 
through everything connected with the reason of the stars 
and with those ways of life that exist in heaven they will come 
to “the things which are not seen” (2 Cor 4:18), or to those 
whose names alone we have as yet heard, and to the things 
“invisible” (cf, Rom 1:20; Col 1:16). That there are many of 
these we learn from Paul the apostle, but what they are or what 


= 


192 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


differences exist among them we cannot even guess with our 
feeble intellect. 


And so the rational being, growing at each successive stage, 
not as it grew when in this life in the Mesh or body and in 


the soul, but increasing in mind and intelligence, advances 
as a mind already perfect to perfect knowledge, no longer 
hindered by its former carnal senses, but developing in intel- 
lectual power, ever approaching the pure and gazing “face 
to face” (cf. 1 Cor 13:12),'' if 1 may so speak, on the causes 
of things.'? And it attains perfection, first that perfection by 
which it rises to this condition, and secondly that by which 


it remainis therein, while it has for the food on which it feeds 
‘the problems of the meaning of things and the nature of their 


causes. For as in this bodily life of ours we grew first of all 


Bodily into thar which we now are, the increase being supplied 


in our early years merely by a sufficiency of food, whereas after 
the process of growth has reached its limit we use food not in 


order to grow but as a means of preserving life within us; so, 


) too, I think that the mind, when it has come to perfection, 


still feeds on appropriate and suitable food in a measure which 
can neither admit of want nor of superfluity. But in all respects 
this food must be understood to be the contemplation and 


¥ understanding of God, and its measures to be those that are 


appropriate and suitable to this nature which has been made 
and created. These measures will rightly be observed by every 
one of those who are beginning to “see God,” that is, to under- 


stand him through “purity of heart” (cf. Mt 5:8). 


BOOK III 


PREFACE OF RUFINUS 


The two former books on “First Principles” I translated not 
merely at your request, but at your urgent demand, during 
the days of Lent. But since in those days, my devout brother 
Macarius, you were living near me and were more at leisure 
than you are now, I also worked the more. These latter two, 
however, I have been slower in interpreting, seeing that you 
have paid me fewer visits from the furthermost part of the 
city to press forward the work. Now if you remember what | 
mentioned in my former preface,' that certain people would 
be angry if they did not hear us speak some evil of Origen, this 
came to pass immediately, as I think you discovered. But if 
those daemons who incite the tongues of men to evil speaking 
were so incensed against that work, in which he had not yet 
fully laid bare their secrets, what do you suppose will happen 
to this, in which he has revealed all the dark and hidden ways 
by which they creep into the hearts of men and deceive weak 
and feeble souls? At once you will see everything in confusion, 
dissensions aroused, clamor raised throughout the city, and 
condemnation called down upon the man who strove to dispel 
the diabolical darkness of ignorance by the light of the gospel 
lamp. Let such things, however, be counted of small moment 
by everyone who desires, while preserving unimpaired the 
rule of the Catholic faith, to be trained in divine instruction. 


193 


194 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


But this I must needs mention, that, as I did in the former 
books, so in these also I have taken care not to translate such 
passages as appeared to be contrary to the rest of Origen’s 
teaching and to our own faith, but to omit them as forgeries 
interpolated by others.* If, however, he appeared to say any- 
thing of a novel kind about rational creatures, then, seeing 
that the essence of the faith is not involved in this, for the sake 
_ of knowledge and discussion, on occasions when perchance 
"we had to reply to certain heresies in a similar order, I have 
not omitted such statements, either in these or in the former 
books, except perhaps where he wished to repeat in the later 
books what had been said in the former; in which case I have 
thought it right for the sake of brevity to cut out some of these 
repetitions. 

Anyone who reads these books with a desire to advance in 
knowledge and not to raise objections will do better to have 
them explained to him by skilled teachers. For it is absurd to 
have the fictitious songs of the poets and the ridiculous tales in 
the comedies explained by grammarians, while anyone thinks 
he can learn without master or interpreter the things which 
are written about God and the heavenly powers and the entire 
universe, in which every wicked error whether of pagan phi- 
Tosophers or of heretics is refuted. This is how it comes about 
that when the discussions concern things difficult and obscure 
men choose rather to condemn them rashly and ignorantly, 
than to learn their meaning by study and diligence. 


A“ 


Chapter I 


aR 


FREE WILL! 


Greek 


1. Since the teaching of the 
church includes the doctrine 
of the righteous judgment 
of God, a doctrine which, if 
believed to be true, summons 
its hearers to live a good life 
and by every means to avoid 
sin—for it assumes that they 
acknowledge that deeds wor- 
thy of praise or of blame lie 
within our own power—let 
us now discuss separately a 


Latin 

1. Such we believe should be 
our beliefs about the divine 
promises, when we apply our 
understanding to the con- 
templation of that eternal 
and never-ending age and 
contemplate its unspeakable 
joy and blessedness. 

Since the teaching of 
the church includes the doc- 
trine of a future righteous 
judgment of God, a belief 
in which summons and per- 
suades men to live a good and 
blessed life and in every way 
to avoid sin, and since by this 
the fact is undoubtedly indi- 
cated that it lies within our 
own power to devote our- 
selves to a life worthy either 


195 


196 


Greek 


few points on the subject of 
free will, a problem of the 


utmost possible urgency. And 


in order to understand what 
free will is we must explain its 
meaning, that when this has 
been made clear the precise 
question may lie before us. 


2. Of things that move 
some have the cause of their 
movement within themselves, 
while others are moved solely 
from without.” Those, for 
example, moved solely from 
without are portable things, 
such as logs of wood and 
stones and all matter that is 
held together simply by its 
own constitution. Let the 
view that would regard the 
flux of bodies as motion be 
excluded from the present 
discussion, since there is no 
need of this for our purpose. 
Things that have the cause 
of their movement in them- 
selves are animals and plants 
and in a word everything 


that is held together by its 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

of praise or of blame, I con- 
sider it necessary in conse- 
quence to discuss a few points 
on the subject of our free will, 
inasmuch as this question has 
been dealt with in no unwor- 
thy manner by very many 
writers. And in order the 
more easily to understand 
what free will is, let us inquire 
what is the nature of will and 
of desire. 

2. Of things that move 
some have the causes of their 
movements within them- 
selves, while others receive 
them from without. Those, 
for example, moved solely 
from without are all lifeless 
things, such as stones, logs of 
wood and other things of this 
kind, which are held together 
simply by the constitution 
of their material or by their 
physical structure. We must 
of course exclude for the pres- 
ent the view that regards it as 
motion when bodies dissolve 
in corruption; for this has no 
bearing on our immediate 
purpose. Other things have 


the cause of their movement 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


nature or by soul. Among 
these they say are included 
even metals; and in addition 
fire is self-moved and perhaps 
also springs of water. But 
while all these have the cause 
of their movement within 
themselves, some are said to 
be moved out of themselves, 
others from within them- 
selves; non-living things out 
of themselves, living things 


from within themselves. 


Now living things are 
moved from within them- 
selves when there arises 
within them an image which 
calls forth an impulse. And 
again in certain animals 
images arise which call forth 
impulses, the imaginative 
nature setting the impulse in 
ordered motion; for instance, 
in the spider, an image of 
weaving a web arises and the 
impulse to weave it follows, 


197 


Latin 
in themselves, as animals, 
trees and all things which are 
held together either by nat- 
ural life or by soul. Among 
these some think that even 
the veins of metals should 
be reckoned; and, in addi- 
tion, fire must be supposed 
to be self-moved and perhaps 
also springs of water. But of 
these which have the cause 
of their movements within 
themselves, some are said to 
be moved out of themselves, 
others from within them- 
selves; and they are so divided 
because those which have 
life but no soul move out of 
themselves, those which have 
soul from within themselves. 
These latter move when 
there comes to them an 
image, that is, a kind of desire 
or incitement, which impels 
them to move towards an 
object. Again, there exists 
in certain animals such an 
image, that is, a desire or 
feeling, which by a natural 
instinct impels and excites 
them to ordered and complex 
motion; as we see in spiders, 


—— 


198 


Greek 


the insect’s imaginative nature 
inciting it to accomplish this 
task in an orderly manner, 
and beyond this imaginative 
nature the insect possesses 
nothing else. So in the bee 
there is an impulse to pro- 
duce a honeycomb. 


3. The rational animal, 
however, has something 
besides its imaginative nature, 
namely reason, which judges 
the images. Some it rejects, 
others it approves of, the 
object being that the creature 
may be guided in accordance 
with these latter images. So it 
happens that, since there are 
in the nature of reason pos- 
sibilities of contemplating 


~ good and evil, by following 


out which and contemplating 
them both choose good and 
avoid evil, we are worthy of 
praise when we devote our- 
selves to the practice of good, 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

which by an image, that is, a 
desire and longing to weave 
a web, are excited to accom- 
plish in an orderly manner 
the work of weaving, some 
natural movement undoubt- 
edly calling forth the impulse 
to do this kind of work; nor 
do we find that this insect 
has any other feeling beyond 
the natural longing to weave 
a web. So, too, the bee is 
impelled to fashion honey- 
combs and to gather, as they 
call it, aerial honey. 

3. But while the rational 
animal has in itself these nat- 
ural movements, it has also, 
to a greater extent than the 
other animals, the faculty of 
reason, by means of which 
it can judge and discern 
between the natural move- 
ments, disapproving of and 
rejecting some and approv- 
ing of and accepting others. 
So by the judgment of this 
reason the movements of men 
may be guided and directed 
towards an approvable life. 

From which it follows 
that, since the nature of 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


and of blame when we act in 
the opposite way. 


We must not forget, how- 
ever, that the greater part of 
the nature assigned to every 
rational creature is in the ani- 
mals in varying degree, some 
having more and some less so 
that the instinct in hunting 
dogs and in war horses comes 
near, if I may say so, to reason 
itself. To be subject, then, to 
a particular external impres- 
sion which gives rise to such 
or such an image is admit- 
tedly not one of the things 
lying within our power; but 
to decide to use what has 
happened either in this way 
or in that is the work of noth- 
ing else but the reason within 
us, which, as the alternatives 
appear, either influences us 
towards the impulses that 


199 


Latin 
this reason in man includes 
a faculty of distinguishing 
between good and evil, and 
when man has done this he 
possesses also the power of 
choosing that which he has 
approved of, he is rightly , 
deemed worthy of praise 
when he chooses what is 
good, and of blame when he 
follows what is base and evil. 
We must, however, by 
no means forget that in cer- 
tain dumb animals, as for 
instance clever dogs or war 
horses, there is found a more 
complex movement than in 
the rest, so that some men 
think that these are moved by 
a kind of rational intelligence. 
But we must believe that this 
results not so much from rea- 
son as from an instinctive and 
natural movement bestowed 
in especially large measure for 
purposes of this kind. But, 
as we were saying, since the 
rational animal is thus con- 
stituted, we men are liable to 
meet with and receive from 
without, whether through 
sight or hearing or the other 


ae 


200 


Greek 


incite to what is good and 
seemly or else turns us aside 
to the reverse. 


4. But if anyone should 
say that the impression from 
without is of such a sort that 
it is impossible to resist it 
whatever it may be, let him 
turn his attention to his own 
feeling and movements and 
see whether there is not an 
approval, assent and inclina- 
tion of the controlling faculty 


towards a particular action 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 


senses, certain impressions 
which urge and excite us 
to good movements or the 
reverse. Now inasmuch as 
these come from without, it 
certainly does not lie within 
our power to avoid meeting 
and receiving them; but to 
judge and determine how we 
ought to use them when they 
come is the work and busi- 
ness of that reason which is 
in us, that is of our own judg- 
ment. For by the judgment of 
this reason we use the stimuli 
that meet us from without for 
whatever purpose the reason 
itself may approve, directing 
our natural movements at its 
bidding to courses that are 
good or the reverse. 

4, But if anyone should 
say that those impressions 
from without that call forth 
our movements are of such 
a sort that it is impossible 
to resist them, whether they 
incite us to good or to evil, let 
him who thinks thus turn his 
attention for a little while to 
himself, carefully examining 
his own inner movements, 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


on account of some specious 
attractions. 


For instance, when a 
woman displays herself before 
a man who has determined to 
remain chaste and to abstain 
from sexual intercourse and 
invites him to act contrary 
to his purpose, she does not 
become the absolute cause 
of the abandonment of that 
purpose. The truth is that he 
is first entirely delighted with 
the sensation and lure of the 
pleasure and has no wish to 
resist it nor to strengthen 


his previous determination; 


201 


Latin 

and see whether he does not 
find that, when the attrac- 
tion of any desire strikes him, 
nothing is accomplished until 
the assent of the soul is gained 
and the bidding of the mind 
indulges the wicked sugges- 
tion. It is as if an appeal were 
being made on certain plausi- 
ble grounds from two differ- 
ent sides to a judge dwelling 
within the tribunal of our 
heart, in order that when the 
grounds have been first stated 
the sentence to act may pro- 
ceed from the judgment of 
reason. 

Suppose, for instance, 
that when a man has deter- 
mined to live a chaste and 
continent life and to abstain 
from all sexual intercourse, a 
woman appears before him 
and invites and entices him 
to do something contrary 
to his purpose, that woman 
does not become the true and 
absolute cause or necessity of 
his perverse conduct, since it 
is in his power, by calling to 
mind his resolution, to bridle 
the incitements to lust and 


202 


Greek 


and then he commits the 
licentious act. On the other 
hand the same experiences 
may happen to one who has 
undergone more instruction 
and discipline; that is, the 
sensations and incitements 
are there, but his reason, 
having been strengthened to 
a higher degree and trained 
by practice and confirmed 
towards the good by right 
doctrines, or at any rate being 
near to such confirmation, 
repels the incitements and 


gradually weakens the desire. 


5. But to throw the blame 


cag nj aioe Dc nd 
for what so happens to us 


on external things and to 


free ourselves from censure, 
declaring that we are like 
stocks and stones, which are 
dragged along by agents that 
move them from without, is 
neither true nor reasonable, 
but is the argument of a man 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

to restrain the delights of the 
attraction that allures him by 
the stern rebukes of virtue, 
so that all desire for the plea- 
sure is put to flight and the 
firmness and constancy of 
his determination endures. 
Finally, if allurements of this 
kind occur to men of greater 
learning who have grown 
strong in divine instruction, 
they at once remember who 
they are, calling to mind what 
they studied and learnt long 
ago and guarding themselves 
by the stay of this most holy 
doctrine; and thus they refuse 
and reject every attraction the 
incitement offers and repel 
the opposing evil desires 
by the help of the reason 
implanted within them. 

5. Since then it is estab- 
lished by a kind of natural 
evidence that these things 
are so, is it not gratuitous to 
refer the causes of our deeds 
to what happens to us from 
without and to remove the 
blame from ourselves, in 
whom the entire cause lies, 
that is, to say that we are like 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


who desires to contradict th 


idea of free will. For if we 


fen eh Nak 
were to ask such a one what 


free will was, he would say it 
consisted in this, that when 
I proposed to do a certain 
thing no external cause arose 
which incited me to do the 


opposite. 


Again, to throw the blame 
simply on our constitution 
is absurd, for education can 
take the most intemperate 
and savage of men and, if 
they will follow her exhor- 
tation, can change them, so 
that the alteration and change 
for the better is very great, the 
most licentious men often 
becoming better than those 
who formerly seemed not to 
be such by their very nature, 
and the most savage chang- 
ing to such a degree of gen- 
tleness that those who had 
never at any time behaved 
savagely yet seem to be savage 


203 


Latin 

stocks and stones, which have 
no movement within them 
but receive the causes of their 
movement from without? 
This indeed is neither a true 
nor a proper assertion, but 
one invented for the sole pur- 
pose of denying the freedom 
of the will; unless we are to 
suppose that free will could 
consist in this, that nothing 
which happens to, us from 
without could incite us to 
good or evil. 

But if anyone should 
refer the causes of our faults 
to the natural unruly consti- 
tution of the body, this can 
be shown to be contrary to 
the experience of all educa- 
tion. For how many do we 
see who, when they have pre- 
viously lived an uncontrolled 
and intemperate life and have 
been the captives of luxury 
and lust, and are then per- 
chance incited by the word 
of teaching and instruction 
to lead a better life, undergo 
so great a change that instead 
of being given to luxurious 
and disgraceful conduct they 


204 


Greek 


in comparison with him who 
has changed to gentleness. We 
see others also most steady 
and respectable men, who by 
perversion to lower ways fall 
from their respectability and 
steadiness and change into a 
condition of licentiousness, 
often beginning such conduct 
in middle life and plunging 
into disorder after the sea- 
son of youth, which so far 
as its nature goes is unstable, 
has passed. Reason therefore 
shows that external things do 
not lie within our power; but 
to use them in this way or the 
other, since we have received 
reason as a judge and inves- 


tigator of the way in which 


we ought to deal with each of 


them, that is our task. 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

become sober and exceed- 
ingly chaste, and instead of 
being fierce and savage they 
become exceedingly mild and 
gentle? So on the other hand 
we see quiet and respectable 


‘men who, when they have 
‘become associated with tur- 


bulent and shameless people, 
have their “good manners 
corrupted by evil conversa- 
tions” (cf. 1 Cor 15:33) and 
are turned into men of the 
same sort as those who are 
steeped in every kind of wick- 
edness. This sometimes hap- 
pens to men of mature age, so 
that they prove to have lived 
more chastely in youth than 
when advanced years have 
granted them the opportu- 
nity of a freer life. The result 
of our reasoning, therefore, 
is to show that things which 
happen from without are not 
in our power, but to use them 
well or badly, when that rea- 
son which is within us dis- 
cerns and decides how we 
ought to use them, this lies 
within our power. 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


6. That it is our own task 
to live a good life, and that 
God asks this of us not as his 
work nor as a thing which 
comes to us from somebody 
else, nor, as some think, from 
fate, but as our own task, the 
prophet Micah will bear wit- 
ness when he says, “It hath 
been told thee, O man, what 
is good, and what doth the 
Lord require of thee but to 
do justice and to love mercy 
and to be ready to walk with 
thy God?” (Mi 6:8). 


And Moses says, “I have 
set before thy face the way 
of life and the way of death. 
Choose the good and walk in 


‘it.” And Isaiah: “If ye are will- 


ing and obey me, ye shall eat 
the good of the land. But if ye 
are unwilling and disobey me, 
a sword shall devour you. For 
the mouth of the Lord hath 
spoken it.” And in the Psalms: 
“If my people had hearkened 
unto me, and if Israel had 
walked in my ways, I would 


205 
Latin 
6. But in order to con- 
firm by the authority of the 
Scriptures the results of our 
reasoning, namely, that to 
live rightly or otherwise is 
our task and not a thing that — 
depends on external causes, 
nor, as some think, on the 
irresistible pressure of fate, 
Micah the prophet will bear 
witness when he says in these 
words, “It hath been told 
thee, O man, what is good, 
and what doth the Lord 
require of thee but to do jus- 
tice and to love mercy and 
to be ready to walk with the 
Lord thy God?” (Mi 6:8). 
And Moses speaks thus, 
“T have set before thy face the 
way of life and the way of 
death. Choose the good and 
walk in it” (Dt 30:15, 19). 
And Isaiah says, “If ye are 
willing and hearken to me, ye 
shall eat the good of the land. 
But if ye are unwilling and 
do not hearken, a sword shall 
devour you. For the mouth of 
the Lord hath spoken it” (Is 
1:19, 20). And in the Psalms 
it is written, “If my people 


206 


Greek 


have humbled their enemies 
to nothing and laid my hand 
upon those that afflict them,” 
where the “hearkening” and 
“walking in the ways” of God 
are assumed.to be in the peo- 
ple’s power. 


When, too, the Savior 
says, “I say unto you, that 
ye resist not him that is evil” 
(Mt 5:39), and “Whosoever 
is angry with his brother shall 
be in danger of the judgment” 
(Mt 5:22), and “Whosoever 
looketh upon a woman to 
lust after her hath committed 
adultery already in his heart,” 
and in any other command- 
ment he gives, he tells us that 
it lies in our power to observe 
the injunctions and that we 
shall with good reason be “in 
danger of the judgment” if we 


transgress them. 


This is why he also says, 
“Everyone who heareth 
these words of mine and 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

had hearkened unto me, and 
if Israel had walked in my 
ways, I would have humbled 
their enemies to nothing . . .” 
(Ps 81:13, 14),* by which he 
shows that the “hearkening” 
and “walking in the ways” 
of God were in the people’s 
power. 

Further, when the Say- 
ior says, “But I tell you not 
to resist him that is evil” (Mt 
5:39), and “Whosoever is 
angry with his brother shall 
be in danger of the judg- 
ment” (Mt 5:22), and “Who- 
soever looketh upon a woman 
to lust after her hath commit- 
ted adultery with her already 
in his heart” (Mt 5:28), and 
in any other commandments 
he gives, what else does he 
indicate but that it lies in 
our power to observe what is 
commanded, and that for this 
reason we are rightly brought 
“in danger of the judgment” 
if we transgress what we cer- 
tainly have power to observe? 

This is why he also says, 
“Everyone who heareth these 
words of mine and doeth 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 
doeth them shall be likened 


to a wise man who built his 
house upon the rock” (Mt 
7:24), and the words that 
follow; but “he that heareth 
and doeth them not is like 
a foolish man who built his 
house upon the sand” (Mt 
7:26), and what follows. And 
when he says to those on the 
right hand, “Come to me, ye 
blessed of my father,” and the 
words that follow, “for I was 
hungry and ye gave me to 
eat; I was thirsty and ye gave 
me to drink” (Mt 25:34, 35), 
with the utmost clearness he 
gives the promises as to men 
who are worthy of being 
praised, whereas on the con- 
trary he says to the others as 
to men who are blamewor- 
thy in comparison with the 
former, “Depart, ye cursed, 
into the everlasting fire” (Mt 
25:41). 


Let us see how Paul also 
reasons with us as being 
men of free will and our- 
selves responsible for our 
destruction or salvation. 


207 
Latin 
them is like a wise man who 
built his house upon the 
rock” (Mt 7:24), and the rest; 
and also, “He that heareth 
them and doeth them not is 
like a foolish man who built 
his house upon the sand” (Mt 
7:26), and the rest. Further, 
what he says to those on the 
right hand, “Come to me, 
all ye blessed of my father,” 
and the rest, “for I was hun- 
gry and ye gave me to eat; I 
was thirsty and ye gave me 
to drink” (Mt 25:34, 35), 
plainly shows that the issue 
lay with themselves, whether 
to be counted worthy of 
praise for keeping the com- 
mandments and receiving the 
promises, or to be counted 
worthy of blame like the oth- 
ers, whose desert was to hear 
and receive the opposite, to 
whom it is said, “Depart, ye 
cursed, into the everlasting 
fire” (Mt 25:41). 

Let us see how Paul the 
apostle also speaks to us as 
having the power of choice 
and as having in ourselves 
the causes of our salvation 


208 


Greek 


“Or despisest thou,” he says, 
“the riches of his goodness 
and forbearance and long- 
suffering, not knowing that 
the goodness of God leadeth 
thee to repentance? but after 
thy hardness and impenitent 
heart treasurest up for thyself 
wrath in the day of wrath 
and revelation and righteous 
judgment of God, who will 
render to every man accord- 
ing to his works: to them 
that by patience in well-do- 
ing seek for glory and honor 
and incorruption, eternal life; 
but unto them that are fac- 
tious and obey not the truth, 
but obey unrighteousness, 
shall be wrath and indigna- 
tion, tribulation and anguish, 
upon every soul of man that 
worketh evil, of the Jew first 
and also of the Greek; but 
glory and honor and peace 
to every man that worketh 
good, to the Jew first and 
also to the Greek” (Rom 2:4— 


_ 10). Indeed, there are in the 


scriptures ten thousand pas- 
sages which with the utmost 
—  — 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

or destruction. “Or despisest 
thou the riches of his good- 
ness and forbearance and 
longsuffering, not knowing 
that the goodness of God 
leadeth thee to repentance? 
but after thy hardness and 
impenitent heart treasurest 
up for thyself wrath in the 
day of wrath and revelation 
of the righteous judgment of 
God, who will render to every 
man according to his works; 
to them that by patience in 
well-doing seek for glory and 
honor and incorruption, eter- 
nal life; but unto them that 
are factious and obey not 
the truth, but obey unrigh- 
teousness, shall be wrath and 
indignation, tribulation and 
anguish, upon every soul of 
man that worketh evil, of 
the Jew first and also of the 
Greek; but glory and honor 
and peace to every man that 
worketh good, to the Jew 
first and also to the Greek” 
(Rom 2:4-10). And you 
can find many other, yes, 
innumerable passages in the 
holy scriptures, which clearly 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


clearness prove the existence 
of free will. 
——— 

“A 


Sad 


7. But since certain say- 
ings from both the Old and 
the New Testaments incline 
us to the opposite conclu- 
Sion, namely, that it is not in 
‘our power whether we keep 
the commandments and are 
saved or transgress them and 
are lost, let us bring forward 
some of these sayings and 
see what is the explanation 
of them. Thus from the ones 


we bring forward, any person 


who in a similar way selects 
for himself all the sayings that 
seem to destroy free will may 
consider our arguments in 
explanation of them. 

Now many have been 
troubled by the story of Pha- 
raoh, in dealing with whom 
God says several times, “I 
will harden Pharaoh's heart” 
(Ex 4:21; 7:3). For if he 


209 

Latin 
show that we have the power © 
of free will. For it would be 
absurd that we should have 
commandments given, the 
keeping of which is to save 
us and the transgression to 
condemn, if we do not pos- 
sess the power to keep them. 
7. But since there are 
found in the divine scriptures 
certain sayings so laid down , 
that the opposite conclusion — 
appears capable of being 
understood from them, let 
us bring them forward and 
discuss them by the rule of 
piety® and give the explana- 
tions of them. Thus from 
the few sayings that we now 
explain, the meaning of the 
other similar sayings which 
appear to rule out the power 
of free will may become clear. 


Now many are troubled 
by the words spoken to Pha- /\" | 
raoh by God, who says several 
times, “I will harden Pha- 
raoh’s heart” (Ex 4:21, 7:3). 
For if he is hardened by God 


210 


Greek 


is hardened by God and 
through being hardened sins, 
he is not himself responsible 
for the sin; and if this is so, 
Pharaoh has no free will. And 
someone will say that in the 
same way those who are lost 
have no free will and will not 
be lost on their own account. 
Also the saying in Ezekiel, 
“] will take away their stony 
hearts and will put in them 
hearts of flesh, that they 
may walk in my statutes and 
keep my judgments” (11:19, 
20), might lead one to sup- 
pose that it was God who 
gave the power to walk in 
the commandments and to 
keep the judgments, by his 
removing the hindrance, the 
stony heart, and implanting 
something better, the heart 
of flesh. 


Let us look also at the 
saying in the gospel, the 
answer which the Savior 
gives to those who ask why 
he speaks to the multitude in 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

and through being hardened 
falls into sin, he himself is not 
the cause of his sin. And if 
this is so, Pharaoh will appear 
not to have free will, and con- 
sequently men will assert that 
this example shows that all 
others who perish do not find 
the cause of their loss in their 
own free will. Also the saying 
in Ezekiel, “I will take away 
their stony hearts and will put 
in them hearts of flesh, that 
they may walk in my statutes 
and keep my judgments” 
(11:19, 20), might lead one 
to suppose that it was God 
who gave the power to walk 
in his commandments and to 
keep his judgments, if it was 
he who removed the stony 
heart, which hindered them 
from keeping the command- 
ments, and who implanted 
in them the better and more 
sensitive one, which is here 
called a heart of flesh. 

Let us look also at the 
nature of the saying with 
which the Lord and Savior 
in the gospel gives answer to 
those who asked him why 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


parables (cf. Mt 13:10). “That 
seeing they may not see,” he 
says, “and hearing they may 
hear and not understand, lest 
haply they should be con- 
verted and it should be for- 
given them” (Mk 4:12). And 
further, the saying by Paul, 
that it is “not of him that wil- 
leth nor of him that runneth, 
but of God that hath mercy”; 
and elsewhere, “Both to will 
and to do are of God” (cf. 
Phil 2:13); and elsewhere, 
“So then he hath mercy on 
whom he will, and whom he 
will he hardeneth. Thou wilt 
say to me then, Why doth he 
yet find fault; for who hath 
resisted his will?” (Rom 9:18, 
19). And, “The persuasion is 
of him that calleth” (Gal 5:8)° 
and not of us. 

And again, “Nay but, 
O man, who art thou that 
repliest against God? Shall 
the thing formed say to him 
that formed it, Why didst 
thou make me thus? Or hath 
not the potter a right over the 
clay, from the same lump to 
make one part a vessel unto 


211 
Latin 
he spoke to the multitude in 
parables (cf. Mr 13:10). He 
says, “That seeing they may 
not see, and hearing they may 
hear and not understand, lest 
haply they should be con- 
verted and it should be for- 
given them” (Mk 4:12). And 
further, what was said by Paul 
the apostle, that it is “not of 
him that willeth nor of him 
that runneth, but of God that 
hath mercy” (Rom 9:16); and 
elsewhere, “Both to will and 
to do are of God” (cf. Phil 
2:13); and again elsewhere, 
“So then he hath mercy on 
whom he will, and whom he 
will he hardeneth. Thou wilt 
say to me, therefore, why 
then doth he yet find fault; 
for who resisteth his will?” 
(Rom 9:18, 19). 

“O man, who art thou 
that repliest against God? 
Doth the thing formed say 
to him that formed it, Why 
didst thou make me thus? Or 
hath not the potter a right 
over the clay, from the same 
lump to make one vessel unto 
honor, and another unto 


212 


Greek 


honor, and another unto 
dishonor?” (Rom 9:20, 21). 
These passages are in them- 
selves sufficient to disturb 
ordinary people with the 
thought that man is not a 
free agent, but that it is God 
who saves and destroys whom 


he will. 


8. Let us begin therefore 
with the statements made 
about Pharaoh, that he was 
hardened by God in order 
that he might not let the 
people go. Along with this we 
shall examine also the apos- 
tle’s saying, “So then he hath 
mercy on whom he will, and 
whom he will he hardeneth.” 
Now these es are used 
by some of the heretics, who 
practically destroy free will 
by bringing in lost natures, 
which cannot receive salva- 
tion, and on the other hand 
saved natures, which are inca- 
pable of being lost.’ Pharaoh, 
they say, having a lost nature, 
is in consequence hardened 
by God, who has mercy on 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

dishonor?” (Rom 9:20, 21). 
These passages and others like 
them seem to have no small 
effect on ordinary people, so 
that they hesitate to believe 
that each man has freedom 
over his own will, but think 
that it depends on the will of 
God whether a man is saved 
or lost. 

8. Let us begin therefore 
with the statements made to 
Pharaoh, who is said to have 
been hardened by God in 
order that he might not let 
the people go. Along with 
this we shall also deal with 
that word of the apostle in 
which he says, “So then he 
hath mercy on whom he will, 
and whom he will he hard- 
eneth” (Rom 9:18). Now it 
is on these passages that the 
heretics chiefly rely, when 
they say that it is not in our 
power to be saved, but that 
the natures of souls are such 
that they are absolutely lost or 
saved, and that a soul with an 
evil nature can by no means 
become good nor can one 
with a good nature become 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


the spiritual men but hardens 
the earthly. 


Let us see, then, what 
they mean. We shall ask 
them whether Pharaoh was 
of an earthly nature. When 
they answer, we shall say that 
a man with an earthly nature 
is completely disobedient to 
God. But if he is disobedient, 
what need is there of harden- 
ing his heart, and that not 
once but several times? There 
is none, unless we assume 
that it was possible for him 
to obey and that, since he was 
not earthly, he would have 
obeyed completely when put 
to shame by the portents and 
signs; but that God, in order 
to display his mighty works 
for the salvation of the many, 
needs Pharaoh to proceed to 
a further degree of disobedi- 


ence and hardens his heart on 


this account. 


213 
Latin 
evil. So they say that Pharaoh, 
since he was of a lost nature, 
was in consequence hardened 
by God, who hardens those 
that are of an earthly nature 
but has mercy on those that 
are of a spiritual nature. 

Let us see, then, what 
they mean by this assertion; 
and let us first ask them to 
tell us whether they mean 
that Pharaoh had an earthly 
nature, which they call a 
lost one. They will doubt- 
less reply: “An earthly one.” 
If then he was of an earthly 
nature he was altogether inca- 
pable of believing in God or 
obeying him, seeing that his 
nature was opposed to this. 
But if this disobedience was 
implanted in him by nature, 
what further need was there 
for his heart to be hardened 
by God, and that not once 
but several times? There was 
none, unless we assume that it 
was possible for him to yield 
to persuasion. Nor could any- 
one be said to be hardened by 
another except a man who in 
himself was not hard. But if 


214 


Greek 


This will be our answer to 
them in the first place, for the 
purpose of overthrowing their 
supposition that Pharaoh was 
of a lost nature. 

We must return them the 
same answer in regard to the 
words spoken by the apostle. 
For whom does God harden? 
The lost? Why? Because they 
would obey if they were not 
hardened? Then would they 
not clearly be saved other- 
wise, since they are not of a 
lost nature? And on whom 
does he have mercy? Is it on 
those who are to be saved? 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

he was not hard of himself, 
it follows that he was not 
of an earthly nature, but of 
such a sort as to be capable of 
giving way when amazed by 
the signs and mighty works. 
And indeed Pharaoh was 
necessary to God, in order 
that for the salvation of the 
many God might display his 
power in him during his long 
resistance and struggle against 
God’s will; and it is on this 
account that his heart is said 
to be hardened. 

Let this be our answer 
to them in the first place, in 
order that their supposition 
that Pharaoh was by nature 
lost may be overthrown. 

Let us also deal with them 
in a similar way in regard 
to the words spoken by the 
apostle Paul. Whom, accord- 
ing to your opinion, does 
God harden? Is it those who 
you say are of a lost nature? 
They would have acted oth- 
erwise, I suppose, if they had 
not been hardened? But if 
they come to loss through 
being hardened, they are lost 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


But how is there need of a 
second mercy for those who 
have once for all been fash- 
ioned for salvation and who 
by their nature are in any 
case destined to be blessed? 
The truth is that, since they 
are in danger of being lost 
unless they obtain mercy, 
they obtain mercy in order 
that they may not incur that 
of which they are in danger, 
namely, being lost, but may 
be in the position of those 
who are saved. This is our 
answer to such persons. 


9. But to those who think 
they understand the mean- 
ing of “hardened”® we must 
address the further question: 
What actually do they mean 
by saying that God in his 


215, 
Latin 
not by nature but by acci- 
dent. Then again tell us, on 
whom does God have mercy? 
Is it on those who are to be 
saved? But how is there need 
of a second mercy for those 
who once for all were des- 
tined by nature for salvation 
and come to blessedness nat- 
urally? The truth is, as even 
their case shows, that it was 
possible for the men in ques- 
tion to be lost, and the rea- 
son why they obtain mercy is 
that by this means they may 
not be lost, but may come 
to salvation and possess the 
realms of the holy. Let this 
be our answer to those who 
by fabricated stories bring 
forward doctrines of natures 
that are good or evil, that is, 
spiritual or earthly, which 
natures, they say, determine 
the salvation or loss of each 
individual soul. 

9. We must now reply 
to those who would have it 
that the God of the law is 
merely just and not good,* 
asking them: In what way do 
they suppose that the heart 


216 


Greek 


working hardens the heart, 
and with what purpose does 
he do this? Now they must 
safeguard the idea of God, 
who is according to sound 
doctrine just and good; but 
if they do not admit that, let 
it be granted them for the 
moment that he is merely 
just. Then let them show how 
he that is good and just, or 
he that is merely just, is act- 
ing justly when he hardens 
the heart of a man who as 
a result of this hardening is 
lost; and how he that is just 
can be a cause of the loss and 
disobedience of those who are 
punished as a result of their 
hardening and disobedience. 

Why, too, does he blame 
Pharaoh, saying, “Thou wilt 
not let my people go; behold, 
I will smite all the firstborn in 
Egypt, even thy firstborn” (Ex 
4:23), and all the rest that is 
recorded as being said by God 
through Moses to Pharaoh? 
It is incumbent on him who 
believes that the scriptures 
are true and that God is just, 


if he is a thoughtful man, to 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

of Pharaoh was hardened by 
God, by what operation or 
with what purpose in view? 
For they must safeguard the 
view and conception of God, 
who is according to us just 
and good, but according to 
ellen ect jessy Plea de 
them show us how God, 
whom they themselves admit 
to be just, is acting justly 
when he hardens a man’s 
heart in order that through 
this very hardening: the man 
may sin and be lost; and how 
God's justice can be defended 
in this case, where God him- 
self is the cause of the loss of 
those whom by his author- 
ity as judge he will hereafter 
condemn on the very ground 
that they were hard and 
unbelieving. 

Why, too, does he blame 
Pharaoh, saying, “If thou wilt 
not let my people go, behold, 
I will smite all the firstborn in 
Egypt, even thy firstborn” (Ex 
4:23), and all the rest that is 
recorded as being said by God 
through Moses to Pharaoh? 


It is incumbent on every man 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 
take pains to show how God, 


in using such expressions as 
these, can be clearly con- 
ceived to be just. If, however, 
anyone should rise up and in 
a barefaced manner’ cham- 
pion the doctrine that the 
Creator is evil,’ we should 
need other arguments to 
answer him. 


10. But since they admit 
that they look upon God as 


being just, and our view is 
—————— 


that he is good as well as just, 


et us consider how one who 
is good and just could harden 
Pharaoh’s heart. See then 
whether we cannot prove, 
through an illustration used 
by the apostle in the Epistle 
to the Hebrews, that God 
has mercy on one and hard- 
ens another by a single opera- 
tion; that it is not his purpose 
to harden, but that he acts 


217 
Latin 
who believes the record of 
the scriptures to be true and 
desires to show that the God 
is just, to give an explanation 
of all this, and to show how 
no diminution of the justice 
of God is involved in it; for, 


even if they deny that he is 
good, still they admit that 


the Judge and Creator of the 


world is just. There is, how- 
ever, another kind of answer 
for those who assert that a 
wicked being, namely the 
devil, is the Creator of this 
world."° 

~~ 10. But since we acknow!- 
edge that the God who spoke 
by Moses is not only just but 
also good, let us consider 
carefully how one who is just 
and good can rightly be said 
to harden Pharaoh's heart. 
Let us see whether perchance 
we may solve this difficult 
problem by certain examples 
and illustrations taken from 
the apostle Paul, showing 
that God has mercy on one 
and hardens another by one 
and the same operation; that 


218 


Greek 


with kindly intent, and that 
the hardening follows as a 
result of the substance of evil 
present in the particular evil 
person, so that God is said to 
harden him who is already 
hardened. “The land,” it says, 
“which hath drunk the rain 
that cometh (oft)'’ upon 
it, and bringeth forth herbs 
meet for them for whose 
sake it is also tilled, receiveth 
blessing from God; but if it 
beareth thorns and thistles, 
it is rejected and nigh unto 
a curse, whose end is to be 
burned” (Heb 6:7, 8). As 
regards the rain, then, there 
is one operation, but the land 
which has been tilled brings 
forth fruit, while that which 
is neglected and barren brings 
forth thorns. 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

God’s actions and desires 
do not aim at hardening 
the man who is hardened, 
but that during the time in 
which he is displaying kind- 
ness and forbearance those 
who treat his kindness and 
forbearance with contempt 
and pride have their heart 
hardened while the punish- 
ment of their misdeeds is 
being deferred, whereas they 
who receive his kindness and 
forbearance as an opportunity 
of repentance and amend- 
ment obtain mercy. To show 
our meaning more clearly, we 
take the illustration used by 
the apostle Paul in the Epis- 
tle to the Hebrews. “The land 
which hath drunk the rain 
that cometh oft upon it, and 
bringeth forth herbs meet for 
them by whom ict is tilled, 
shall receive blessing from 
God; but that which beareth 
thorns and thistles is rejected 
and nigh unto a curse, whose 
end is to be burned” (Heb 
6:7, 8). From these words of 
Paul which we have quoted it 
is clearly shown that through 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


Now it seems almost 
irreverent to represent the 
giver of the rain as saying: 
“Tt is | who made the fruits 
and the thorns that are in the 
earth’; yet in spite of this it is 
true. For if there had been no 
rain, there would have been 
neither fruits nor thorns, but 
after the rain has fallen in 
due time and measure, both 
spring up. For it says: “the 
land which hath drunk the 
rain that cometh oft upon it, 
if it beareth thorns and this- 
tles, is rejected and nigh unto 
a curse” (Heb 6:7, 8). So then 
the blessing of the rain comes 
also on the inferior land, but 
this, being neglected and 
untilled, brings forth thorns 
and thistles. Thus the marvel- 
ous works done by God are 
as it were the rain, while the 


219 


Latin 

one and the same operation 
of God, by which he bestows 
rain upon the earth, one piece 
of land being carefully tilled 
brings forth good fruits, while 
another, which is neglected 
and untilled, produces thorns 
and thistles. 

Now if one were to speak 
as it were in the person of 
the showers and say, “It was 
I the rain that made the good 
fruits, and I, too, made the 
thorns and thistles,” although 
this would seem to be a hard 
saying it is nevertheless a 
true one. For if there were no 
rain, neither fruits nor thorns 
and thistles would grow; but 
after the showers have fallen 
the earth produces both 
kinds from out of itself. But 
although the earth has pro- 
duced both kinds of growth 
by the blessing of the rain, the 
diversity of the growth is not 
to be attributed to the show- 
ers, but the blame for an evil 
crop must fall on those who, 
when they might have broken 
up the land by frequent plow- 
ing and turned over the dull 


220 


Greek 

differing wills of men are like 
the tilled and the neglected 
land, though as land they are 


both of one nature. 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

clods with the heavy mattocks 
and cut away and rooted out 
all useless and harmful weeds 
and cleansed and tilled the 
fields with all the toil and 
skill that such cultivation 
demands and so prepared 
them for the expected show- 
ers, have neglected this and 
will accordingly reap those 
most appropriate fruits of 
their idleness, thorns and 
thistles. Thus it happens that 
the goodness and impartial- 
ity of the rain visits all lands 
alike, yet by one and the same 
operation of the showers that 
land which has been tilled 
produces useful fruits with 
a blessing to its diligent and 
useful cultivators, whereas 
that which by the idleness 
of its cultivators has become 
hardened brings forth thorns 
and thistles. Let us therefore 
take those signs and mighty 
works which were done by 
God to be as it were show- 
ers provided by him from 
above. But the purpose and 
desires of men must be taken 


to be the land, whether tilled 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


11. So, too, if the sun 
were to utter a voice and say, 
“I melt things and dry them 
up,” when being melted and 
being dried up are opposites, 
he would not be speaking 
falsely in regard to the point 
in question, since by the one 
heat wax is melted and mud 
dried. Thus the one opera- 
tion which was performed 
through Moses revealed the 
hardness of Pharaoh on the 


one hand, the result of his 
wickedness, and on the other 


221 
Latin 
or untilled, which is of one 
nature as land compared with 
land, but not of one and the 
same degree of cultivation. 

It follows from this'* 
that the will of each person 
is either hardened by the 
mighty and wonderful works 
of God, if it is untilled and 
fierce and barbarous, so that 
it becomes more savage and 
thorny than ever, or else it 
becomes softer and brings 
itself into obedience with the 
whole mind, if it has been 
cleansed from its faults and 
carefully trained. 

11. But to prove the mat- 
ter more clearly it will not 
be superfluous to employ 
yet another illustration. For 
instance, suppose one were 
to say that the sun binds and 
loosens, when binding and 
loosening are opposites. The 
statement will not, however, 
be false, for the sun, by one 
and the same power of its 
heat, loosens wax and yet 
dries up and binds together 
mud. Not that its power 
operates one way on mud and 


222 


Greek 


hand the persuasibility of the 
mixed Egyptian multitude 
who joined the Hebrews 
when they departed. 


And the briefly recorded 
fact that the heart of Pharaoh 
experienced a kind of soften- 
ing when he said: “But ye 
shall not proceed far; ye shall 
go a three days’ journey and 
leave your wives behind” (cf. 
Ex 8:27, 28), and whatever 
else he spoke when yielding 
| before the marvelous works, 
makes it clear that these signs 


had some effect even on him, 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

another way on wax, but that 
mud is of one quality and wax 
of another, though indeed 
according to nature they are 
one thing because each comes 
from the earth. So therefore 
one and the same opera- 
tion of God, which worked 
through Moses in signs and 
wonders, revealed on the one 
hand the hardness of Pha- 
raoh, which he had devel- 
oped by the intensity of his 
wickedness, and on the other 
hand proclaimed the obedi- 
ence of those other Egyptians 
who were mingled among the 
Israelites and are said to have 
gone out of Egypt along with 
them. 

Moreover, in regard to 
the passage which implies 
that the heart of Pharaoh was 
gradually being softened, so 
that on one occasion he said, 
“Ye shall not proceed far; ye 
shall go a three days’ jour- 
ney, but ye shall leave your 
wives and your children and 
flocks behind” (cf. Ex 8:27, 
28; 10:9, 11), and any other 
passages there may be in 


Book II, Chapter I 


Greek 


though they did not entirely 
accomplish their object. Yet 
not even this would have hap- 
pened if the idea held by most 
people about the words, “I 
will harden Pharaoh's heart,” 
rightly represented what was 
wrought by him, that is, by 
God.” 


It is not unreasonable to 
soften down such expressions 
even from our common man- 
ner of speech."* For kind mas- 
ters often say to servants who 
have been spoiled by their 
kindness and forbearance, “It 
was I who made you wicked,” 
or “I am to blame for these 
serious offences.” We must 


give heed to the character and 
force of what is said and not 
misrepresent it through fail- 
ing to understand the mean- 
ing of the expression. 


223 


Latin 

which he appears to be yield- 
ing gradually before the signs 
and wonders, what else do 
these indicate except that the 
power of the signs and won- 
ders had some effect on him, 
although it did not achieve so 
much as it ought? For if the 
hardening had been of such 
a kind as most people think, 
we should certainly not have 
found him yielding even in a 
few points.'? 

It will not, I think, appear 
unreasonable to explain even 
from our common usage the 
turn and figure of speech 
which is associated with the 
expression “hardening.”'* For 
kind masters are often wont 
to say to servants who have 
grown more insolent and 
wicked as a result of patient 
and gentle treatment, “It was 
I who made you this; I have 
spoiled you; my patience has 
made you good for noth- 
ing; I am the cause of your 
hard and worthless character, 
because I do not at once pun- 
ish you for every single fault 
according to your deserts.” 


Accordingly Paul, after 
clearly examining this ques- 
tion, says to the sinner: “Or 
despisest thou the riches of 
his goodness and forbearance 
and long suffering, not know- 
ing that the goodness of God 
leadeth thee to repentance? 
but after thy hardness and 
impenitent heart treasurest 
up for thyself wrath in the 
day of wrath and revelation 
and righteous judgment of 
God” (Rom 2:4, 5). Now let 
that which the apostle says to 
the sinner be applied to Pha- 
raoh, and it will be perceived 
to be entirely appropriate 
when addressed to him who 
“according to his hardness 
and impenitent heart was 
treasuring up for himself 
wrath,” since his hardness 
would not have been thus 
proved and made manifest 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 
Latin 
We must first take note of the 
turn and figure of the speech 
and so come to_understand 
the force of the expression, 
and not misrepresent a word 
whose inner meaning we have 
not carefully investigated. 
Accordingly Paul the 
apostle, when clearly dealing 
with this question, says to the 
man who remained in sin: 
“Or despisest thou the riches 
of his goodness and forbear- 
ance and longsuffering, not 
knowing that the goodness 
of God leadeth thee to repen- 
tance? but after thy hardness 
and impenitent heart treasur- 
est up for thyself wrath in the 
day of wrath and revelation 
of the righteous judgment 
of God” (Rom 2:4, 5). Let 
us then take that which the 
apostle says to the man who 
lives in sin and apply it to 
Pharaoh, and see whether 
you will not find it appropri- 
ate when spoken concerning 
him, for he, “according to 
his hardness and impenitent 
heart,” treasured and stored 
up for himself “wrath in the 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 
unless the signs had been per- 


formed, and performed on so 
large and grand a scale. 


12. But since such state- 
ments are hard to believe and 
are considered to be forced, 
let us see from the words 
of the prophets also what 
is said by those who have 
experienced the great kind- 
ness of God and have lived 
a good life, but have after- 


' wards fallen into sin. “Why 


didst thou make us to err, O 
Lord, from thy way? Why 
didst thou harden our heart 
that we should not fear thy 
name? Return for thy ser- 
vants sake, the tribes of thine 
inheritance, that for a little 
while we may inherit thy 
holy mountain” (Is 63:17, 
18). And in Jeremiah: “Thou 
didst deceive me, O Lord, 
and I was deceived; thou wast 
stronger and didst prevail” 


(Jer 20:7). 


225 


Latin 

day of wrath,” since his hard- 
ness would never have been 
thus proved and made mani- 
fest unless signs and wonders 
of such number and grandeur 
had followed. 

12. But if the proofs 
which we have adduced seem 
insufficient and the apostolic 
illustration to be lacking in 
strength, let us bring forward 
in addition the witness of pro- 
phetic authority and see what 
the prophets declare about 
those who by living a good 
life at the first have deserved 
to receive very many proofs 
of God’s goodness, but after- 
wards, as men do, have fallen 
into sin. The prophet, mak- 
ing himself one with them, 
says, “Why, Lord, didst thou 
make us to err from thy way? 
And why didst thou harden 
our heart that we should not 
fear thy name? Return for 
thy servant's sake, the tribes 
of thine inheritance, that we, 
too, may receive for a little 
while some inheritance of 
thy holy mountain” (Is 63:17, 
18). And Jeremiah speaks in 


Now the sentence, “Why 
didst thou harden our heart, 
that we should not fear thy 
name?” spoken by those who 
are praying for mercy, is spo- 
ken in a special sense as fol- 
lows. Why didst thou spare 
us so long, not visiting us for 
our sins, but abandoning us 
until our transgressions have 
grown to greatness? 


For God abandons most 
men by leaving them unpun- 
ished, in order that from the 


things that lie within our 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 
the same way: “Thou didst 
deceive us, O Lord, and we 
were deceived; thou hast held 
us and hast prevailed” (Jer 
20:7). 

Now the sentence, “Why, 
Lord, didst thou harden our 
heart, that we should not fear 
thy name,” spoken by those 
who were praying for mercy, 
must be taken in a spe- 
cial sense, as if it said, Why 
hast thou spared us so long 
and not visited us when we 
sinned, but hast abandoned 
us, so that our wickedness 
has grown greater and our 
freedom to sin has extended 
because thy punishment 
ceased? For so a horse," if it 
does not continually feel the 
spur of its rider and have its 
mouth rubbed by the rough 
bit, becomes hardened. So 
a young lad, if not contin- 
ually subdued by flogging, 
will grow up into an insolent 
youth, a ready prey to vices. 

God therefore abandons 
and neglects those whom 
he judges to be unworthy 
of chastisement. “For whom 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


power the character of each 
person may be proved and 
the better ones may become 
manifest as a result of the test 
applied to them; while the 
others remain unnoticed, not 
in deed by God, for he knows 
all things before they come to 
be (cf. Sus 5:42; Sir 42:18) 
but by the rational creation 
and themselves, in order 
that they may find the way 
of healing at a later time; for 
they would not have known 
the benefit, unless they had 
condemned themselves. 


227 


Latin 

the Lord loveth he chasteneth 
and punisheth; and scourgeth 
every son whom he receiveth” 
(Heb 12:6).'° We must sup- 
pose from this that those men 
are already received into the 
rank and affection of sons, 
who have deserved to be 
scourged and punished by 
God in order that through 
endurance of trials and trib- 
ulations they may be able 
to say in their own persons, 
“Who shall separate us from 
the love of God which is in 
Christ Jesus? Shall tribula- 
tion or anguish or famine or 
nakedness or peril or sword?” 
(Rom 8:35). For through 
all these is brought out and 
made manifest the will of 
each person; and the stead- 
fastness of his perseverance 
is indicated, not so much to 
God, who knows all things 
before they come to be (cf. 
Sus 5:42; Sir 42:18), as to the 
rational and heavenly powers, 
who have been appointed as 
it were helpers and servants 
of God in the work of bring- 
ing to pass the salvation of 


This method is of advan- 
tage to each, that he may 
become aware of his own 
individual nature and of 
the grace of God. The man 
who is not aware of his own 
weakness and of the divine 
grace, even if he receives a 
benefit before he has had 
experience of himself or con- 
demned himself, will think 
that what is supplied to him 
__ by the grace of heaven is due 
to his own good works. This 
produces conceit and pride, 
and will prove a cause of his 
| downfall, as we believe hap- 
pened in the case of the devil, 


who attributed to himself the 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 
men.” As for the others, who 
do not yet offer themselves 
to God with such constancy 
and affection and are not 
ready to yield themselves to 
his service and prepare their 
souls for trial, these are said 
to be abandoned by God, 
that is, not to be instructed, 
since they are not ready for 
instruction, their treatment 
and healing being undoubt- 
edly reserved for a later time. 
For these indeed do not 
know what they obtain from 
God, unless they first come 
to the point of desiring to 
obtain a benefit; which will 
only happen thus, when a 
man has previously learned 
to know himself and to feel 
what is lacking in himself and 
to understand from whom he 
should and can seek the sup- 
ply of what is lacking. For he 
who does not first understand 
his infirmity and sickness is 
unable to seek a physician; 
or at any rate the man who 
has not learned the dangerous 
nature of his illness will not 
be grateful to the physician 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


privileges which he enjoyed 
when he lived blamelessly. 
“For every one that exalteth 
himself shall be humbled, 
and he that humbleth himself 
shall be exalted” (Lk 14:11; 
18:14). And observe that 
for this reason divine things 
“have been hidden from the 
wise and understanding” (Mt 
11:27; Lk 10:21), in order 
that, as the apostle says, “no 
flesh should glory before 
God” (1 Cor 1:29), and have 
been “revealed unto babes” 
(Mt 11:27; Lk 10:21), who 
after their babyhood have 
risen to higher things and 
have remembered that it is 
not from their own effort so 


much as from the unspeak- 
able goodness of God that 


they have reached the utter- 


most limit of blessedness. 


229 
Latin 
when he has recovered his 
health. So, too, if a man has 
not first learned the defects of 
his soul and the wickedness of 
his sins and confessed them 
openly with his own mouth 
he cannot be cleansed and 
absolved; otherwise he might 
be unaware that what he 
receives is a gift of grace and 
might think that the divine 
liberality was a blessing that 
belonged to him This would 
undoubtedly give rise again 
to arrogance and pride of 
heart and become once more 
the cause of his downfall, as 
we must believe happened 
in the case of the devil, who 
thought that the privileges 
which he enjoyed when he 
lived blamelessly were his 
own and not given to him by 
God. And in him was fulfilled 
the saying that “every one 
that exalteth himself shall be 
humbled” (Lk 24:11; 18:14). 
It is for this reason, it seems 
to me, that the divine myster- 
ies have been “hidden from 


the prudent and wise” (Mt 
11:27; Lk 10:21), in order, 


13. The man who is aban- 
doned is abandoned therefore 
by the divine judgment, and 
towards certain sinners God 
is longsuffering, not without 
reason, but because in regard 
to the immortality of the soul 
and the eternal world it will 

‘be to their advantage that 
they should not be helped 
quickly to salvation but 
should be brought to it more 
slowly after having experi- 
enced many ills. For physi- 
cians also,'* even though they 
may be able to heal a man 
quickly, yet act in a contrary 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

as the scripture says, “that 
no flesh should glory before 
God” (1 Cor 1:29), and have 
been “revealed unto babes” 
(Mt 11:27; Lk 10:21), that is, 
to those who, after becoming 
infants and babes, or in other 
words returning to the sim- 
plicity of babes, then make 
progress, and when they 
reach perfection remember 
that they have obtained their 
blessedness not so much by 
their own virtues as by the 
grace and mercy of God. 

13. The man therefore 
who must needs be aban- 
doned is abandoned by the 
judgment of God, and God is 
longsuffering towards certain 
sinners, though not without a 
definite reason. For this very 
fact that he is longsuffering 
makes for their advantage, 
since the soul, whose healing 
and oversight are his concern, 
is immortal; and being an 
immortal and eternal thing it 
is not, even though it be not 
quickly healed, thereby shut 
out from salvation, which 
is only delayed until more 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


way whenever they suspect 
the existence of a hidden poi- 
son in the body. They do this 
because they wish to heal the 
patient more surely, consider- 
ing it better to let him remain 
in his fever and sickness for 
a long time in order that he 
may regain permanent health, 
rather than appear to restore 
him quickly to strength and 
afterwards to see him relapse 
and this quicker cure prove 


only temporary. 


In the same way God, 
who knows the secrets of 
the heart and foreknows 


the future, perhaps jin his 


\ 214 


231 
Latin 
convenient times. Moreover 
it is perhaps expedient for 
those who have been more 
deeply infected with the pas- 
sion of wickedness to attain 
salvation slowly. For physi- 
cians also,'* when they could 
very quickly cover the scars 
of a wound, yet some-times 
prevent and defer its imme- 
diate healing with a view to 
ensuring better and sounder 
health; since they know that 
it is preferable to cause delay 
in wounds that fester, and to 
allow the malignant humor to 
flow for a while, rather than 
to hasten to a superficial cure 
and to shut up within the 
veins the inflamed and poi- 
sonous matter, which when 
cut off from its usual outlets 
will undoubtedly creep into 
the interior of the body and 
penetrate to the vital parts 
themselves, so as to bring on 
not merely bodily disease but 
actual loss of life. 

In the same way also 
God, who knows the secrets 
of the heart and foreknows 
the future, in his great 


232 


Greek 
longsuffering allows the hid- 


den evil to remain while he 
draws it out by means of 
external circumstances, with 
the object of purifying him 
who owing to carelessness 
has received into himself 
the seeds of sin, that having 
vomited them out when they 
come to the surface the sin- 
ner, even though he has pro- 
ceeded far in evil deeds, may 
in the end be able to obtain 
purification after his evil life 
and be renewed. For God 
deals with souls not in view 
of the fifty years, so to speak, 
of our life here, but in view 

——— 
of the endless world.'? He has 
“made our intellectual nature 
immortal and akin to him- 
self, and the rational soul is 
not shut out from healing, as 


~ if this life were all. 7 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

longsuffering allows some 
things to happen which, 
coming upon men from 
without encourage the pas- 
sions and faults that are con- 
cealed within to emerge and 
proceed into the light, so 
that by means of these events 
men who owing to great neg- 
ligence and carelessness have 
received into themselves the 
roots and seeds of sin may be 
purified and healed, the seeds 
being cast up and brought to 
the surface in order that they; 
may be in a manner vomited 
forth and dispersed. And 
thus, even though a man may 
appear to be involved in very 
serious evils, suffering convul- 
sions in all his members, he 
may yet be able in the end to 
obtain rest and relief, to reach 
the limit of satiety in his evils 
and so after many troubles 
to be restored to his origi- 
nal state. For God deals with 
souls not in view of the short 
time of our life here, which 
is confined to some sixty or 
a few more years, but in view 
of the everlasting and eternal 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


14. If then one were to 
criticize the farmer for not 
casting his seed more quickly 
on the rocky ground, when 
one saw that other rocky 
ground which has received 
seed was flourishing, the 
farmer would reply: “I shall 
sow this ground more slowly, 
putting in seeds that will be 
able to endure, the slower 
method being better for this 
ground and safer than is the 
case with the ground which 
has received its seed more 
quickly but superficially”; 
and we should agree that the 
farmer spoke reasonably and 
had acted like a wise man. 


233 
Latin 
age, exercising his providen- 
tial care over souls that are 
immortal, just as he himself 
is eternal and immortal."? For 
he made our rational nature, 
which he created “in his own 
image and likeness” (cf. Gn 
1:26), incorruptible, and 
therefore the soul, which is 
immortal, is not shut out by 
the shortness of our present 
life from the divine healing 
and remedies. 

14. But let us take from 
the gospels also some illustra- 
tions of the matters we speak 
about. It is related that there 
is a certain rock covered with 
a small and scanty depth of 
earth, into which if seed falls 
it is said to spring up quickly; 
but after it has sprung up, 
because it does not take root 
deeply, the plant is said “to 
be scorched and to wither 
away when the sun arises 
(cf. Mt 13:5, 6 and par.). 
Now this rock undoubtedly 
stands for the soul of man, 
hardened through its own 
carelessness and made stony 
by wickedness. For no one 


234 


Greek 


So, too, the great Farmer of 
all nature delays the benefit 
which we should consider 
quick, for fear lest it should 
prove superficial. 

But it is likely that 
someone will meet us with 
the objection, “Why does 
some of the seed fall upon 
the soul that has the super- 
ficial soil, that which is as 
it were a rock?” To this we 
must answer that it was bet- 
ter for the soul that desired 
the higher things too hastily 
and not by the way that led 
to them to obtain what it 
desired, in order that when 
it had condemned itself for 
this it might patiently endure 
to receive a long time after- 
wards the cultivation that is 
in accordance with nature. 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

has a “stony heart” created 
by God, but each person's 
heart is said to become stony 
through his own wickedness 
and disobedience. 

If then one were to crit- 
icize the farmer for not cast- 
ing his seed more quickly on 
the rocky ground when one 
saw that other rocky ground 
which had received seed 
was quickly flourishing, the 
farmer would certainly say in 
reply: “I sow this land more 
slowly for this reason, that 
it may retain the seeds it has 
received. For it is better for 
ground like this to be sown 
later, lest perhaps the crop 
should spring up too rapidly, 
and coming from the very 
top of a thin soil should be 
unable to endure the heat 
of the sun.” Would not he 
who at first criticized now 
acknowledge the reason and 
skill of the farmer and agree 
that what formerly seemed to 
him illogical was in fact done 
with good reason? In the 
same way therefore God, who 
is a most skillful farmer of his 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


235 
Latin 
entire creation, prevents and 
delays, undoubtedly till some 
future time, the restoration 
of health in cases where 
we think it should be more 
quickly restored, for fear lest 
the cure should prove superfi- 
cial rather than internal. 

But if someone meets us 
with the objection, “Why do 
certain seeds fall upon the 
rocky ground, that is, upon 
a hard and rocky soul?” we 
must answer to this that not 
even such an event can take 
place apart from the order- 
ing of divine providence; for 
unless by this means a knowl- 
edge was gained of the great 
self-condemnation which fol- 
lows a heedlessness in hearing 
and a wickedness in examin- 
ing the divine commands, it 
would certainly be unknown 
what useful purpose was 
served by an orderly training. 
And so it comes to pass that 
the soul; becomes aware of 
its fault and casts the blame 
upon itself and reserves and 
yields itself up for the pro- 
cess of cultivation that is to 


Greek 


For souls are, so to speak, 
innumerable, and their habits 
are innumerable, and equally 
so are their movements, their 
purposes, their inclinations 
and their impulses, of which 
there is only one perfect 
superintendent, who has full 
knowledge both of the times 
and the appropriate aids 
and the paths and the ways, 
namely, the God and Father 
of the universe. He knows 
how by means of the great 
plagues and the drowning 
in the sea he is leading even 
Pharaoh; and his superin- 
tending care for him does not 
stop at this point. For when 
he was drowned he was not 
destroyed. “For in the hand 
of God are both we and our 
words, and all understand- 
ing and knowledge of crafts” 
(Wis 7:16). This, then, is a 
fair defense of the statement 
that “Pharaoh’s heart was 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

follow; that is, the soul sees 
for itself that its faults must 
first be removed and that it 
must then undergo instruc- 
tion in wisdom. 

Since, therefore, souls are 
innumerable, and equally so 
are their habits, their pur- 
poses, their different indi- 
vidual movements, their 
inclinations and impulses, 
the variety of which is quite 
beyond the capacity of the 
human mind to consider, we 
must accordingly leave the 
skill and power and knowl- 
edge necessary for their super- 
intendence to God alone, for 
he only can know the reme- 
dies for each individual soul 
and determine the time for its 
healing. He, then, who alone, 
as we have said, is acquainted 
with the ways of each mortal 
man, knows by what way he 
ought to lead even Pharaoh, 
“in order that through him 
his name might be named in 
all the earth” (cf. Rom 9:17; 
Ex 9:16) chastising him with 
many plagues and then lead- 
ing him on to be drowned 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


hardened” (cf. Ex 10:20) and 
of the other statement that 
“he hath mercy on whom he 
will, and whom he will he 


hardeneth” (Rom 9:18). 


15. Let us also look at 
Ezekiel’s statement in which 
he says, “I will take away from 
them their stony hearts and 
I will put in them hearts of 
flesh, that they may walk in 
my judgments and keep my 
ordinances” (Ez 11:19, 20). 
Now if God, when he wills, 


237 
Latin 

in the sea. And we must cer- 
tainly not think that in this 
drowning the providential 
care of God for Pharaoh came 
to an end; for we must not 
suppose that, because he was 
drowned, he went immedi- 
ately out of existence. “For in 
the hand of God are both we 
and our words, and all under- 
standing and knowledge of 
crafts” (Wis 7:16), as the 
scripture says. These, then, 
are the arguments we put 
forth to the best of our ability, 
in discussing the passage of 
scripture in which God is said 
to have hardened Pharaoh's 
heart (cf. Ex 10:20), and the 
other statement that “he hath 
mercy on whom he will and 
whom he will he hardeneth” 

(Rom 9:18). 

15. Let us now also look 
at the statement of Ezekiel 
in which he says, “I will take 
away from them their stony 
heart and I will put in them 
a heart of flesh, that they 
may walk in my judgments 
and keep my ordinances” 
(Ez 11:19, 20). Now if God, 


238 


Greek 


“takes away the hearts of 
stone” and implants “hearts 
of flesh,” so that men keep his 
ordinances and observe his 
commandments, it is not in 
our power to put away wick- 
edness, for the taking away of 
“hearts of stone” is nothing 
else than the removal, from 
him for whom God wills it, 
of the wickedness by reason 
of which a man is hardened. 
And the insertion of a “heart 
of flesh,” in order that a man 
may “walk in the ordinances 
of God and keep his com- 
mandments,” what else is this 
than to become yielding and 
unopposed to the truth and 
to be capable of practicing 
the virtues? 


But if God promises to 
do this, and if we do not 
lay aside our “stony hearts” 
before he takes them away, it 
is clear that it is not in our 
power to put away wicked- 
ness. And if we ourselves do 
nothing to implant within 
us the “heart of flesh,” but it 
is the work of God, then to 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 
when he wills, takes away the 
“heart of stone” and puts in a 
“heart of flesh,” so that men 
may keep his ordinances and 
observe his commandments, 
it will be seen that it is nei- 
ther in our power to put away 
wickedness—for the taking 
away of a “heart of stone” 
would appear to be nothing 
else than the removal, from 
him for whom God wills it, 
of the wickedness by which 
a man is hardened—nor to 
insert a “heart of flesh,” that 
a man may “walk in God’s 
ordinances and keep his com- 
mandments,” which indeed 
is nothing else but to become 
obedient to God and unop- 
posed to the truth and capa- 
ble of practicing the virtues. 
If then God promises to 
do this, and if, before he takes 
away our “stony heart” we are 
not able of our own selves to 
lay it aside, it follows that it 
is not; in our power to cast 
off wickedness, but in God's. 
And again, if it is not by our 
own act that there comes into 
us the “heart of flesh,” if it is 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


live a virtuous life will not be 
our work, but something due 
entirely to the divine grace. 


Now this is-what will be 
said by the man who, arguing 
from the bare words, would 
destroy our free will. We, 
however, shall reply that these 
words must be understood 
in the following manner. It 
is as when a man who suffers 
from ignorance and want of 


education, and becomes con- 


scious of his personal defects 
either from the exhortation of 
his teacher or from his own 
reflection, entrusts himself to 
one whom he believes to be 
capable of leading him on to 
education and virtue. When 
he so entrusts himself, his 
instructor promises to take 
away his lack of education 
and to implant in him edu- 
cation, not as if it counted 
for nothing in regard to his 
being educated and escaping 
from his ignorance that he 
should have brought him- 


self to be cured, but because 


239 


Latin 
the work of God alone, then 


to live a virtuous life will 
not be our work, but in all 
respects the work of God’s 
grace. 

Now this is what is said 
by those who wish to prove by 
the authority of scripture that 
nothing lies within our own 
power. We shall reply to them 
that these words must not be 
understood in that sense, 
but as follows. It is as if an 
uneducated and uninstructed 
man, becoming conscious of 
the disgrace of his condition, 
whether by being stirred at 
the exhortation of another 
or by a desire to rival those 
who are wise, should entrust 
himself to one by whom he 
is confident that he can be 
carefully trained and compe- 
tently instructed. If then he, 
who had formerly hardened 
himself in ignorance, entrusts 
himself, as we have said, with 
full purpose of mind to a 
master and promises to obey 
him in everything, the mas- 
ter, on seeing clearly his pur- 
pose and determination, will 


240 


Greek 


the instructor promises to 
improve one who desires 
improvement. 


So the divine word prom- 
ises to take away the wicked- 
ness which it calls a “stony 
heart,” from those who come 
to it, not if they are unwill- 
ing, but if they submit them- 
selves to the physician of the 
sick; just as in the gospels the 

. sick are found coming to the 
Savior and asking to obtain 
healing and being healed. 
And, so to speak, to give sight 
to the blind is (cf. Mr 11:5), 
so far as concerns the request 
of those who believe they can 
be healed, a work of the suf- 
ferers, but so far as concerns 
the restoration of sight it is 
a work of our Savior. This 
then is the way by which the 
word of God promises to 


implant knowledge in those 


who come to it, taking away 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

on his part undertake to take 
away from him his lack of 
education and to implant in 
him education, not promis- 
ing, however, to do this if the 
disciple withholds his assent 
and co-operation” but only if 
he offers and pledges himself 
to entire obedience. 

So, too, the divine word 
promises to take away the 
“stony heart” from those who 
come to it, not indeed from 
those who do not listen to it, 
but from those who submit 
to the precepts of its teaching; 
just as in the gospels we find 
the sick coming to the Savior, 
asking to obtain health and so 
being healed. And when, for 
example, the blind are healed 
(cf. Mt 11:5) and receive sight, 
it is, so far as concerns the fact 
that they made request to 
the Savior and believed that 
they could be healed by him, 
a work of those who were 
healed; but so far as concerns 
the fact that their sight was 
restored, it is a work of the 
Savior. In this way also does 
the divine word promise to 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


the stony and hard heart, 
which signifies wickedness, 
to enable them to walk in the 
divine commandments and 
to keep the divine ordinances. 


16. After this there is 
the passage from the gospel, 
where the Savior said that 
he spoke to those that are 
without in parables for this 
reason, that “seeing they may 
not see and hearing they may 
not understand, lest they 
should turn and it should be 
forgiven them” (cf. Mr 10:10, 
13; Mk 4:11, 12s Lk 8:10). 
Now our opponent will say: 
“If when they have heard a 
clearer message some people 
certainly do turn, and turn 
in such a way as to become 
worthy of the forgiveness of 
sins, and if the hearing of 
this clearer message does not 
rest with them but with their 
teacher, and he does not pro- 
claim it to them for this rea- 
son, lest they should see and 
understand, then salvation 
does not lie in their power; 


241 
Latin 
give instruction by taking 
away the stony heart, that 
is, by banishing wickedness, 
in order that men may thus 
be able to walk in the divine 
ordinances and keep the com- 
mandments of the law. 

16. After this there comes 
before us the passage from 
the gospel, where the Savior 
said, “For this reason I speak 
to them that are without in 
parables,” “that seeing they 
may see and not perceive, and 
hearing they may hear and 
not understand, lest haply 
they should be turned and 
it should be forgiven them” 
(cf. Mt 10:10, 13; Mk 4:11, 
12; Lk 8:10). In regard to this 
our opponent will reply: “If 
they who hear more clearly 
are certainly corrected and 
turned, and turned in such 
a way as to become worthy 
of the forgiveness of sins, 
and if the hearing of this 
clear message does not rest 
with them but entirely with 
their teacher, whose work it 
is to teach them more openly 
and clearly, but who says that 


242 


Greek 


and if this is so, we are not 
free as regards salvation and 
destruction.” 


Now there would be a 
convincing answer to this, if 
it were not for the addition, 
“lest they should turn, and 
it should be forgiven them’; 
namely, that the Savior did 
not wish those who would 
not become noble and good 
to understand the deeper 
mysteries, and that this was 
why he spoke to them in par- 
ables. But as it stands, with 
the words “lest they should 
turn, and it should be for- 
given them,” the answer is 


more difficult. 


In the first place we must 
note the passage as an argu- 
ment against the heretics,”! 
who hunt out similar eS 
from the Old Testament, in 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

he does not preach the word 
to them clearly for this rea- 
son, ‘lest haply they should 
hear and understand and be 
turned’ and be saved, then 
their salvation will certainly 
not rest with themselves; and 
if this is so, we shall have no 
freedom as regards either sal- 
vation or destruction.” 

Now if it were not for the 
addition, “lest they should be 
turned, and it should be for- 
given them,” there would be 
a very simple answer, namely, 
to say that the Savior did not 
wish those whom he fore- 
saw would not be good to 
understand the mysteries of 
the kingdom of heaven and 
that he spoke to them in par- 
ables on that account. But as 
it stands, with the addition, 
“lest haply they should be 
turned, and it should be for- 
given them,” the explanation 
is rendered more difficult. 

And in the first place we 
must note what a defense 
this passage furnishes against 
the heretics,”' who are accus- 
tomed to hunt out from the 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


which there is revealed, as 
they are bold enough fo say, 
the cruelty of the Creator or 
attitude, or whatever they 
choose to call the quality in 
question, in regard to the 
wicked; their sole purpose 
being to deny that there is 
any goodness in him who 


. formed the world. With the 


New Testament, however, 
they do not deal in a similar 
way, nor even candidly, but 
Pass over statements closely 
resembling those which they 
consider open to criticism in 


the Old Testament. 


For even according to the 
gospel the Savior is clearly 
shown, as they themselves 
assert in regard to the for- 
mer writings, to refrain from 
speaking plainly on this 
account, lest men should 
turn, and having turned 
should become worthy of 
the forgiveness of sins; a 


243 
Latin 
Old Testament any expres- 
sions which may appear to 
them, as they understand 
them, to point to some 
severe and cruel quality in 
God the Creator, as when he 
is described as moved with 
the desire or whatever name 
they choose to call the qual- 
ity in question, for vengeance 
or punishment; their object 
being to deny that there is 
any goodness in the Creator. 
In regard to the gospels, how- 
ever, they do not pass judg- 
ment with the same mental 
bias or the same feeling, nor 
do they observe that some 
such passages as they con- 
demn and censure in the Old 
Testament are to be found 
also in the gospels. 

For clearly in this chapter 
the Savior is shown, as they 
themselves say, not speaking 
openly for this reason, lest 
men should be turned and 
when turned should receive 
forgiveness of sins. Now cer- 
tainly if this is understood 
according to the mere let- 
ter, it will be in no way less 


244 


Greek 


statement which of itself is 
in no way less than the simi- 
lar ones from the Old Testa- 
ment which are attacked. If 
they seek for a defense of the 
gospel statement, we must 
ask them whether they are 
not to be blamed for dealing 
in different ways with simi- 
lar problems; for they do not 
take offence at the New Tes- 
tament but seek to defend it, 
whereas in regard to the Old 
Testament, in similar passages 
which they ought to defend 
equally with those of the 
New, they make an attack. 
From these considerations we 
shall force them to admit that 
on account of their resem- 
_ blances the scriptures must all 
~ be regarded as coming from 
one God. But come now, and 
let us provide, to the best of 
our ability, a defense to the 
question before us. 

17. We said when inves- 
tigating the case of Pharaoh 
that sometimes it does not 
turn out to the advantage 
of those who are healed 


that they should be healed 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

than those passages which 
are attacked in the Old Tes- 
tament. If, however, it seems, 
even to them, to call for an 
explanation, when passages of 
such a sort are found in the 
New Testament, it will follow 
necessarily that the passages 
in the Old Testament which 
are attacked shall be cleared 
from censure by a similar 
explanation, so that by this 
means the writings of each 
Testament may be proved 
to come from one and the 
same God. But let us turn, to 
the best of our ability, to the 


question before us. 


17. We said before when 
discussing the case of Pharaoh 
that sometimes it does not 
turn out to advantage for one 
to be healed quickly,” espe- 
cially if the disease be thereby 


Book III, Chapter I Let 


Greek 


quickly,” if, that isj they have 
fallen of themselves into dif- 
ficulties and are/ then easily 


released from the conditions 


‘into which they have fallen; 


for despising the evil as being 
easy of cure and taking no 
precautions against falling 
into it they will find them- 
selves in it a second time. In 
dealing with such persons, 


therefore, the eternal God, 


the perceiver of secret things, 


who knows all things before 


they come to be (Sus 5:42), 


in his goodness refrains from 


sending them the quicker 


help and, if I may say so, 


helps them by not helping 
them, since this course is for 
their profit. 

It is probable, then, that 
those “who are without” (Mk 
4:11; cf. 1 Cor 5:13), con- 
cerning whom we are now 
speaking, were foreseen by the 
Savior, according to our sup- 
position, as being not likely 
to prove steadfast in their 
conversion, if they were to 
hear more explicitly the mes- 
sage that was spoken. They 


7 
i 2 


Latin 

shut up in the internal organs 
and so rage more fiercely. 
Therefore God, who is the 
perceiver of secret things and 
who knows all things before 
they come to be (Sus 5:42), in 
his great goodness delays the 
healing of such persons and 
defers the remedy to a more 
distant time and, if I may say 
so, heals them by not healing 
them, lest a premature recov- 
ery of health should render 


them incurable. 


It is possible, therefore, 
in regard to those whom the 
word of our Lord and Savior 
addressed as being “without” 
(Mk 4:11; cf. 1 Cor 5:13), 
that since he perceived by his 
power of “searching the hearts 
and reins” (Ps 7:10, LXX [RV 
9]) that they were not yet fit 
to receive his teaching in 
clearer terms, he covered up 


246 


Greek 


were therefore destined by the 
Lord not to hear the deeper 
teachings more clearly, lest 
after having quickly turned 
and been healed by obtain- 
ing forgiveness they should 
despise the wounds of their 
wickedness as being slight 
and easy of cure and should 
very quickly fall into them 
again. Perhaps, too, though 
they had paid the penalty for 
their former sins which they 
committed against virtue 
when they abandoned her, 
they had not yet fulfilled the 
appropriate time in which 
to be themselves abandoned 
by the divine superinten- 
dence and to be filled more 
and more with the particular 
evils whose seeds they had 
sown and then afterwards to 
be called to a more enduring 
repentance, such as would 
prevent them from quickly 
falling again into the sins into 
which they had previously 
fallen when they mocked 
at the high worth of noble 
things and gave themselves 
up to all that was worse. 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

the deeper mysteries of the 
faith in veiled speech. For he 
feared that if they were speed- 
ily converted and healed, that 
is, if the forgiveness of their 
sins were quickly obtained, 
they might easily fall again 
into the same disease of sin 
which they had found could 
be cured without any diffi- 
culty. And if this should hap- 
pen, no one can doubt that 
the penalty would be dou- 
bled and the quantity of evil 
continually increased, when 
there is not only a repetition 
of sins which had appeared 
to be forgiven, but even the 
court of virtue is polluted by 
the tread of deceitful-minded 
and corrupted men, full 
within of hidden wickedness. 
And what remedy can there 
ever be for such persons, who 
after partaking of the impure 
and filthy food of wickedness 
have tasted the pleasure of 
virtue and received its sweet- 
ness into their mouths and 
have then turned over again 
to the poisonous and deadly 
food of iniquity? Who doubts 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


Those therefore who are 
spoken of as being “without,” 
plainly by comparison with 
those “within” (cf. Mk 4:11; 
1 Cor 5:12, 13), are not alto- 
gether far away from those 
within, since while those 
within hear distinctly, they 
hear indistinctly because it is 
spoken to them in parables; 
nevertheless they hear. But 
as for the rest of those who 
are without, those called 
the Tyrians, although it was 


247 
Latin 
that it is better for them to be 
put off and abandoned for a 
time, in order that if one day 
they should happen to have 
had their fill of wickedness 
and be able to shudder at 
the filthy ways in which they 
now delight, then at last the 
word of God may be effec- 
tively revealed to them, with 
the result that what is holy 
is not given to the dogs nor 
pearls cast before swine who 
will trample them under their 
feet and then turn round and 
rend and attack those who 
have preached to them the 
word of God? (cf. Mt 7:6). 
These then are they who 
are said to be “without,” 
doubtless by comparison 
with those who are said to 
be “within” (cf. Mk 4:11; 
1 Cor 5:12, 13) and to 
hear the word of God more 
plainly. Those, however, who 
are “without” also hear the 
word, although it is covered 
up in parables and darkened 
by proverbs. But there are 
others besides those who are 
“without,” those namely who 


248 


Greek 
foreknown that “they would 


have repented long ago, sit- 
ting in sackcloth and ashes” 
(cf. Mt 11:21; Lk 10:13), had 
the Savior come within their 
borders, these do not even 
hear what the others hear, 
for the reason, probably, that 
they are much farther dis- 
tant in respect of merit. The 
purpose is, however, that at 
some other time, after it has 
been “more tolerable” (cf. 
Mt 11:22) for them than for 
those who refused to receive 
the word, in whose pres- 
ence he mentioned the Tyr- 
ians, these may find a more 
opportune moment to hear 
and may experience a more 
enduring repentance. 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

are called Tyrians, who do 
not hear at all; and in spite of 
the fact that the Savior fore- 
knew that “they would have 
repented long ago, sitting 
in sackcloth and ashes,” “if 
the mighty works had been 
done among them which 
were done among others” 
(cf. Mt 11:21, 22; Lk 10:13), 
yet still they do not hear, not 
even the things which those 
“without” hear. The reason 
for this is, I believe, that the 
condition of these people 
was far inferior and worse 
in the matter of wickedness 
than that of those who are 
said to be “without,” that is, 
not far from those “within,” 
and who have deserved to 
hear the word though only 
in parables; and that proba- 
bly their healing was reserved 
for the time when it will be 
“more tolerable” for them “in 
the day of judgment” (cf. Mr 
11:22) than for those among 
whom had been performed 
those mighty works which 
are recorded. Thus at last, 
relieved from the weight of 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


See, however, whether in 
addition to our investigation 
of the truth we are not striv- 
ing even more to preserve in 
every way an attitude of piety 
towards God and his Christ, 
since we endeavor to explain 
completely how in passages 
of such importance and diffi- 
culty relating to the manifold 
providence of God he is taking 
thought for the immortal soul. 


I 


249 


Latin 

their evil deeds they will walk 
more easily and enduringly in 
the way of salvation. 

But I wish to remind 
those who read these pages of 
the following point, namely, 
that in dealing with most dif- 
ficult and obscure passages 
like these we are striving with 
the utmost earnestness not so 
much to argue out clearly the 
solutions of the problems— 
for this everyone will do as 
the Spirit gives him utterance 
(Acts 2:4)—but by the cau- 
tiousness of our statements to” 
preserve the rule of piety.” It 
is our endeavor to show that 
the providence of God which 
governs the universe with jus- 
tice also rules immortal souls 
on the most equitable prin- 
ciples in accordance with the 
merits and motives of each 
individual. For God’s dealings 
with men are not confined 
within the life of this age, 
but a previous state of merit 
always furnishes the cause of 
the state that is to follow; and 
so by an immortal and eter- 
nal law of equity and by the 


Greek 


If, for instance, one were 
to inquire in reference to the 
things which are objected 
to, namely, that while those 
who saw wonders and heard 
divine words are not ben- 
efited, the Tyrians would 
have repented if such things 
had been done and spoken 
among them, and were to 
say, “Why, pray, did the Sav- 
ior preach to such people 
to their hurt, in order that 
their sin might be accounted 
heavier?”—we should answer 
him thus: that he who knows 
the hearts of all who find 
fault with his providence on 
the ground that they did not 
believe because it had not 
given them the chance of 
seeing what it had allowed 
others to behold and had 
not arranged for them to 
hear what others had heard 
to their profit, in his desire 
to prove that the excuse was 
not reasonable gives them 


the things which they who 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 
Latin 
control of divine providence 
the immortal soul is brought 
to the height of perfection. 
If, however, one were 
to attack us in reference to 
our statement that the word 
of the preaching was delib- 
erately rejected by certain 
very depraved and wicked 
men, and to ask why it was 
preached to them when the 
Tyrians, who were certainly 
despised, are preferable in 
comparison, especially as the 
sin of these men was thereby 
increased and their condem- 
nation rendered more serious 
by the fact that they heard the 
word and were not open to 
believe it, we must answer, it 
would seem, in the following 
manner. God, who knows 
the hearts of all, foreknew 
the complaints made about 
his providence particularly 
by those who say: “How 
could we believe, when 
we neither saw what oth- 
ers saw nor heard what was 
preached to others? So far are 
we from being at fault, that 
those to whom the word was 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


blame his administration 
asked for. The intention is 
that after they have received 
these advantages and have 
been convicted none the less 
of the utmost impiety in that 
they have not even then given 
themselves up to be bene- 
fited, they may cease from 
such audacity, and when 
their minds have been set 
free on this point they may 
learn that God is sometimes 
long and slow in doing good 
to men, not allowing them 
to see and hear things, the 
seeing and hearing of which 
merely reveals their sin to be 
heavier and more grievous if 
after such great and wonder- 
ful experiences they do not 


believe. 


251 


Latin 

proclaimed and the signs dis- 
played made no delay at all 
but amazed at the very power 
of the miracles became believ- 
ers.” Wishing therefore to rule 
out all excuse for complaints 
of this sort and to show that 
it was not the delay of the 
divine providence but the 
will of each human mind that 
was the cause of its ruin, God 


conferred the grace of his 
benefits even upon unwor- 
thy and unbelieving men, in 
order that “every mouth may 
be stopped” (Rom 3:19) and 
the mind of man may know 
that the failure is entirely on 
its own part and in no way 
due to him. At the same time, 
when he who has despised 
the divine benefits conveyed 
to him is condemned more 
severely than he who has not 
deserved to obtain them or 
hear of them at all, we may 
understand and know that 
this too is a mark of the 
divine mercy and of God’s 
most equitable government, 
which sometimes delays to 
give men the opportunity of 


18. Let us also look at 
the passage, “So then it is 
not of him that willeth, nor 
of him that runneth, but of 
God that hath mercy” (Rom 
9:16). Now the objectors say: 
If it is not of him that wil- 
leth, nor of him that runneth, 
but of God that hath mercy, 
then salvation does not come 
from what lies in our power 
but from the constitution we 
have received from him who 
constituted us what we are or 
from the will of him who has 
mercy when he pleases. 

We must ask these per- 
sons the following question: Is 
it a good or a bad thing to will 
what is good? And is it a mat- 
ter for praise or for blame that 
one should run with the desire 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 
Latin 
seeing or hearing the myster- 
ies of the divine power, lest 
after the power of the mir- 
acles has been seen and the 
mysteries of his wisdom have 
been heard and known they 
should despise and neglect 
them and so be visited with a 
heavier punishment for this 
impiety. 

18. Let us also look at the 
saying, “It is not of him that 
willeth, nor of him that run- 
neth, but of God that hath 
mercy” (Rom 9:16). Now our 
opponents say: If it is not of 
him that willeth, nor of him 
that runneth, but that that 
man is saved on whom God 
has mercy, then salvation is 
not in our power. For either 
our nature is such that we can 
be saved or cannot be saved, 
or else it depends solely on the 
will of him who has mercy 
and saves us if he pleases. 

We must first ask these 
persons the following ques- 
tion: Is it a good or a bad 
thing to will what is good? 
And is it a matter for praise 
or for blame that he who runs 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


to reach the goal in an eager 
haste for what is good? If they 
should say, for blame, they 
would be answering against 
all reason, since the saints will 
and run and clearly in this 
are doing nothing worthy of 
blame. But if they should say 
that it is a good thing to will 
the good and to run towards 
it we shall ask them how a lost 
nature can will better things. 
That would be like a bad tree 
bearing good fruit (cf. Mt 
7:18), if to will better things 


-_is good. They may answer ina 


third way that to will the good 
and to run towards it is one 
of the things indifferent and 
neither good nor bad. To this 
we must reply that if to will 
the good and to run towards 
it is a thing indifferent, then 
the opposite of this, namely, 
to will the evil and to run 
towards that, is also a thing 
indifferent. But to will the evil 


and to run towards it is not 
a thing indifferent. Nor is it 
indifferent, therefore, to will 
the good and to run towards 
the good. 


253 


Latin 

should eagerly haste to the 
goal of what is good? If they 
should say, for blame, they 
would clearly be mad; for all 
the saints will the good and 
run towards it and certainly 
they are not worthy of blame. 
What then if he who is not 
saved is of an evil nature, 
and wills the good and runs 
towards it but does not find 
it? For they say that a bad tree 
does not bear good fruit (cf. 
Mt 7:18), yet to will the good 
is good fruit, and how does 
the fruit of a bad tree become 
good? But if they should say 
that to will the good and to 
run towards it is a thing indif- 
ferent, that is, neither good 
nor bad, let us answer them: 
If to will the good and to run 
towards it is a thing indiffer- 
ent, then the opposite of this, 
namely, to will the evil and 
to run towards that, will also 
be a thing indifferent. But it 
is certain that to will the evil 
and to run towards it is not a 
thing indifferent, but plainly 
a bad thing. It is clear, then, 
that to will the good and to 


254 


Greek 


19. Such then is the expla- 
nation which I think we can 
offer in regard to the saying, 
“So then it is not of him that 
willeth, nor of him that run- 
neth, but of God that hath 
mercy” (Rom 9:16). Now 
Solomon says in the Book 
of Psalms—for the Song of 
Ascents, from which we shall 
quote the words, is his—“Ex- 
cept the Lord build the house, 
they labor in vain that build it; 
except the Lord keep the city, 
the watchman waketh but 
in vain” (Ps 127:1).* In this 
he is not dissuading us from 
building or teaching us not to 
keep awake in order to guard 
the city in our soul, but he is 
showing us that what is built 
without God and what does 
not receive its guard from him 
is built in vain and protected 
to no purpose, since God may 
reasonably be regarded as the 
lord of the building and the 
Master of the universe as the 
ruler of the guard for the city. 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 
Latin 
run towards the good is nota 
thing indifferent, but a good 
thing. 

19. Having then routed 
our opponents with the above 
answer let us hasten now to 
explain the passage in ques- 
tion, in which it says, “It is 
not of him that willeth, nor of 
him that runneth, but of God 
that hath mercy” (Rom 9:16). 
In the Book of Psalms in the 
Songs of Ascents, which are 
attributed to Solomon, it is 
written thus: “Except the Lord 
build the house, they labor in 
vain that build it; except the 
Lord keep the city, the watch- 
man waketh but in vain” (Ps 
127:1).”° By these words he is 
certainly not suggesting that 
we ought to cease from build- 
ing or from keeping awake in 
order to guard that city which 
is within us, but he is showing 
us that what is built without 
God and what is guarded 
without God is built in vain 
and protected to no purpose. 
For in everything that is built 
well and preserved well the 
Lord is regarded as the author 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


So then, if we were to say, 
This building is not the work 
of the builder but of God, 
or, it is owing to the efforts 
not of the guard but of God 
the Ruler of all that this city 
has suffered no harm from 
its enemies, we should not 
be in error; it being under- 
stood that some part of the 
work had been done by man 
but that the happy result was 
to be gratefully attributed to 
God who brought it to pass. 
In the same way, since human 
will is not sufficient to enable 
us to attain the end, nor is the 
running of those who are, as 
it were, athletes sufficient to 
enable them to gain “the prize 
of the high calling of God in 
Christ Jesus” (Phil 3:14)—for 
these things are accomplished 
by God's assistance—it is well 
said that “it is not of him that 
willeth, nor of him that run- 
neth, but of God that hath 
mercy” (Rom 9:16). Just as if 
one were to say about farm- 
ing, as indeed it is actually 


255 


Latin 
both of the building and of its 
safe preservation. 

For example, if we were 
to see a splendid work such as 
a large and magnificent build- 
ing reared with architectural 
beauty, should we not rightly 
and deservedly say that it was 
not constructed by human 
power but by divine help 
and influence. This, how- 
ever, would not signify that 
the labor and toil of human 
endeavor had ceased and 
performed nothing at all. Or, 
again, suppose we were to see 
a city hemmed in by a strict 
blockade of its enemies, with 
threatening engines brought 
up to its walls and a press- 
ing attack made by means 
of a rampart with weapons, 
fire and all the other death- 
dealing instruments of war; 
then if the enemy should be 
repulsed and put to flight, 
it is right and proper for us 
to say that deliverance was 
granted by God to the lib- 
erated city. Yet by this we do 
not mean that the sentinels’ 
night watches, the young 


256 


Greek 


written, “I planted, Apollos 
watered, but God gave the 
increase; so that neither is he 
that planteth anything, nor 
he that watereth, but God 
that giveth the increase” (1 
Cor 3:6, 7); and we could 
not piously say that the pro- 
duction of full crops was the 
work of the farmer or the 
work of the waterer, but the 


work of God. 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 

Latin 

men’s readiness for battle and 
the guards’ vigilance were 
lacking. The apostle must 
therefore be understood to 
have spoken in this sense, 
that the will of man is not by 
itself sufficient to the accom- 
plishment of salvation, nor 
is any mortal running able 
to attain the heavenly prom- 
ises and to receive “the prize 
of the high calling of God 
in Christ Jesus” (Phil 3:14), 
unless this good will of ours 
and our ready purpose and 
whatever industry we may 
possess is both helped and 
strengthened by the divine 
assistance. The apostle there- 
fore said very logically, “It is 
not of him that willeth, nor 
of him that runneth, but of 
God that hath mercy”(Rom 
9:16), just as if we were to say 
in connection with farming 
that which actually is written, 
“I planted, Apollos watered, 
but God gave the increase; so 
that neither is he that plan- 
teth anything, nor he that 
watereth, but God that giveth 
the increase” (1 Cor 3:6, 7). 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


j 28 3 


So, too, our perfection 
does not come to pass with- 
out our doing anything, and 
yet it is not completed as a 
result of our efforts, but God 
performs the greater part of 
it. And in order to produce 
‘a clearer conviction that this 
is the meaning of the passage 
we will take an illustration 
from the art of navigation. 
To what extent should we say 
that the navigator'’s art helps 
in bringing the ship back to 
the harbor, when compared 
with the force of the winds 
and the favorable state of the 
atmosphere and the shining of 
the stars, all of which co-oper- 
ate to preserve those who sail? 
Why, even the sailors them- 
selves from feelings of rever- 
ence do not often venture to 
claim that they have saved 
the ship but attribute it all to 


257 


Latin 
As therefore when a field 

has brought forth good and 

rich crops to perfect maturity, 

no one could piously or logi- 

cally say that the farmer made 

these fruits, but all would 

acknowledge that they were 

bestowed by God, so, too, 

our perfection is not effected 

while we rest and do nothing, 

nor on the other hand is its 

completion to be attributed 
to us, but rather to God, who 
performs the greater part of 
it. In the same way when a 
ship has escaped from the 
dangers of the sea, although 
the result is achieved by the 
exercise of much labor on 
the part of the sailors and 
by the complete use of the 
navigator’s art, together with 
the diligence and industry of 
the pilot, the direction of the 
winds and the positions of 
the stars being also carefully 
noted, nevertheless when at 
last after being tossed by the 
waves and strained by the 
billows the ship reaches the 
harbor in safety, no one in his 
sober senses would attribute 


258 


Greek 


God; not that they have per- 
formed nothing, but that the 
efforts of God’s providence 
are very much in excess of the 
effects of their art. 


So indeed with our salva- 
tion the effects of God’s work 
are very much in excess of the 
effects of what we can do. 

This, I believe, is the rea- 
son why it was said, “It is 
not of him that willeth, nor 
of him that runneth, but of 
God that hath mercy” (Rom 
9:16). For if we are to take 
the passage, “It is not of him 
that willeth nor of him that 
runneth, but of God that 
hath mercy,” in the sense 
that our opponents suggest, 
the commandments are 
superfluous, and it is in vain 
when Paul himself blames 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 
Latin 
its safe return to anything but 
the mercy of God. Further, 
not even the sailors them- 
selves nor the pilot would 
venture to say, “I caused the 
ship to be saved,” but they 
refer it all to the mercy of 
God; not that they suppose 
that they contributed nothing 
in the way of art or labor to 
the ship’s safety, but that they 
know that while the labor was 
provided by them, the ship’s 
safety was due to God. 

So also in the journey 
of our life it is we who must 
expend labor and zeal and 
supply diligent toil, but the 
salvation which is the fruit 
of our labor we must look to 
receive from God. Otherwise, 
if God demands none of our 
work, the commandments 
will certainly appear to be 
superfluous; and it is in vain 
when Paul himself blames 
some who have fallen away 
from the truth and praises 
others for standing fast in 
the faith, and to no purpose 
when he also delivers certain 
precepts and directions to 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


some for having fallen away 
and approves of others for 
remaining steadfast and gives 
directions to the churches; it 
is useless, too, for us to yield 
ourselves up to willing what 
is better, useless also for us 
to try to run. But it is not in 
vain when Paul gives all his 
advice, and when he blames 
some and approves of others, 
nor is it in vain when we yield 
ourselves up to willing what is 
better and to desiring eagerly 
the things that are excellent. 
Our opponénts, therefore 
have not rightly explained the 
meaning of the passage. 

20. In addition to these 
there is the passage, “To will 
and to work are of God” (Phil 
2:13). Now some say, If to 
will is from God, and to work 
is from God, then even if we 
will badly and work badly, 
these come to us from God; 
and if this is so, we have no 
freewwill. Again, when we will 
what is better and work deeds 
that are excellent, since to will 
and to\work are from God it 
is not we who have done the 


259 


Latin 

the churches; in vain, too, 
that we ourselves either will 
or run towards the good. But 
it is certain that these things 
do not happen in vain, and it 
is certain that the apostles do 
not deliver precepts in vain, 
nor does the Lord give laws to 
no purpose. It remains then 
for us to declare that the van- 
ity lies rather with the her- 
etics, when they give a false 
meaning to these good words. 


Winx 


20. After this follows the 
question, that “both to will 
and to work are of God” (Phil 
2:13). Now they say, If to will 
is from God, and to work is 
from God, then whether we 
will or work well or badly, it 
is from God; and if this is so, 
we have no free will. 

To this we must reply that 
the statement of the apostle 
does not assert that to will 
what is evil is from God or that 


to will what is good is from 


260 


Greek 


excellent deeds; we seemed 
to do them, but it was God 
who bestowed them on us, 
and so even in this we have 
no free will. In reply to this 
we must say that the state- 
ment of the apostle does not 
assert that to will what is evil 
is of God or that to will what 
is good is of God; nor that 
to work deeds that are better 
or worse is of God; but to 
will in general and to work 
in general. For as we have it 
from God that we are living 
beings and that we are men, 
so also we have from him the 
power of willing in general, 
as I said, and the power of 
movement in general. And 
just as we, because we are liv- 
ing beings, possess the power 
of movement and can move, 
for instance, these limbs of 
ours, hands or feet, and yet 
we could not reasonably say 
that we have from God the 
particular power of mov- 
ing to strike, or to destroy, 
or to take away another’s 
goods, but what we received 
_ from God was the power of 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 


God; nor that to work either 
good or evil is from God; but 
it says in a general way that 
“to will and to work are of 
God.” For as we have it from 
God that we are men, that we 
breathe and that we move, so 
also we have from God the 
power of willing; just as if we 
were to say that our power of 
movement is from God, or the 
fact that each of our members 
performs its proper function 
and movements is from God. 
But it must certainly not be 
understood from this that if 
the hand moves, for instance, 
to strike someone unjustly or 
to steal, this is from God; for 
only the power of movement 
is from God, and it is our part 
to direct those movements, 
the power of exercising which 
we have from God, either 
to good or to evil purposes. 
Thus what the apostle says 
is, that we receive from God 
the power of willing, but it is 
we who use the will either for 
good or for evil desires. We 
must apply similar reasoning 
to our works. 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


movement in general and it 
is we who use this power for 
the worse or for the better, so 
we have received from God 
the power of working, by vir- 
tue of bur being living crea- 
tures, and from the Creator 
the power of willing, but it 
is we who use the power of 
willing either for the noblest 
purposes or for the opposite 
ones, and likewise the power 
of working. 

21. Still, the saying of the 
apostle in the passage where 
he suggests an objection 
against himself will appear 
to tend to the conclusion 
that we are not possessed of 
free will. He says, “So then 
he hath mercy on whom he 
will, and whom he will he 
hardeneth. Thou wilt say 
then unto me, Why doth he 
still find fault? For who with- 
standeth his will? Nay but, 
O man, who art thou that 
repliest against God? Shall 
the thing formed say to him 
that formed it, Why didst 
thou make me thus? Or hath 
not the potter a right over the 


261 


Latin 


21. But there is also the 
passage where the apostle 
said, “So then he hath mercy 
on whom he will, and whom 
he will he hardeneth. Thou 
wilt say then unto me, Why 
doth he still find fault? For 
who withstandeth his will? 
Nay but O man, who art 
thou that repliest against 
God? Shall the thing formed 
say to him that formed it, 
Why didst thou make me 
thus? Or hath not the pot- 
ter a right over the clay from 
the same lump to make one 
part a vessel unto honor and 
another unto dishonor?” 
(Rom 9:18-—21). 


262 


Greek 


clay, from the same lump to 
make one part a vessel unto 
honor, and another unto dis- 
honor?” (Rom 9:18—21). 
Now someone will say, 
If, just as the potter from 
the same lump makes some 
vessels for honor and some 
for dishonor, so God makes 
some creatures for salvation 
and some for destruction, 
then salvation or destruction 
does not rest with us nor are 
we possessed of free will. We 
must ask the man who inter- 
prets the words thus, whether 
it is possible to imagine the 
apostle contradicting him- 
self; and I do not believe that 
anyone will dare to say that 
it is. If then the apostle does 
not speak in contrary ways, 
how according to the man 
who accepts the passage in 
this sense is he reasonable in 
imputing blame to the forni- 
cator at Corinth or to those 
who had fallen away and had 
not repented of the licen- 
tiousness and impurity of 
their deeds? (cf. 1 Cor 5:1—5; 
2 Cor 12:21). How, too, can 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 


Now someone may per- 
haps say, If, just as the potter 
from the same lump makes 
some vessels for honor and 
some for dishonor, so God 
makes some men for salvation 
and some for destruction, 
then salvation or destruction 
does not rest with us; which 
makes it clear that we have 
no free will. We must reply 
therefore to those who inter- 
pret the words thus, and ask 
whether it is possible that 
the apostle could contradict 
himself. And if we cannot 
think this of the apostle, 
how according to them will 
it seem just for him to blame 
those at Corinth who had 
committed fornication, or 
those who had fallen away. 
and had not repented of their 
deeds of licentiousness and 
fornication and impurity? (cf. 
1 Cor 5:1—5; 2 Cor 12:21). 
How, too, can he praise 


those who had acted rightly, 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 
he bless for having acted well 


those whom he praises, as for 
instance the house of Onesi- 
phorus, in these words: “The 
Lord grant mercy unto the 
house of Onesiphorus; for 
he oft refreshed me and was 
not ashamed of my chain; 
but when he was in Rome 
he sought me diligently and 
found me. The Lord grant 
unto him to find mercy of 
the Lord in that day” (2 Tm 
1:16—18). It is not like the 
same apostle to blame the 
sinner as if he was worthy 
of blame and to approve as 
if worthy of praise him who 
had acted well, and yet on 
the other hand to assert, as 
if nothing lay in our power, 
that it is due to the intention 
of the Creator that one ves- 
sel is made “unto honor” and 
another “unto dishonor.” 
And in regard to the state- 
ment that “we must all stand 
before the judgment seat of 
Christ, that each one may 
receive the things done in the 
body, according to what he 
hath done, whether it be good 


263 


Latin 
as for instance the house of 
Onesiphorus, saying: “The 
Lord grant mercy unto the 
house of Onesiphorus; for 
he oft refreshed me and was 
not ashamed of my chain; 
but when he came to Rome 
he sought me diligently and 
found me. The Lord grant 
unto him to find mercy of 
the Lord in that day” (2 Tm 
1:16—18). It is not consistent 
with the seriousness of the 
apostle to blame the man 
who is worthy of blame, that 
is, the man who has sinned, 
and to praise the man who is 
worthy of praise for his good 
work, and on the other hand 
to say, as if it were in no one’s 
power to do anything good 
or evil, that it is the Cre- 
ator’s doing that each man 
acts either well or ill, since he 
makes “one vessel unto honor 
and another unto dishonor.” 
And how could he also 
add the saying that “we must 
all stand before the judgment 
seat of Christ, that each one 
of us may receive in his body 
according to what he has 


264 


Greek 
or bad” (2 Cor 5:10), how 


is this correct, if those who 
have done evil have come to 
this kind of conduct because 
they were created “vessels of 
dishonor,” and if those who 
have lived virtuously have 
done good because they were 
from the beginning fashioned 
for this purpose and are “ves- 
sels of honor”? 

And further, is there not 
a conflict between this view, 
which they gather from the 
words we have quoted, that 
it is due to the intention of 
the Creator that a vessel is 
honorable or the reverse, and 
the saying found elsewhere: 
“In a great house there are 
not only vessels of gold and 
silver, but also of wood and of 
earth; and some unto honor, 
and some unto dishonor. If 
therefore a man purge him- 
self, he shall be a vessel unto 
honor, sanctified and meet 
for the master’s use, prepared 
unto every good work” (2 
Tm 2:20, 21). For if he who 
purges himself becomes a 
“vessel unto honor,” and he 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

done, whether it be good or 
bad” (2 Cor 5:10)? For what 
return of good is due to him 
who could do no evil, because 
he was fashioned for good by 
the Creator? Or what penalty 
could properly be demanded 
of him who by the very act 
of his Maker was unable to 
do good? 


Finally, is there not a 
contradiction between this 
assertion and what is said 
elsewhere: “In a great house 
there are not only vessels of 
gold and of silver, but also of 
wood and of earth; and some 
unto honor, and some unto 
dishonor. If therefore a man 
purge himself from these, he 
shall be a vessel unto honor, 
sanctified and meet for the 
master’s use, prepared unto 
every good work” (2 Tm 2:20, 
21). If therefore a man purges 
himself, he becomes a “vessel 
unto honor”; but he who has 
disdained to purge himself 
from his impurities becomes 
a “vessel unto dishonor.” In 
view of these declarations 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


who allows himself to remain 
unpurged becomes a “vessel 
unto dishonor,” so far as these 
words go the Creator is in no 
way responsible. For the Cre- 
ator makes “vessels of honor 
and vessels of dishonor” 
not from the beginning b 

does not condemn or justify 
beforehand by that, but he 
makes those who purge them- 
selves “vessels of honor” and 
those who allow themselves 
to remain unpurged “vessels 
of dishonor’; so that it comes 
from causes older than the 
fashioning of vessels unto 
honor and unto dishonor that 
one was made “unto honor” 
and another “unto dishonor.” 


22. But if we once 
admit” that there are certain 
older)causes to account for 


the “vessel of honor” and the 


“vessel of dishonor,” what is 
there absurd in our recurring 


265 
Latin 
the cause of our deeds can by 
no means, in my opinion, be 
referred to the Creator. For 
God the Creator makes some 
vessels “unto honor” and he 
makes other vessels “unto 
dishonor’; but it is that vessel 
which has purged itself from 
all impurity that he makes a 
“vessel unto honor,” while the 
one which has stained itself 
with low vices he makes a 
“vessel unto dishonor,” And 
so we conclude from this that 
the cause of each man’s activ- 
ities goes back into the past 
and that each was made by 
God a vessel of honor or of 
dishonor in accordance with 
his merits. Each vessel has 
therefore from its own self 
provided the Creator with 
the causes and occasions in 
virtue of which it was formed 
by him either “unto honor” 
or “unto dishonor.” 

22. But if this statement 
appears to be just, as it cer- 
tainly is just and in har- 
mony with all piety, namely, 
that each vessel is fashioned 
by God for honor or for 


266 


Greek 
to the subject of the soul and 


recognizing that the older 
reasons why Jacob was loved 
and Esau hated lie with Jacob 
before he came into the body 
and with Esau before he 
entered Rebecca’s womb? (cf. 
Mal 1:2, 3; Gn 25:25, 26). 


At the same time it is 
made quite clear in regard to 
their fundamental nature that 
just as it is one clay which is 
in the hands of the potter, 
from a lump of which come 
vessels “unto honor and unto 
dishonor,” so every soul in 
God's hands is of one nature 
and all rational beings come, 
if I may say so, from one 
lump, though certain older 
causes have made some to 
be for honor and others for 


dishonor. 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 
dishonor as a result of pre- 
existing causes, it does not 
seem absurd for us, when 
discussing the older causes 
in the same order and by the 
same method, to apply the 
same principle to souls, and 
to believe that this was the 
reason why Jacob was loved 
even before he was born into 
this world, and Esau was 
hated while still enclosed in 
his mother’s womb (cf. Mal 
1:2, 3; Gn 25:25, 26). 
Further, the saying that 
“from the same lump” is 
made both a vessel of honor 
and one of dishonor will not 
cause us difficulty, for we 
say that there is one nature 
for all rational souls, just as 
one lump of clay is described 
as being in the hands of the 
potter. Since then there is 
one nature for all rational 
creatures, out of this one 
nature God formed and cre- 
ated, as the potter does out 
of one lump of clay, “some 
men to honor and others to 
dishonor,” in accordance with 
preexisting grounds of merit. 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


But if the language of 
the apostle conveys a rebuke 
when he says, “Nay but, 
O man, who art thou that 
repliest against God?” (Rom 
9:20) it probably teaches us 
that he who has confidence 
towards God by reason of his 
faithful and good life would 
not hear the words, “Who 
art thou that repliest against 
God?” A man like Moses, for 
example—‘“for Moses spake, 
and God answered him with 
a voice” (Ex 19:19); and as 
God answers Moses, so also 
the saint answers God. But 
he who has not obtained 
this confidence, for the clear 
reason that he is either lost 
or else makes these inquiries 
with a desire not to learn but 
to cause contention, and who 
says, “Why doth he still find 
fault? For who withstandeth 
his will?” from such motives, 
this man would deserve the 
rebuke contained in the 
words, “Nay but, O man, 
who art thou that repliest 
against God?” (Rom 9:20). 


267 

Latin 
But in regard to the 
apparent rebuke conveyed 
by the apostle’s language 
when he says, “O man, who 
art thou that repliest against 
God” (Rom 9:20), I think 
that what he teaches here 
is this, that such a rebuke 
does not refer to one who is 
faithful and lives a good and 
righteous life and has confi- 
dence towards God, that is, to 
a man like Moses, of whom 
the scripture says that “Moses 
spake, and God answered 
him with a voice” (Ex 19:19); 
and as God answered Moses, 
so also the saint will answer 
God. But the man who is 
unfaithful and loses his con- 
fidence in answering before 
God by the unworthiness 
of his life and conduct, who 
makes these inquiries with 
a desire not to learn and 
advance, but to cause strife 
and contention, the kind of 
man who can say what the 
apostle indicates in the words, 
“Why then doth he still find 
fault? For who withstandeth 
his will?”—this is the man 


268 


Greek 


23. To those, however, 
who bring in diverse natures 
and use this passage in sup- 
port we must answer as 
follows. If they retain the 
doctrine that the lost and the 
saved come “from one lump” 
(Rom 9:21) and that the Cre- 
ator of the saved is also the 
Creator of the lost, and if 
he who makes not only the 
spiritual but also the earthy 
is good (for this follows from 
their reasonings), it is none 
the less possible for one who 
has become at the present 
time a vessel of honor in con- 
sequence of certain former 
righteous deeds and yet has 
not acted similarly here nor 
in a way befitting a vessel of 
honor, to become in another 
age a vessel of dishonor; just 
as on the other hand it is 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 
to whom is rightly directed 
the rebuke conveyed by the 
apostle’s words, “O man, who 
art thou that repliest against 
God?” (Rom 9:20). This 
rebuke, then, is not for the 
faithful and the saints, but for 
the unfaithful and impious. 
23. As for those, how- 
ever, who bring in diverse 
natures of souls and adduce 
this statement of the apostle 
in support of their doctrine, 
we must answer them as fol- 
lows. If they agree with us 
that the apostle says that both 
those who are made for honor 
and those who are made for 
dishonor, whom they call 
the persons of saved and of 
lost natures, come “from one 
lump” (Rom 9:21), then the 
natures of souls will not be 
diverse, but there will be one 
nature for all. And if they 
admit that one and the same 
potter undoubtedly indicates 
one Creator, then there will 
not be different Creators for 
those who are saved and for 
those who are lost. Now let 
them choose whether they 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


possible for one who by rea- 
son of acts older than this 
life has become here a ves- 
sel of dishonor to become, 
if he amends his ways in the 
“new creation” (Gal 6:15 [RV 
Marg.]), a “vessel of honor 
sanctified and meet for the 
master's use, prepared unto 
every good work.”?’ 


269 
Latin 
wish the passage, to be inter- 
preted as indicating a good 
God who creates evil and lost 
men, or a God not good who 
creates men that are good 
and prepared for honor. The 
necessity of giving an answer 
will extract from them one 
of these two alternatives. But 
according to our conten- 
tion that God makes vessels 
to honor or to dishonor by, 
reason of preexisting causes, — 
the proof of God’s righ- 
teousness is in no way com- 
promised. For it is possible 


‘that one vessel, which from 


previous causes has in this 
world been fashioned for 
honor, may in another age, 
if it has acted carelessly here, 
become a vessel of dishonor 
in accordance with the des- 
erts of its conduct; just as 
on the other hand if a man 
has from pre-existing causes 
been formed by the Creator 
as a vessel of dishonor in this 
life, and yet has amended 
his ways and purged himself 
from all his faults and low . 
vices, he may in that new age 


270 


Greek 


And perhaps the present 
Israelites will be deprived of 
their racial position for not 
having lived worthily of their 
noble birth, being changed as 
it were from vessels of honor 
into vessels of dishonor; while 
many of the present Egyptians 
and Idumaeans who have 
come near to Israel”* will, 
when they have borne more 
fruit, “enter into the church 
of the Lord,” no longer being 
reckoned as Egyptians or 
Idumaeans but for the future 
becoming Israelites (cf. Dt 
23:7, 8). Thus according to 
this view some men by the 
exercise of their wills make 
progress from worse to better, 
while others fall from better 
to worse; others, too, are pre- 
served in their good deeds or 
rise from good to better, while 
others again continue in their 
evil deeds and, if the evil flows 
on, from being bad become 
still worse.” 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

become a “vessel unto honor, 
sanctified and meet for the 
master’s use, prepared unto 
every good work.” 

Finally, those who were 
formed by God to be Isra- 
elites in this age, and have 
lived a life unworthy of their 
noble birth and fallen away 
from their high descent, will 
in the age to come, for their 
unbelief, be changed as it 
were from vessels of honor 
into vessels of dishonor; while 
on the other hand many who 
in this life have been reck- 
oned among the Egyptian or 
Idumaean vessels but have 
embraced the faith and con- 
duct of the Israelites shall 
“enter into the church of 
the Lord” and exist as vessels 
of honor “at the revelation 
of the sons of God” (cf. Dt 
23:7; Rom 8:19). Thus it is 
more agreeable to the rule of 
piety” to believe that every 
rational creature, according 
to his will and conduct, is 
changed at one time from 


bad to good and at another 
falls from good to bad; that 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


271 
Latin 
some continue in good, and 
some even advance to what 
is better and ever ascend to 
higher things until they reach 
the highest stage of all; while 
others continue in evil or, if 
the evil within them begins 
to overflow, go on to a worse 
condition and are at last over- 
whelmed in the lowest depths 
of wickedness. 

We must suppose from 
this that it is possible for 
some who have begun at first 
with small sins to be so given 
over to wickedness and to go 
to such lengths of evil that 
their iniquity equals even that 
of the opposing powers; and 
that on the other hand, if, 
through many severe punish- 
ments and most bitter chas- 
tisements they are able at last 
to recover their senses and 
by degrees endeavor to find 
a remedy for their wounds, 
they may when their wick- 
edness has ended be restored // 
to what is good. This leads us 
to the opinion that since, as 
we have frequently said, the 


s,| soul is immortal and eternal, 


272 


Greek 


24. In one place, then, 
the apostle claims that it is 
not in God’s power whether 
we become vessels unto 
honor or unto dishonor, but 
he attributes it entirely to us 
when he says, “If therefore a 
man purge himself, he shall 
be a vessel unto honor, sanc- 
tified and meet for the mas- 
ter’s use, prepared unto every 
good work” (2 Tm 2:21). In 
another place, however, he 
claims that it is not in our 
power, but appears to attri- 
bute it entirely to God when 
he says, “The potter hath 
a right over the clay, from 
the same lump to make one 
part a vessel unto honor, 
and another unto dishonor” 
(Rom 9:21). 

Now these sayings of 


his are not contradictory, 
nD 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

it is possible that in the many 
and endless periods through- 
out diverse and immeasurable 
ages it may either descend 
from the highest good to 
the lowest evil or be restored 
from the lowest evil to the 
highest good. 

24. Now the language 
of the apostle, in the passage 
where he speaks of vessels of 
honor or dishonor, namely, 
“if a man purge himself, he 
shall be a vessel unto honor, 
sanctified and meet for the 
master’s use, prepared unto 
every good work” (2 Tm 
2:21), seems to put nothing 
in God’s power and every- 
thing in ours. In the passage, 
however, where he says, “The 
potter hath a right over the 
clay, from the same lump to 
make one part a vessel unto 
honor, and another unto 
dishonor” (Rom 9:21), he 
appears to attribute every- 


thing to God. 


Now we must not take 
these passages to be con- 


as st 


Book III, Chapter I 


Greek 


but must be taken together 
and one perfect explanation 
drawn from them both. It is, 
then, neither in our power to 


make progress apart from the 


knowledge of God, nor does 
the knowledge of God com- 


pel us to do so unless we our- 
selves contribute something 
towards the good result; nor 
does our power apart from 
the knowledge of God and 
the full use of the power that 
deservedly belongs to us cause 
a man to be created for honor 
or for dishonor; nor does the 
power of God by itself fash- 
ion a man for honor or for 
dishonor, but God finds a 
ground of difference in our 
will, as it inclines to the better 
or to the worse. 


273 
Latin 
tradictory to one another, 
but the meaning of each 
must be combined into one 
and a single interpretation 
drawn from the two; that 
is, that we are not to think 
that the things which are in 
the power of our will can be 
performed without the help 
of God, nor that those which 
are in God’s hands can be 
brought to completion apart 
from our acts and earnest 
endeavors and purpose. For 
indeed we do not have it in 
our own will either to desire 
or to perform anything with- 
out being bound to recog- 
nize that this very power of 
desiring and performing was 
given to us by God, subject 
to the distinction which we 
spoke of above.*' Nor again 
are we to think that when 
God fashions vessels, some 
for honor and some for dis- 
honor, he regards our wills or 
purposes or merits as a cause 
of the honor or dishonor, as 
if they were a kind of matter 
out of which he may fash- 
ion each one of us either for 


Let these arguments, which 
we have provided on the sub- 
ject of free will, be sufficient. 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

honor or for dishonor. The 
truth is that the very move- 
ment of the soul and purpose 
of the mind of itself suggests 
to him, to whom the heart 
and the thoughts of the soul 
are not hidden, whether the 
vessel should be fashioned for 
honor or for dishonor. 

But let these arguments, 
which we have discussed to 
the best of our ability on the 
questions that arise out of free 
will, be sufficient. 


Chapter II 


THE OpprosING PowERS 


t 
1. We must now see how, according to the scriptures, the 
opposing powers and the devil himself are engaged in a strug- 
gle with the human race, provoking and inciting men to sin. 
First, a serpent is described in Genesis as having seduced Eve 
(cf. Gn 3:1-6); and in regard to this serpent, in the Ascension 
of Moses, a book which the apostle Jude mentions in his epis- 
tle, Michael the archangel when disputing with the devil about 
the body of Moses says that the serpent was inspired by the. 
devil and so became the cause of the transgression of Adam 
and Eve.' Further, the question is asked by some, who is the 
angel that speaks from heaven to Abraham and says, “Now I 
know that thou fearest God, and for my sake hast not withheld 
thy beloved son, whom thou lovedst” (Gn 22:12). For clearly 
it is an angel who is described and who says that he knew now 
that Abraham feared. God and had not withheld his beloved 
son, as the scripture runs, yet he did not declare that it was for 
God’s sake, but for his own sake, that is, for the sake of him 
who was speaking. We must also inquire who that being was of 
whom it is said in Exodus that he wished to kill Moses because 
he was setting out for Egypt (cf. Ex 4:24). And afterwards, 
who is it that is called the “destroying angel” (Ex 12:23), and 
who also is he who in Leviticus is described as Apopompeus, 


275 


276 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


that is, the Averter, of whom the scripture speaks thus: “One 
lot for the Lord, and one lot for Apopompeus” (Lv 16:8)?? 

Further, in the first book of the Kings an evil spirit is said 
to suffocate Saul (cf. 1 Sm 18:10):° and in the third book 
Micaiah the prophet says, “I saw the God of Israel sitting upon 
his throne, and all the host of heaven stood round about him 
on his right hand and on his left. And the Lord said, Who 
shall entice Ahab king of Israel, that he may go up and fall at 
Ramoth Gilead? And one said on this manner, and another 
said on that manner. And there came forth a spirit, and stood 
before the Lord and said, I will entice him. And the Lord said 
unto him, Wherewith? And he said, I will go forth, and I will 
be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. And he said, 
Thou shalt entice him, and shalt prevail also; go forth, and 
do so. And now the Lord hath puta lying spirit in the mouth 
of all thy prophets; and the Lord hath spoken evil concerning 
thee” (1 Kgs 22:19-23). This account clearly shows that a 
certain spirit by his own will and choice elected to entice and 
to practice deceit, and that God makes use of this spirit to 
compass the death of Ahab, who deserved that fate. 

Also in the first book of the Chronicles it says, “The devil 
raised up Satan in Israel, and moved David to number the 
people” (1 Chr 21:1).* In the Psalms an evil angel is said to 
persecute certain men (cf. Ps 35:5, 6). In Ecclesiastes, too, 
Solomon says, “If the spirit of one that hath power rise up 
against thee, leave not thy place, for healing will restrain many 
transgressions” (Eccl 10:4).? And in Zechariah we read of the 
devil standing at Joshua's right hand and resisting him (cf. Zec 
3:1). Isaiah also says that the sword of God rises up against 
“the dragon, the crooked serpent” (Is 27:1). And what shall I 
say of Ezekiel, who in his second vision prophesies most clearly 
to the prince of Tyre about an opposing power and who says, 
too, that the dragon dwells in the rivers of Egypt (Ez 29:3)?¢ 


Book III, Chapter II 277 


And as for the entire book that is written about Job, what else 
does it contain but an account of the devil seeking for power 
to be given him over all Job’s possessions, and over his sons, 
and finally over his body? He is conquered, however, through 
Job’s patience. In this book the Lord has by his answers taught 
us much about the power of that dragon which opposes us. 
Let these examples from the Old Testament, so far as we can 
call them to memory at the moment, be now quoted to prove 
that the opposing powers are both named in the scriptures and 
are said to be adversaries of the human race and reserved for 
future punishment. 

But let us look also at the New Testament, where Satan 
comes to the Savior, tempting him (Mt 4:1—11 and par.); 
and where evil spirits and impure daemons, which had taken 
possession of very many, were put to flight by the Savior from 
the bodies of the sufferers, who are said also to have been set 
free by him (cf. Mk 1:23ff.; 32-34; 5:1ff.). Moreover, Judas, 
when the devil had now put it into his heart to betray Christ, 
afterwards received Satan wholly into himself; for it is written 
that “after the sop Satan entered into him” (Jn 13:2, 27). Paul 
the apostle teaches us that we should not “give place to the 
devil” (Eph 4:27) but, he says, “Put on the armor of God, that 
ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil” (Eph 
6:11), pointing out that the saints’ wrestling “is not against 
flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, 
against the rulers of this world’s darkness, against spiritual 
hosts of wickedness in the heavenly places” (Eph 6:12). Fur- 
ther, he says that the Savior was crucified by “the princes of 
this world,” who are “coming to naught,” whose “wisdom,” he 
adds, he does not speak (cf. 1 Cor 2:6-8). Through all these 
instances, therefore, the divine scripture teaches us that there 
are certain invisible enemies fighting against us, and it tells us 


that we must be armed to meer them. This leads the simpler 


4 


Suu + 
evi U " AU 


278 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 
N 


sort of believers in Christ the Lord to suppose that all the sins 


that men have committed come from the persistent influence 
of the contrary powers on the sinners’ minds, because in this 
invisible contest the powers are found to be superior. But if, 
so to speak, there were no devil, no man would ever sin at all. 


2. We however, who look more carefully into the reason of 


things, do not think that this is so; especially when we consider 
the acts that arise clearly from the necessities of our body. Are 
we to suppose that the devil is the cause of our being hungry 
or thirsty? I suppose there is no one who would venture to 
maintain this. If then he is not the cause of our being hun- 
gry or thirsty, what of that condition when an individual has 
attained the age of puberty and this period has called forth the 
exciting movements of the natural heat? It follows without a 
doubt that, as the devil is not the cause of our being hungry 
or thirsty, so neither is he the cause even of that impulse which 
is naturally called forth at the time of maturity, that is, of the 
desire for sexual intercourse. It is certain that this impulse is 
by no means always aroused by the devil, so as to lead us to 
suppose that if there were no devil our bodies would not have 
the desire for such intercourse. 

Then again let us consider in regard to food,—if it be 
true, as we have shown above, that this is not sought for by 
men at the instance of the devil, but from a natural instinct— 
whether human experience, supposing there were no devil, 
could possibly employ such great self-control in partaking 
of food as absolutely never to exceed the limit, that is, never 
to take anything but what the occasion demanded or more 
than reason permitted, and that it should never happen that 
men went astray in the observance of due measure and mod- 
eration in their food. I for my part do not think that, even 
if there were no impulse from the devil to urge men on, this 
rule could be so observed by them that no one would exceed 


Book III, Chapter II 279 


due measure and moderation in partaking of food, not at any 
rate before they had learned this lesson by long practice and 
experience. What then? In regard to foods and drink it would 
be oacsoes for us to go wrong even apart from the instigation 
“careless moment; and are we to suppose that in regard to the 


control of the sexual appetite and the natural desires we should 


not be affected in a similar way? My own opinion is that the © | 


same process of reasoning can also be applied to the rest of the 
natural emotions, such as covetousness, anger, sorrow or any 
others whatever, which by the fault of intemperance exceed 


the limits of their natural measure. 


The fact is therefore clear that, just as in regard to things ) 


that are good the mere human will is by itself incapable of 
completing the good act,—for this is in all cases brought to 
perfection by divine help—so also in regard to things of the 
opposite kind we derive the beginnings and what we may 
call the seeds of sin from those desires which are given to us” 
naturally for our use. But when we indulge these to excess and 
offer no resistance to the first movements towards intémper- 


S ance, then the hostile power, seizing thé opportunity of this 


first offence, incites and urges us on in-every way, striving 


to extend the sins over a larger field; so that while we men 
supply the occasions and beginnings of our sins, the hostile 
powers spread them far and wide and if possible endlessly. It 
is thus that the fall into avarice at last takes place, men first 
longing for a little money and then increasing in greed as the 
vice grows. Afterwards their passion is succeeded by a mental 
blindness and, with the hostile powers stimulating and urging 
them on, money is now not merely longed for but even seized 
by force or acquired through the shedding of human blood. 
A sure proof that these vast excesses of sin come from 
the daemons can easily be observed from the following fact, 


Q& 


280 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


that those who are under the influence of immoderate love or 
uncontrolled anger or exceptional sorrow suffer no less than 
those who are tormented in body by daemons. Further, it is 
related in certain histories that some men have become insane 
from love, others even for sorrow or excessive joy; and this 
happens. I think, because these opposing powers, that is, the 
daemons, have been allowed to occupy a place in their minds, 
a place which intemperance has first laid open, and have then 
taken complete possession of their intelligence, especially as 
“no thought of the glory of virtue aroused them to resistance. 
3. That there are, however, certain sins which do not come 
from the opposing powers but take their beg: 


inning from the 
natural instincts of the body is most clearly declared by the 
apostle Paul in the place where he says, “The flesh lusteth 
against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh; and these are 
contrary the one to the other, so that ye cannot do the things 
that ye would” (Gal 5:17). If then the “flesh lusteth against 
the spirit,” and the “spirit against the flesh,” we have at some 
time to “wrestle against flesh and blood” (Eph 6:12), that 
is, when we are “men” and “walk according to the flesh” (1 
Cor 3:4; 2 Cor 10:2), and when we cannot be tempted with 
temptations beyond what are human, when it is said of us that 
“no temptation hath taken you, except such as is human; but 
God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above 
that ye are able” (1 Cor 10:13). 

For just as those who preside over the games do not allow 
the competitors to oppose one another indiscriminately or by 
chance in the contests, but after a careful examination match 
them in equal pairs according to size and years, this one with 
that and this one with that, boys, that is, with boys and men 
with men as they are suited to one another by close resem- 
blance in age or strength, so also must we understand in regard 
to the divine providence, that it treats all who descend into the 


Book II, Chapter II 281 


struggles of human life with the most impartial care, according 
to the nature of each individual’s virtue, which he alone knows 
who alone beholds the hearts of men. One, therefore, fights 
against one kind of flesh, another against another kind; one 
for so long a time, another for so long; one is incited by the 
flesh to this or that, another to something else; one struggles 
against this or that hostile power, another against two or three 
at once, or now against one and now against another, and at 
one particular time against one and at another against another; 
or after certain acts a man fights against certain powers, after 
other acts against different ones. For consider whether some 
such arrangement is not indicated by the saying of the apostle, 
“But God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted 
above that ye are able” (1 Cor 10:13), that is, because each 
one is tempted in proportion to the degree and possibilities 
of the strength he possesses. 

It must not be supposed, however, that because we said 
that by the righteous decision of God each man is tempted 
in proportion to the degree of his strength, the tempted man 
ought therefore by all means to be victorious; for the com- 
petitor in the games cannot by all means be victorious, even 
though he may be paired with his opponent in an equal match. 
But unless the powers of the combatants are equal, the victor's 
palm will not be justly won nor may the vanquished be justly 
blamed. For this reason God allows us to be tempted, yet not 
“above that we are able”; for we are tempted in proportion to 
our powers. Nor is it written that in temptation God will also 
make a way to escape from bearing it, but a way to escape that 
we may be able to bear it. And this possibility that he has given 


us it is in our hands to utilize either vigorously or feebly. There - i. 


is no doubt that in every temptation we are given a power of 
bearing it, if only we use to the full the power thus granted. 
For to have the power to conquer is not the same thing as to 


282 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


conquer, as the apostle pointed out in carefully chosen lan- 
guage when he said that “God will give a way of escape, that 
ye may be able to bear it” (1 Cor 10:13) not, that ye may bear 
it. Many do not bear it, but are conquered by temptation. But 
what God gives us is not the certainty that we shall bear it, in 
which case there would appear to be no struggle at all, but the 
possibility “that we may be able to bear it.” 

‘This strength, therefore, which is given to us in order that 
we may be able to conquer, we by the exercise of our free will 
For if it were given to us in-such completeness as to ensure 
our victory by all means, that is, to prevent us from being by 
any possibility conquered, what reason for struggling would 
remain to him who could not be conquered? Or what merit 
in gaining the palm when our adversary is deprived of the 
chance of conquering? But if the possibility of conquering 


~~ is conferred equally upon us all, while the way in which we 


should use this possibility, that is, either vigorously or feebly, is 
a thing that lies in our own power, then it will be just to blame 
the vanquished and give the palm to the victor. From these 
considerations, therefore, which we have urged to the best of 
our ability, I think it is clearly apparent that there are some 
offences which we commit quite apart from the influence of 
the evil powers, and others which are carried to excessive and 
immoderate lengths at their instigation. It follows that we 
must now inquire how these opposing powers produce the 
aforenamed incitements within us. 

~~ 4. We find that the “thoughts which proceed out of the 
heart” (cf. Mt 15:18, 19; Mk 7:21), whether they are a mem- 
ory of deeds we have done or a contemplation of any things or 
causes whatsoever, proceed sometimes from ourselves, some- 
times are aroused by the opposing powers, and occasionally 


" also are implanted in us by God or by the holy angels. This 


Book III, Chapter I a3 wt 283 


would perhaps seem fabulous if it were not proved by the 
witness of divine scripture. That a thought may arise from 
ourselves is seen from the witness of David in the Psalms: “For 
the thought of man shall confess thee, and the residue of his 
thoughts shall hold a festival day to thee” (Ps 76:10 [LXX]). 
That it may come also from the contrary powers is seen from 
the witness of Solomon in Ecclesiastes, as follows: “If the spirit 
of one that hath power rise up against thee, leave not thy place, 
for healing will restrain many transgressions” (Eccl 10:4).’ And 
Paul the apostle will bear his witness on the same matter when 
he says: “Casting down thoughts and every high thing that 
exalts itself against the knowledge of Christ” (2 Cor 10:5). 

That on the other hand a thought may come from God 
is seen from the witness of David in the Psalms, as follows: 
“Blessed is the man whose acceptance is with thee, O Lord; thy 
ascents are in his heart” (Ps 84:5 [LXX]). And the apostle says 
that “God put it into the heart of Titus” (2 Cor 8:16). That 
some thoughts are suggested to men’s hearts by either good or 
bad angels is shown both by the angel that accompanied Tobit 
(Tb 5:4ff.) and by the language of the prophet when he says, 
“And the angel who was speaking in me replied” (Zec 1:14 
[LXX]). Moreover the book of the Shepherd asserts the same 
thing, teaching that two angels attend each human being, and 
saying that whenever good thoughts arise in our heart they are 
suggested by the good angel, and whenever thoughts of the 
opposite kind they are the inspiration of the bad angel.* The 
same thing, too, is asserted by Barnabas in his epistle, where 
he says that there are two ways, one of light and the other 
of darkness, over which preside certain angels, the angels of 
God over the way of light and Satan’s angels over the way of 
darkness.” 

We must bear in mind, however, that nothing else hap- 


pens to us as a result of these good or evil thoughts which are 


284 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


suggested to our heart but a mere agitation and excitement 


which urges us on to deeds either of good or of evil. It is 
possible for us, when an evil power has begun to urge us on 


to a deed of evil, to cast away the wicked suggestions and 
to resist the low enticements and to do absolutely nothing 
worthy of blame; and it is possible on the other hand when 
a divine power has urged us on to better things not to follow 
its guidance, since our faculty of free will is preserved to us 
in either case. 2 zy y 

Now we said in the preceding paragraph"® that certain 
memories either of good or of evil deeds are also suggested to 
us, whether through divine providence or through the oppos- 
ing powers. This is shown in the book of Esther, when Artax- 
erxes did not remember the benefits he had received from the 
righteous man Mordecai, and during a weary and sleepless 
night an idea came into his mind from God that he should 
send for the records of great deeds that were written in the 
archives. By these he was reminded of Mordecai’s services and 
ordered his enemy Haman to be hanged, while to Mordecai 
himself he granted splendid honors and the safety of the whole 
race of the saints who were then in imminent peril (Est 6-8). 
On the contrary we must suppose that it was some power of 
the devil who suggested to the mind of the priests and scribes 
the remark which they made when they came to Pilate: “Sir, 
we have remembered that that deceiver said, while he was yet 
alive, After three days I will rise again” (Mt 27:63). 

Moreover the thought of Judas concerning the Savior’s 
betrayal was not one which came solely from the wickedness 
of his own mind. For the scripture bears witness that the devil 
had put it into his heart to betray him (cf. Jn 13:2). On this 
account Solomon rightly utters the precept, “Keep thy heart 
with all diligence” (Prv 4:23); and Paul the apostle says, “We 
ought to give more earnest heed to the things that we heard, 


Book III, Chapter II 285 


lest haply we drift away” (Heb 2:1); and when he says, “Give 
not place to the devil” (Eph 4:27) he shows that by a certain 
kind of action or a certain kind of inaction a “place” in the 
mind is given to the devil with the result that, when once he 
has entered our heart he either takes possession of us, or at any 
rate pollutes the soul if he cannot take entire possession of it, 
by hurling at us his “fiery darts” (cf. Eph 6:16), with which we 
are sometimes merely inflamed, but sometimes pierced and 
wounded deeply. In rare cases, indeed, and by a few persons 
these “fiery darts” of his are “quenched” (ibid.), so that they 
fail to find the place for a wound; that is, when a man has 
been covered with the strong and defensive “shield of faith.” 
But in regard to the statement in the epistle to the Ephesians, 
“For our wrestling” is not against flesh and blood, but “against 
principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness 
of this world, against spiritual hosts of wickedness in the heav- 
enly places” (Eph 6:12), we shall; be right in understanding 
the apostle’s word “our” as meaning I, Paul, myself and you 
Ephesians and whoever else has not to wrestle with flesh and 
blood; for these have their struggle “against principalities and 
powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world,” as 
was not the case among the Corinthians, whose struggle was 
still against “flesh and blood” and whom “no temptation had 
taken but such as was human” (1 Cor 10:13).'' 

5. We must not suppose, however, that each person strug- 
gles against all these powers. It would, I think, be impossible _ 
for any man, however holy he might be, to carry on a struggle 
against all these at once. If, however, that which in fact can not 
happen should by any chance come to pass, it would be utterly 
impossible for human nature to endure it without being com- 
pletely overwhelmed. And just as, for example, if fifty soldiers 
were to say that a struggle was about to take place between 
them and fifty other soldiers, we should not understand from 


286 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


this that one of them was going to fight against fifty, and yet 
each one of them might rightly say that “we have to fight 
against fifty,” meaning all against all; so, too, we must interpret 
the apostle’s saying in this way, that the whole body of Christ’s 
athletes and soldiers are engaged in a wrestling and stru 
against all those powers which have been enumerated; Se 
all will take part in the struggle, but individuals will either be 
matched against individuals, or at any rate will fight in such 
a way as shall be approved by God, who is the j just president 
of this contest. 

For | think that human nature has definite limitations, 


~ even though there is a Paul of whom it is said, “He is a cho- 


sen vessel unto me” (Acts 9:15), or a Peter against whom “the 
gates of hell shall not prevail” (Mt 16:18), or a Moses, “the 
friend of God” (Ex 33:11); for not even one of these could 
face the whole crowd of opposing powers at once without 
destruction to himself, except perhaps on the condition that, 
there was working within him the power of him who said, 
“Be of good cheer, I have overcome the world” (Jn 16:33). In 
reliance on him Paul affirmed with confidence, “I can do all 
things through Christ who strengthened me” (Phil 4:13); and 
again, “And I labored more abundantly than they all, yet not 


I, but the grace of God which was with me” (1 Cor 15:10). 


It was therefore because he had this power, which cer- 
tainly is not human, working and speaking in him, that Paul 
could say: “For I am persuaded thar neither death, nor life, 
nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, 
nor things to come, nor strength, nor height, nor depth, nor 
any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love 
of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord” (Rom 8:38, 39). 
For human nature by itself alone cannot, I think, maintain 
the struggle against “angels” and “heights and depths” and any 

“other creature”; but when it has felt the Lord to be present 


Book III, Chapter II 287 


and dwelling within, it will say in confidence of receiving the 
divine help, “The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom 
shall I fear? The Lord is the protector of my life; of whom shall 
I be afraid? When evil doers came upon me to eat up my flesh, 
even my enemies who persecute me, they stumbled and fell. 
Though a host should encamp against me, my heart shall not 
fear; though war should rise against me, I will put my trust 
in him” (Ps 27:1-3). 

So I think that a man can probably never by himsel ej 
overcome an opposing power, but only by the use of divine 
help. That is why an angel is said to have wrestled with Jacob. 
Now we understand the passage in this way, that to wrestle 
with Jacob does not mean to wrestle against Jacob, but that 
the angel, who was present in order to save him, and who 
after learning of the progress he had made gave him the addi- 
tional name of Israel, wrestled together with him, that is, was 
on his side iri the contest and helped him in the struggle; 
for undoubtedly it was some other against whom Jacob was 
fighting and against whom his struggle was being waged (cf. 
Gn 32:22-30):'2 And Paul indeed; did not tell us that our 
wrestling was with principalities or with powers, but against 
principalities and against powers. If therefore Jacob also wres- 
tled, he wrestled undoubtedly against one of these powers, 
which Paul enumerates as opposing and making attacks on the 
human race and especially on the saints. Finally, it is for this 
reason that scripture speaks of him as having wrestled with the 
angel and having had “power with God,” namely, that while 
the course of the struggle is sustained by the angel's help, the 
palm of achievement leads the conqueror to God. 

6. Nor indeed must we suppose that struggles like Jacob's 
are carried on by means of bodily strength and the exercise of 
the art of wrestling, but that the fight is one of spirit against 
spirit, in the same way as Paul points out that our present 


j 
x 


288 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


struggle is “against principalities and powers and the rulers of 
the darkness of this world” (Eph 6:12). This kind of struggle 
must be understood as follows; that when losses and dangers, 
insults and accusations are raised up against us, the opposing 
powers do not do this with the mere object of making us 
endure these sufferings, but of provoking us by means of them 
to fierce anger or excessive sorrow or the depths of despair, or 
indeed, what is more serious, of inducing us when wearied 
out and overcome by these annoyances to complain against 
God on the ground that he does not control human life fairly 
and righteously. Their aim is that by these efforts our faith 
may be weakened or that we may lose hope or be driven to 


» abandon the true doctrines and persuaded to accept some 


impious belief about God. 

For some such aim is recorded in the case of Job, when the 
devil had asked God for power over his goods. The story of 
Job also teaches us that it is not by chance attacks that we are 
assailed, if ever such losses of property come upon us, nor is it 
by chance that any one of us is made captive or that our houses 
fall into ruins, in which some of our dear ones are crushed to 
death (cf. Jb 1:6-19). In all these circumstances every believer 
must say, “Thou wouldst have no power against me, except 
it where given thee from above” (Jn 19:11). For observe that 
Job’s house would not have fallen upon his sons unless the 
devil had first obtained power against them; nor would the 
horsemen have made a raid in three bands to seize his camels 
and oxen and other cattle unless they had been instigated 
by that spirit to whom they had surrendered themselves as 
servants by their obedience to his will. Nor would that which 
appeared to be fire and has been supposed to be a thunderbolt 
have fallen upon Job’s sheep before the devil had said to God, 
“Hast thou not made a hedge about all that is without and all 
that is within his house, and the rest of his goods? But now 


Book III, Chapter II 289 


put forth thine hand, and touch all that he hath, and see if he 
will not curse thee to thy face” (Jb 1:10, 11). 

7. From these considerations it is shown that all those 
events that happen in this world, which are regarded as things 
indifferent,!? whether calamities like the above or events of 
any other kind whatever, happen neither by God's doing nor 
yet without God. For when evil and hostile powers wish to 
bring to pass such events God does not only not prevent them 
but even gives permission, restricting it, however, to definite 
times and persons. Thus even in regard to Job himself it is 
said that at a definite time he was ordained to fall into the 
power of others and to have his house plundered by wicked 
men. It is for this reason that divine scripture teaches us to 
accept all things that happen to us as sent by God, because 
we know that nothing happens without him. That such is the 
case, namely, that nothing happens without God, how can we 
doubt, when our Lord and Savior clearly declares: “Are not 
two sparrows sold for a farthing, and not one of them shall 
fall on the ground without your Father which is in heaven?” 
(Mr 10:29). 

But necessity has led us into a somewhat lengthy digres- 
sion on the question of the struggle which the opposing 
powers maintain against men, while we have also discussed 
the more sorrowful events which happen to the human race, 
namely, the trials of this life, as Job says, “Is not the whole life 
of man upon earth a trial?” (Jb 7:1). Our object has been to 
éxpound more clearly how these things happen and what is 
the pious belief that we ought to hold about them. Let us now 
see how men slip into the sin of false knowledge, and with 
what purpose the opposing powers are wont to stir up strife 
against us on this matter also. 


Chapter III 


THE THREEFOLD WISDOM 


I, When the holy apostle is desirous of teaching us a great and 
hidden truth concerning knowledge and wisdom he says in the 
first epistle to the Corinthians: “Howbeit we speak a wisdom 
among the perfect; yet a wisdom not of this world nor of the 
rulers of this world, which are coming to naught; but we speak 
God’s wisdom in a mystery, the hidden wisdom which God 
foreordained before the worlds unto our glory, which none 
of the rulers of this world knew. For had they known it, they 
would never have crucified the Lord of Glory” (1 Cor 2:6-8). 
Here, in his desire to show that there are different kinds of 
wisdom, he describes one as a “wisdom of this world,” one as 
a “wisdom of the rulers of this world” and another as God’s 
wisdom. Moreover, when he uses the phrase, “wisdom of the 
rulers of this world,” I do not think he means that there is one 
wisdom for all the rulers of this world, but he seems to me to 
indicate a particular kind of wisdom for each individual ruler. 

And again, when he says, “But we speak God’s wisdom ~ 
in a mystery, the hidden wisdom which God foreordained 
before the worlds; unto our glory,” we must inquire whether 
he means that this wisdom of God, which has been hidden 
and in other times and generations has not been made known 
to the sons of men as it is now revealed to his holy apostles and 


291 


Seep. 


292 4 4 YS p $6 dp, 
= 
prophets, is the same as that wisdom of God which existed 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


“before the Savior's coming, the wisdom by which Solomon 


became wise. But the Savior by his own word declares that his 
teaching i is greater than Solomon's, when he says, “And behold, 
a greater than Solomon is here” (Mt 12:42), in which decla- 
ration it is shown that those who were taught by the Savior 
were taught something more than Solomon knew. 

For if anyone oe the Savior did indeed know more 
than Solomon, but did ‘not impart this knowledge to others, 
how will this agree logicallywith what he says in the following 
words, “The queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment 
and shall condemn the men of this generation, for she came 
from the ends of the earth to hearthe wisdom of Solomon, 
and behold, a greater than Solomon is here” (Mt 12:42)? There 
is therefore'a “wisdom of this world” and there is also probably 
a wisdom belonging to each, individual “ruler of this world.” 
But as for the wisdom of the one God, we beli@ve it refers to 
that wisdom which was at work to a lesser extent inthe men 
of old, but was more fully and more clearly revealed through 
Christ. We shall, however, investigate the wisdom. n_of od) in 
the proper place.' — _ 

2. At the moment our task is to treat of the opposing 
powers’ and to ask how they originate those hostile movements 
by which false knowledge i is implanted in men’s minds and 
souls are led astray while supposing that they have discovered 
wisdom. It is therefore, I think, necessary to discern and dis- 
tinguish between the “wisdom of this world” and the wisdom 
of the “rulers of this world,” that by so doing we may be able to 
discover who are the fathers of this wisdom, or indeed of these 
kinds of wisdom. | think, then, as we said above,? that the 


_ “wisdom of this world” is a different one from those varieties 


of wisdom which belong to the “rulers of this world,” and that 


in this wisdom there appears to be understood and included 


Book III, Chapter III 293 


all things that belong to this world. Now this wisdom contains 
in itself nothing which can enable it to decide on questions of 
the divine nature, or of the cause ¢ of the world, or of any higher 
matters whatsoever, or of the principles of a good and blessed 
life; but is such, for instance, as deals wholly with the arts of 
poetry, grammar, rhetoric, geometry and music, to which we 
should probably add the art of medicine. In all these arts we 
must suppose that the “wisdom of this world” is present. 

As for the wisdom of the “rulers of this world,” we under- 
stand this to be what they call the secret and hidden philoso- 
phy of the Egyptians and the astrology of the Chaldaeans and 
Indians; who profess a knowledge of high things, and further 
the manifold and diverse opinions of the Greeks concerning 
the divine nature. Accordingly we find in the holy scriptures 
that there are rulers over individual nations, as for instance, 
we read in Daniel of a certain “prince of the kingdom of the 
Persians” and another “prince of the kingdom of the Greeks” 
(cf. Dn 10:13, 20) who, as is clearly shown by the sense of 
the passage itself, are not men but powers. Moreover in the 
prophet Ezekiel the “prince of Tyre” (cf. Ch. 28)* is most 
plainly pictured as a certain spiritual power. When these, 
therefore, and other similar princes of this world, each having 


his own individual wisdom and formulating his own doctrines 
\and peculiar opinions, saw our Lord and Savior promising and 


proclaiming that he had come into the world for the purpose 
of destroying all the doctrines, whatever they might be, of the 
“knowledge falsely so called” (1 Tm 6:20), they immediately 
laid snares for him, not knowing who was concealed within 
him. For “the kings of the earth stood up, and the rulers were 
gathered together against the Lord and against his Christ” (cf. 
Ps 2:2). But their snares became known and the plots which 
they had contrived against the Son of God were understood 
when they “crucified the Lord of glory.” Therefore the apostle 


294 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


says, “We speak a wisdom among the perfect; yet a wisdom 
not of this world, nor of the rulers of this world, which are 
coming to naught, . . .» a wisdom which none of the rulers 
of this world knew. For had they known it, they would never 
have crucified the Lord of glory” (cf. 1 Cor 2:6-8).° 

3. The question indeed arises whether these varieties of 
wisdom which belong to the rulers of this world and with 
which they strive to indoctrinate men are introduced into our 
minds by the opposing powers with the desire of ensnaring 
and injuring us, or whether they are offered to us simply in 
consequence of an error, that is, not with a view to injuring 
men but because the “rulers of this world” themselves think 
their wisdom to be true and are therefore anxious to teach 
others what in their opinion is the truth. The latter is, I think, 
more likely. For example, just as Greek authors or the lead- 
ers of the various heresies have themselves first erroneously 
accepted a false doctrine for the truth and decided in their own 
mind that it was the truth, and then afterwards have tried to 
persuade others to adopt this same doctrine which they have 
determined is the true one, so we must suppose the “rulers of 
this world” also to have acted, those beings, namely, that are 
called by this title because they are spiritual powers who have 
been appointed to exercise rule over certain definite nations 
in this world.’ 

There are also, besides these rulers, certain special energies 
of this world, that is, certain spiritual powers who control 
definite activities which they have themselves by their own 
free will chosen as their task, among whom are those spirits 
who control the “wisdom of this world”; for instance, there 
is a particular energy or power who is the inspirer of poetry, 
another of geometry, and in the same way a particular wale 
is the originator of every such art and subject of instruction.* 
Finally, many Greeks have been of the opinion that the art of 


Book III, Chapter III 295 


poetry cannot exist apart from madness, and accordingly in 
their histories it is often recorded that those whom they call 
seers were suddenly filled with the spirit of a kind of madness.” 
And what is to be said also of those persons whom they call 
divine, who through the control of the daemons that are over 
them utter responses in verses formed according to the rules 
of the poetic art?!” 

Further, those men whom they call magi, or the malevo- 
lent,'' have often, by invoking daemons over boys of tender 
years, caused them to recite poems in verse to the wonder 
and amazement of all. We must suppose that these effects are 
produced in the following manner. Just as holy and stainless 
souls, when they have devoted themselves to God with entire 


affection and entire purity and have kept themselves apart 


from all contact with daemons and purified themselves by 


much abstinence and have been steeped in pious and religious 


exercises, acquire thereby a communion with the divine nature 
and win the grace of prophecy and of the other divine gifts, 


so, too, must we think that those who show themselves fit 
subjects for the opposing powers, that is, those who adopt 
a work and manner of life and purpose agreeable to them, 
receive their inspiration and become participators in their 
wisdom and doctrine. The result of this is that they are filled 
with the operations of those spirits to whose service they have. 
once subjected themselves. 

4. Then in regard to those who teach another doctrine 
of Christ than that which the rule of scripture allows, it is 
not superfluous to consider whether it is with treacherous 
intentions that the opposing powers, in their efforts to check 
the faith of Christ, have devised certain fabulous and at the 
same time impious dogmas, or whether in fact even they, after 
hearing the word of Christ, have been unable either to banish 


it from the secret recesses of their consciousness or to retain 


296 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


it in a pure and holy form, and so have introduced, through 
the agency of vessels that suited their purpose and, if 1 may 
so call them, through their own prophets, different kinds of 
error contrary to the rule of Christian truth. The more likely 
supposition is, that the apostate and exiled powers which have 
departed from God compose these errors and deceits of false 
doctrine either from the pure wickedness of their mind and 


will or else from envy of those for whom, once they have 


learned the truth, there is prepared a way of ascent to that 


station from which the powers have fallen, and from a desire 
to prevent any such progress. 

It is, then, clearly demonstrated by many proofs that the 
soul of while in the body, can admit different energies, 
that is, controlling influences, of spirits either good or bad. 
Now the bad spirits work in two ways; that is, they either take 
whole and entire possession of the mind, so that they allow 
those in their power neither to understand nor to think, as 
is the case, for example, with those who are popularly called 
“possessed,” whom we see to be demented and insane, such as 
the men who are related in the Gospel to have been healed by 
the Savior; or they deprave the soul, while it still thinks and 
understands, through harmful suggestion by means of differ- 
ent kinds of thoughts and evil inducements, as for example 
Judas was incited to the crime of the betrayal by the devil's 
putting the thought into him, according to the statement of 
scripture, “But when the devil had already put it into the heart 
of Judas Iscariot to betray him” (Jn 13:2). 

On the other hand a man admits the energy and control 
and inspired to strive towards things heavenly and divine; 
just as the holy angels and God himself worked in the proph- 
ets, inciting and exhorting them by holy suggestions to strive 
towards better things, though certainly in such a way that it 


Book III, Chapter III 297 


rested with the man’s own will and judgment whether or not 
he was willing to follow God’s call to the heavenly and divine. 
From this we learn to discern clearly when the soul is moved 
by the presence of a spirit of the better kind, namely, when it 
suffers no mental disturbance or aberration whatsoever as a 
result of the immediate inspiration and does not lose the free 
judgment of the will. Such for example were the prophets and 
apostles, who attended upon the divine oracles without any 
mental disturbance. We have shown, moreover, in previous 
examples, when we mentioned Mordecai and Artaxerxes," 
that by the suggestions of a good spirit a man’s memory is 
incited to the recollection of better things. 

5. It follows, I think, that we must also inquire what are 
the causes which lead the soul of man to be influenced at one 


time by good spirits and at another time by bad." I suspect 


that this is due to certain causes which are oldef even than 
our birth in this body, as John indicated by his leaping and 
rejoicing in his mother’s womb when the voice of Mary’s sal- 
utation sounded in the ears of his mother Elizabeth, and as is 
declared by the prophet Jeremiah who, “before he was formed 
in his mother’s belly” was known by God and “before he came 
forth from the womb” was sanctified by him, and while yet a 
boy received the gift of prophecy (cf. Jer 1:5, 6). On the other 
hand" it is clearly proved that some people are possessed right 
from their earliest years, that is, are born with an accompany- 
ing daemon (cf. Mk 7:25ff; 9:17f.), while others are declared 
by the testimony of histories to have been under supernatural 
control from boyhood, and others still have from their earliest 
years been indwelt by a daemon whom they term a python 
(cf. Acts 16:16), that is, a spirit of ventriloquism. 

In the face of these examples, those who maintain that 


‘ 


everything in this world is governed by the providence of God, 


a doctrine which is also part of our faith, can give no other 


298 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


answer, as it seems to me, which will proye divine providence 
to be free from all suspicion of injustice, except to say that 
there were certain pre-existent causes which led these souls, 
before they were born into the body, to contract some degree 
of guilt in their sensitive or emotional nature, in consequence 
of which divine providence has judged them worthy of endur- 
ing these sufferings. For the soul always possesses free will, 
both when in the body and when out of the body; and the 
will’s freedom always moves in the direction either of good or 
of evil, nor can the rational sense, that is, the mind or soul, 
ever exist without some movement either good or evil. It is 
probable that these movements furnish grounds for merit 


even before the souls do anything in this world, so that in 


“accordance with such causes or merits they are ordained by the 


divine providence right from their birth, yes, and even before 
it, if 1 may so speak, to endure conditions either good or evil." 

6. Let these assertions, then, be made concerning those 
events which appear to happen to men right from their birth 
or even before they emerge into this light. In regard, however 
to the suggestions made to the soul, that is, to men’s thoughts, 
by different spirits, and which incite men to good or to its 
opposite, we must suppose that even for these there sometimes 
exist causes prior to our bodily birth. But sometimes a mind 
that is watchful and that casts away from itself whatever is 
evil calls to its side the assistance of the good; whereas on the 
contrary one that is negligent and slothful, being less cau- 
tious, gives a place to those spirits which, like robbers lying 
in ambush, contrive to rush into the minds of men whenever 
they see a place offered to them through slackness, as Peter 
the apostle says; “Your adversary the devil as a roaring lion 
walketh about, seeking whom he may devour” (1 Pt 5:8). On 
this account a strict guard must be kept over our heart day 
and night and no place must be given to the devil (cf. Eph 


Book III, Chapter IIT 299 


4:27), but all our actions must be such that God’s ministers, 
that is, “the spirits who have been sent forth to minister to 
them” who have been called to “inherit salvation” (cf. Heb 
1:14), may find a place within us and may delight to enter 
the guest-chamber of our soul; and dwelling in us, that is, in 
our heart, may rule us with the better counsels, if so be they 
shall find the habitation of our heart adorned by the practice 
of virtue and holiness. 

~ Let these arguments, which we have set out to the best of 
our ability, be sufficient in regard to those powers which are 
opposed to the human race. 


Chapter IV 


WHETHER THE STATEMENT 
MADE By SOME Is TRUE, 


TuHaT EAcu INDIVIDUAL Has 
Two SouLS 


1. And now, I think, we must not pass over in silence the 
“human temptations” (cf. 1 Cor 10:13), those which occasion- 
ally arise from “flesh and blood,” or from “the wisdom of flesh 
and blood,” which is said to be at enmity with God (cf. Eph 
6:12; 2 Cor 1:12; Rom 8:7, 8); for we have already dealt with 
the temptations that are said to be more than human, that is, 
with the struggles we maintain “against the principalities and 
powers and against the rulers of the darkness of this world 
and the spiritual hosts of wickedness in the heavenly places” 
(Eph 6:12), and with those that befall us against evil spirits 
and impure daemons. 

In this connection we must, I think, if we are to be logical, 


inquire whether there is in us, that is, in men who consist of 


soul and body and “viral spirit” (cf. Wis 15:11; 1 Thes 5:23), 
something else besides which possesses a peculiar inclination 


and movement in the direction of evil. A question of this kind 


/ is accustomed to be raised by some, namely, whether we ought ~ f 


to say that there is in us as it were two souls, the one divine 


and heavenly and the other of a lower sort; or whether from 
the very fact that we are joined to bodies (which bodies are 


301 


302 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


in their own proper nature dead and utterly lifeless, since it is 
from us, that is, from our souls, that the material body derives 
its life, whereas in itself it is certainly opposed and hostile to 
the spirit') we are drawn and incited to those evils which are 
pleasing to the body; or whether in the third place, as some 
Greeks, have supposed, our soul though one in its essence is 
‘nevertheless composed of several parts, namely, one part that 
is called rational and another irrational, while that part which 
they call irrational is again divided into the two emotional 
elements of appetite and passion.’ Now we have found each 


of the three above-mentioned opinions about the soul held by 


some. The one of them, however, which we said was approved 


by c certain Greek philosophers.) that the soul consists of three 
parts, I do not observe to be strongly confirmed by the author- 
ity of divine scripture, whereas in regard to the remaining 


two a certain number of passages may be found in the divine 
writings which appear capable of being applied to them. 


2. Of these theories let us first discuss the one which some 


are accustomed to frame, that we have within us one soul that 


is good and heavenly and another that is lower and i earthly; A 


and that the soul which is superior is implanted from heaven; 
like the soul which gave to Jacob while still in the womb the 
prize of victory against his brother Esau whom he supplanted, 
or, the soul which was sanctified in Jeremiah from the womb, 
or in the case of John was from the womb filled with the Holy 
Spirit (cf. Gn 25:22—25; Jer 1:5; Lk 1:41). But that which 
they call the lower soul is, they maintain, produced along with 
the body from the bodily seed, and consequently they deny 
that it can live or subsist apart from the body; which is the 
reason, they say, why it is frequently termed the flesh.* For the 


passage, “The flesh lusteth against the spirit” (Gal 5:17), they— 


do not take to be spoken of the actual flesh, but of this soul, 
which is properly the soul of the flesh. 


Book III, Chapter IV 303 


Moreover they endeavor by these arguments to corrobo- 
rate the passage in Leviticus which runs as follows: “The soul 
of all flesh is its blood” (Lv 17:14). For from the fact that the 
blood by being diffused throughout the flesh endows the flesh 
with life; they say.that this soul, which is called “the soul of all 
flesh,” resides in the blood. And as for the saying, “The flesh 
wars against the spirit and the spirit against the flesh” (Gal 
5:17), and the other saying, “The soul of all flesh is its blood” 
(Lv 17:14), they assert that we have here the same thing which 
is called in other words “the wisdom of the flesh” (Rom 8:7 
[Vg.]), namely, a certain material spirit, which is not subject 
to the law of God nor indeed can be subject to it, because it 
possesses earthly wishes and bodily desires.’ It is about this that 
they suppose the apostle to be speaking when he says, “But 
I see another law in my members, warring against the law of 
my mind, and bringing me into captivity under the law of sin 
which is in my members” (Rom 7:23). 

But if one were to object to them that these statements 
are made about the body which in its own proper nature is a 
dead thing and which is only said to possess a mind or a wis- 
dom which is “at enmity with God” (cf. Rom 8:7) or which 
“wars against the spirit” (cf. Gal 5:17) in the same way as if 
one were to say that the actual flesh has a voice which protests 
against being hungry or thirsty or cold, or against enduring 
discomfort in any respect whatever, whether through excess or 
through want, they would endeavor to combat and solve this 
difficulty by showing that the soul has many other passions 
which in no way at all take their origin from the flesh, and yet 
the spirit is contrary to these, as for instance ambition, avarice, 
jealousy, envy, pride and others like them; and seeing that the 
mind or spirit of man is in conflict with these, they would lay 
down as the cause of all such evils nothing else but this bodily 


304 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


soul, as it were, of which we have spoken above, and which is 
generated by the transmission of the seed.° 

To this statement they are accustomed to add also the 
witness of the apostle, where he says, “But the works of the 
flesh are manifest, which are these: fornication, uncleanness, 
lasciviousness, idolatry, sorcery, enmities, strife, jealousies, 
wraths, factions, divisions, heresies, envyings, drunkenness, 
revellings and such like” (Gal 5:19, 21); for they assert that not 
all of these take their origin from the use or enjoyment of the 
flesh in such a way that we could suppose all such passions to 
be part of that substance which has no soul, that is, the actual 
flesh. Moreover, when he says, “Ye see your calling, brethren, 
how that not many among you are wise after the flesh” (1 Cor 
1:26), it would seem to point to this, that there is apparently 
a wisdom that is peculiarly fleshly and material, and that the 
wisdom which is after the spirit is a different one; and certainly 
the former could not be called wisdom unless there existed a 
soul of the flesh to possess that wisdom which is termed the 
wisdom of the flesh. To this they also add the following; if 
“the flesh warreth against the spirit and the spirit against the 
flesh, so that we may not do the things that we will to do” 
(Gal 5:17), what things are they of which he says, “we may 
not do what we will to do”? It is certain, they say, that it does 
not mean things of the spirit, for the will of the spirit is not 
forbidden; nor is it things of the flesh, for if the flesh does not 
possess a soul of its own it will undoubtedly not possess a will. 
It remains, therefore, that it means the will of this soul, for 
that can have its own proper will which is certainly opposed 
to the will of the spirit. A 4 
‘Sy If this is so, it is plain that the will, lof this. soul i is something 
-, intermediate between the flesh and the’spirit, undoubtedly 

serving and obeying one of the twos whit chever it has chosen 


to obey.’ If it gives itself up to the delights of the flesh, it makes 


Book III, Chapter IV 305 


men fleshly; if, however, it joins itself to the spirit, it causes ~ 
a man to be “in the spirit” and on this account to be called 
spiritual. It is this that the apostle seems to indicate when he 
says, “Ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit” (Rom 8:9). 

We must inquire, therefore, what exactly this wi will is, which 
is intermediate between the flesh and the spirit, above and_ | 
beyond the will which is said to ‘belong to the flesh or to the 
spirit. For of a certainty we should hold that everything which 
is said to belong to the spirit is due to the will of the spirit 
and whatever deeds are called “works of the flesh” are due to 
the will of the flesh (cf. Gal 5:22, 19). What then above and 
beyond these is the will of the soul, which is given a separate 
name and which the apostle wishes us not to do when he 
says, “So that ye may not do the things that ye will to do” 
(Gal 5:17)? It seerns to be here indicated that this will must 
be attached to neither of these two, that is, neither to the flesh 
nor to the spirit. But someone may say that just as it is better 
for the soul to do its own will than to do the will of the flesh, _ 

so again it is better for it to do the will of the spirit than its 
ownwill. Why then does the apostle say, “So that ye may not 
do the things that ye will to do”?—-since in that contest which 
is waged between the flesh and the spirit, the spirit is by no 
means certain of victory; for it is clear that in many cases the 
flesh obtains the mastery. 

3, We have entered here upon a very deep discussion, in 
which it is necessary to investigate the possible arguments 
from every aspect. Let us see, therefore, whether at this point 
we may not perhaps establish some such conclusion as the 
following; that as it is better for the soul to follow the spirit 
at the time when the spirit has obtained the victory over the 
flesh, so, too, even though it appears worse for it to follow the 
flesh when this is warring against the spirit and desiring to call 
the soul to its side, yet perhaps it may turn out to be more 


306 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


advantageous for the soul |to be mastered by the flesh than 
to remain within the sphere of its own will. For so long as it 
continues in its own will, then is the time when it is said to be 
“neither hot nor cold” (Rv 3:15); but remaining in a sort of 
lukewarm condition it may find conversion a slow and some- 
what difficult process. If, however, it attaches itself to the flesh, 
it will be satiated and filled after a time with those very evils 
which it endures as a result of the vices of the flesh and will 
be wearied out as it were by the very heavy burdens of luxury 
and lust, and so may be the more easily and quickly converted 
from low material desires to a longing for heavenly things 
and to spiritual grace. And we must suppose that the apostle 
uttered the saying, “The spirit warreth against the flesh and 
the flesh against the spirit, so that we may not do the things 
that we will to do” (Gal 5:17),—the things referred to being 
undoubtedly those which are apart from the will of the spirit 
and apart from the will of the flesh—meaning, if we were to 


‘say it in other words, that it is better for a man to be in a state 


of virtue or in a state of wickedness rather than in neither of 
these; and that before the soul turns to the spirit and is made 


one with i one with it, during the time it is attached to the body and 


occupied v with fleshly thoughts, it appears to be neither in a 


state of goodness nor yet clearly in a state of wickedness, but to 
be, if I may so say, like an animal. It is better, if it be possible, 
that it should attach itself to the spirit and become spiritual. 
If, however, this is not possible, it is more expedient for it to 
follow even the wickedness of the flesh than by remaining 
fixed in the sphere of its own will to occupy the position of 
an irrational animal.*p 

We have dealt with these points because we were desirous 


of discussing every opinion that is put forward; and we have 
gone further afield than was our wish in order that it may not 


be supposed that we are unawar ¢ of the questions commonly 


| a ¥ 


he 


Book III, Chapter IV 307 


raised by those who ask whether there exists within us, besides 
the heavenly and rational soul, another one which is by its 
nature contrary to the first and which is called either the flesh, 
or the wisdom of the Hesh, or the soul of the flesh (cf. Rom 
8:6, 7 [Vg.]). 

4. Let us now see what answer is given to the above 
arguments by those who maintain that there is in us a single 
movement and a single life of one and the same soul, whose 
salvation or loss is properly to be attributed to itself as the 
result of its own actions. And let us first see what is the nature 
of the passions of the mind to which we are subject whenever 
we feel within us that we are being dragged in one direction 
and another, when a conflict of thoughts arises in our heart 
‘and certain images are suggested to us which incline us now 
this way and now that and by which we stand at one time 
reproved and at another time self-approved (cf. Rom 2:15). 

Now it is nothing remarkable if we say that evil natures 
have a judgment that is variable and conflicting, and out of 
harmony with itself; since this is found to be the case with all 
men, whenever a doubtful matter comes into consideration 
and they look ahead and deliberate which is the better or more 
useful choice to make. It is in no way surprising, therefore, 
that if two images occur to a man in turn and suggest con- 
trary modes of action they should drag the mind in different 
directions. For example, if a man’s thought invites him to the 
faith and fear of God, it cannot then be said that the flesh is 
warring against the spirit; but so long as it is uncertain what 
is the true and useful course, the mind is dragged in different 
ways. So, too, when we think of the flesh as inciting a man to 
lust, while a better counsel opposes this sort of allurement, it 
must not be supposed that there is one life acting in opposi- 
tion to another, but that the conflict is due to the nature of 
the body, which is striving to empty out and exhaust the places 


308 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


filled with seminal fluid. Neither must it be supposed that it 
is any opposing influence or the life of another soul which 
excites thirst in us and impels us to drink or which causes us 
to become hungry and urges us to take food; but just as these 
things are alike desired and evacuated through natural move- 
ments of the body, so also the moisture of the natural seed 
collecting from time to time in its appointed regions strives 
to find an issue and outlet, a result which is so far from never 
happening except at the impulse of some external excitement 
that sometimes the seed is even spontaneously emitted. 
When therefore it is said that “the flesh warreth against 
the spirit” (Gal 5:17), these persons understand the passage 
thus, that the use or the needs or delights of the flesh excite a 
man and draw and entice him away from divine and spiritual 
things. For when we are drawn away by reason of the needs of 
the body we are not allowed leisure for things that are divine 
and profitable for eternity; just as on the other hand when a 
soul has leisure for divine and spiritual things and is united 
with the Spirit of God it is said to war against the flesh, for it 
does not allow itself to become relaxed through indulgences 
and to be tossed about by the pleasures in which it takes a 
natural delight. This is the meaning they give to the saying, 
“The wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God” (Rom 8:7 
[Vg.]); not that the flesh really has a soul or wisdom of its 
own, but just as we are accustomed to say by a peculiar use 


of language that the ground is thirsty and wishes to drink 


‘water,— where we certainly use the word, “wish” not ina literal _ 


but in a peculiar sense, as if, again, we were to say that a house 
“wants” rebuilding, and many other similar expressions—so, 
too, must we interpret the phrase “wisdom of the flesh,” and 
the saying, “the flesh lusteth against the spirit.” _/ 

They are accustomed also to add to these the saying, “The 
voice of thy brother's blood crieth unto me ftom the ground” 


j 
{ 


Book III, Chapter IV 309 


(Gn 4:10). For what cries to God is not the actual blood that 
was shed, but by a peculiar use of language the blood is said 
to cry out when vengeance is demanded from God upon the 
shedder of the blood. Moreover when the apostle says, “I see 
another law in my members” (Rom 7:23), they understand it 
as if he had said that the man who desires to apply himself to 
God's word is distracted and diverted and hindered from this 
purpose by the bodily needs and functions, which exist as a 
kind of “law” in the body, and that these prevent him from 
applying himself to the “wisdom of God” (cf. 1 Cor 1:21, 


24) and so being able more earnestly to behold the divine _ 


mysteries. 


5. In regard, however, to the fact that heresies, envyings, ~ 


strifes and other things are included in the list of “works of the 
flesh” (cf. Gal 5:19, 21), theyinterpret it in this way. When the 
sensitiveness of the soul has grown duller through its subser- 
vience to the passions of the body, it is weighed down by the 


mass of its vices and becomes sensitive to nothing refined or 
spiritual. It is then said to become flesh, taking a name from 
that element in which it exercises the greater part of its vigor 
and effective purpose They also put the following question: 
“Whom can we find, or whom shall we speak of as being the 
maker of this evil mind which is called the mind of the flesh?” 
For they maintain the belief that there is no other creator of 
soul and flesh but God. If we should say that the good God 


in his own creation made some 


it will certainly appear absurd. If then it is written that “the 


wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God” (Rom 8:7 [Vg.]), 


and if we are to say that this is a result of the creation, then 
God himself will appear to have madé@ a certain nature that 
is at enmity with himself, a nature that cannot be subject to 
him or to his law, in which case indeed we should suppose it 


to be an animal of which these statements are made. But if 
rs 


erect 


ae 


310 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


the passage is to be understood in this way, what pray will be 
our difference from those men who say that souls are created 
diverse in their natures, so as to be destined by nature either 
for salvation or for destruction? This is certainly satisfactory 
to none but the heretics, who because they cannot defend the 
justice of God by pious reasoning compose impious inventions 
like this. 

We have brought forward, then, to the best of our ability 
in the person of each of the parties, the arguments that can be 
used in discussion Concerning each opinion in turn. It is for 
the reader to choose which of them deserves the preference. 


—_——— 


ea 


Chapter V 


Y 
THAT THE WORLD 
Took Its BEGINNING IN TIME 


vV/ 
1. After the foregoing discussion, since one of the dogmas 


of the Church, held chiefly in consequence of our belief in 


the truth of our records, is that this world was made and 


began to exist at a definite time and that as a result of the 
consummation of the age to which all things are subject it 
must be dissolved through its own corruption,' there appears 
to be nothing unreasonable in bringing up afresh a few points 
relating thereto. And so far as the matter concerns our belief 
in the scriptures the discussion seems to be a very easy one. 
Indeed even the heretics, divided as they are on many other 


matters, yet seem on this point to agree with one another in . 


submitting to the authority of scripture. 
In regard, then, to the creation of the world, what other 


~ book of scripture is more able to enlighten us than that which 


was written by Moses concerning its origin?” This account may 
well enshrine certain deeper truths than the mere record of 
the history seems to reveal and may contain a spiritual mean- 
ing in many passages, using the letter as a kind of veil (cf. 2 
Cor 3:14f.) for profound and mystical doctrines; nevertheless 
the language of the narrator certainly indicates this, that all 
visible things were created at a definite time. And as for the 


consummation of the world, Jacob is the first to refer to this 


when, in giving his testament to his sons he says, “Gather to 


311 


“* 


312 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


me, ye sons of Jacob, that I may tell you what shall be in the 
last days,” or, “after the last days” (Gn 49:1 [LXX]). If then 
there are “last days,” or a time “after the last days,” it follows 
of necessity that the days which had a beginning also come to 
an end. David also says: “The heavens shall perish, but thou 
shalt remain; and they all shall grow old as a garment, and as 
a vesture shalt thou change them, and they shall be changed; 
but thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail” (Ps 102:26, 
27). And when our Lord and Savior says, “He who created 
in the beginning made them male and female” (Mt 19:4), he 
himself bears witness that the world was made; whereas when 


he says that “heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words 


shall not pass away” (Mt 24:35 and par.), he shows that it is 
| ne 


corruptible and destined to come to an end. 


Moreover, the saying of the apostle, “The creation was 
subjected to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him who 
subjected it in hope, because the creation itself also shall be 
delivered from the bondage of corruption into the liberty 
of the glory of the children of God” (Rom 8:20, 21) clearly 
asserts the end of the world, as when he says again, “The 
fashion of this world passeth away” (1 Cor 7:31); while in the 
very fact that he says “the creation was subjected to vanity” he 
points also to its beginning. For if the creation was subjected 
to vanity by reason of a certain hope, it was certainly so sub- 
jected from a cause, and what proceeds from a cause must 
necessarily have a beginning; since apart from some beginning 
the creation could not have been subjected to vanity nor could 
it hope to be “delivered from the bondage of corruption” if 
it had never begun to be a servant of corruption. Moreover, 
anyone who looks for them at his leisure can find in the divine 
scriptures very many other sayings of this sort, which assert 


that the world both had a begin ning and is expecting an end. 


Book III, Chapter V 313) / 


2. If, however, there is anyone who in this matter would 
oppose either the authority or the credibility of our scripture, 
let us ask him the question, whether he asserts that God can 
comprehend all things or that he cannot? Now to say that he 
cannot is clearly impious. If, however, he should say, as he 
must, that God comprehends all things, it follows from this 
very fact that they can be comprehended that they are under- 
stood to have both a beginning and an end. For that which is 
absolutely without any beginning can in no way be compre- 
hended. However far the understanding may reach out, so far 
is the ability to comprehend withdrawn and removed endlessly 
when there is held to be no beginning. 

3. But they are accustomed to meet us with this objection; 


“If the world had a beginning in time, what was God doin 
before the world began?” For it is alike impious and absurd 


ee > ee 
to say that God's nature is to be at ease and never to move, or 


to suppose that there was a time when goodness did not do 
good and omnipotence did not exercise its power.? raise 
this objection when we say that this world began at a definite 
time and when in accordance with our belief in scripture we 
also calculate how many years old it is. To these propositions I 
do not think that any of the heretics can easily give an answer 
that will accord with the nature of their own doctrine. 

We, however, will give a logical answer that preserves the 
rule of piety, by saying that God did not begin to work for the 
first time when he made this visible world, but that just as after 


the dissolution of this world there will be another one, so also 


45 we believe that there were others before this one existed.* Both 


of these beliefs will be confirmed by the authority of divine 
sc ipture. For Isaiah teaches that there will be another world 
he this, when he says, “There shall be a new heaven and a 
new earth, which I will cause to endure in my sight, saith the 
Lord” (Is 66:22). And that there were other worlds before this 
————— 


77 


314 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


one Ecclesiastes shows when he says, “What is it that hath 
been? Even that which shall be. And what is it that hath been 
created? That very thing that is to be created; and there is 
nothing at all new under the sun. If one should speak and say, 
“See, this is new; it hath been already, in the ages which were 
before us” (Eccl 1:9, 10). By these testimonies each proposi- 
tion is proved at the same time, namely, that there were ages 
in the past and that there will be others hereafter. We must 
time, but that after this one another will exist in its turn. But 
it is not necessary to go through these questions again in detail 
now, since we have already done this in a former chapter.” 

4. Still, there is a point which I do not think we ought 
lightly to pass by, and that is that the holy scriptures call the 
foundation of the world by a new and peculiar name, terming 
it katabole. This word is very incorrectly translated into Latin 
by constitutio, or foundation, for katabole in Greek has rather 


the significance of deicere, that is, to cast downwar is, and is, 


as-we have said, incorrectly rendered into Latin by constitutio.° 


An example occurs in the gospel sjconding to John, when 
the Savior says, “And there shall be tribulation in those days, 


~ such as hath not been from the foundation of the world” (Mt 


24:21).’ Here “foundation” stands for katabole, the meaning of 
which term must be taken to be as we have explained it above. 
Moreover the apostle used the same word in the epistle to the 
Ephesians, when he says, “Who chose us before the foun- 
dation of the world” (Eph 1:4); for here, too, “foundation” 
represents katabole, which must be taken to have the same 
meaning as that given in our interpretation above. It seems 
worthwhile, therefore, to inquire what it is that is indicated 
by this new name. 

Now I think* that since the end and \suménation of the 
saints will happen i in those worlds “that not seen and are 


.) 2 
& 


cle Coma, deh n 19.445 


Book III, Chapter V 315 


eternal” (2 Cor 4:18), we must suppose, from a contemplation 
of this end, as we have frequently shown in former chapters, 
that rational creatures have also had a similar beginning.’ And_ 


if they had a beginning that was such as they expect ‘their 
nd to be, they have undoubtedly existed right from their 


Cer 


e Z 
beginning in those worlds “that are not seen and are eternal” 


(ibid.). If this is so, there has been a descent from higher to 
lower conditions not only on the part of those souls who have 
by the variety of their own movements deserved it, but also on 
the part of those who have been brought down, even against 
their will, from those higher invisible conditions to these lower 
visible ones, in order to be of service to the whole world. For 
indeed “the creation was subjected to vanity, not willingly, 
but by reason of him who subjected the same in hope” (Rom 
8:20), the hope being that both sun and moon and stars and 
the angels of God should fulfill an obedient service for the 


world; and it was for those souls which on account of their oe 


excessive spiritual defects required these grosser and more solid 


~ bodies and also for the’sake of those others for is 
arrangement was necessary that the present visible world w 


“instituted. A descent, therefore, of all alike frogr Higher to 
: t > 


lower conditions appears to be indicated by rhe meaning of 
this word atabole. Nevertheless the entireCreation cherishes 
ahope of liberty, a hope of being “delivefed from the bondage 


had both fallen and become scattered, have been gathered 


able to hold all those souls which were destined to undergo 
“discip line in it'' and also those powers which were appointed 
“to be at hand to serve and assist them. Moreover it is proved 


~ of corruption” (Rom 8:21) when the “children of God,” who | »/, 


a 


= / 


316 P ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


by many declarations thar all rational creatures are of one 
nature, and it is only on this ground that the justice of God /// 
in all his dealings with them can be defended, namely, when 
~Sr ante ee he has been 
placed in this or in that rank of life. 415,375 

5. This arrangement,” therefore, which God ¢stablished 
afterwards, when he had already from the beginning of the 
world foreseen th the thoughts and motives both of those who 
through spiritual spiritual defect deserved to descend into bodies and 
of those who were carried away by their eager desire for visible 
things and also of those who were compelled whether will- 
ingly or unwillingly by him who subjected them “in hope” 
to perform certain duties for such as had fallen into this con- ~_ 
dition,—this arrangement, I say, some met have not under- 
stood; and because they have not perceived that this variety of 
oe 
causes arising from free will, they have supposed that every- 
thing in this world is governed either by chance movements 

_ or bya fateful necessity and that nothing is within the power 
of our will. As a result they have been unable to free God’s 
providence from the imputation of blame. 

6. But just as we said that all souls that have tin this 
world have stood in need of many sheet 2egiviian and 
helpers, so in the last times, when the end of the world was 
near at hand and the whole human race was hastening towards 
its final destruction, and‘when weakness had overtaken not 
only those that bees those also to whom the care 


of ruling had beer committed, then there arose the need not 


/ >. of such help: as this nor of defenders like these, but the aid 
_ of the atithor and Creator himself was demanded in order to 


_ytestore to the first the capacity to obey and to the second the 
capacity to rule, which in both cases had been corrupted and 
profaned. And so the only-begotten Son of God, who was the 


~~ ¥ 


Book III, Chapter V 317 


word and wisdom of the Father, when he lived with the Father 
in that glory which he had before the word was (cf. Jn 17:5), 
emptied himself, and taking the form of a servant became 
obedient even unto death (cf. Phil 2:7, 8) in order to teach 
them obedience who could in no other way obtain salvation 
except through obedience; and also r estored) )the corrupted 
laws of ruling and of reigning in that he “subdues all enemies 
under his feet” (1 Cor 15:27); and by the fact that he must 
reign till he puts his enemies tinder his feet he teaches the 
rulers themselves the arts of control. 


Because then he trad come, as we have said, to renew the 


'\ (capacity not only for ruling, and reigning but also for obeying, 


he first fulfilled i in himself what he wished to be fulfilled by 
others ‘and not only became obedient to the Father “even unto 


the death of the cross” (Phil 2:8), but also at the consumma- 
“ tion of the age, by his including in himself all those whom | 


he subjected to the Father and who:through hint come to — 
salvation, he himself with them and in them is also said to be 
“subjected” to the Father, when “all things” shall “subsist in 
him” and he shall be the “head of all things” and in him shall 
be the “fullness” of those who obtain salvation. This then is 
what the apostle says of him: “When all things have been sub- 
jected unto him, then shall the Son also himself be subjected , © 
unto him that did subject all things unto him, that God may 
be all in all” (cf. 1 Cor 15:28; Col 1:17-19; Eph 1:22ff.). 

7. But the heretics, not understanding, I cannot tell why, 
the apostle’s meaning contained in these words, deprecate 
using the term subjection i in regard to the Son; though if the 
propriety of its ascription to him be questioned, the truth 
may easily be discovered by assuming the contrary. For if to 
be subjected is not good, it follows that the contrary, that is, 
not to be subjected, is good. Moreover the language of the 
apostle as they would interpret it, appears to prove this when 


ep 


318 eE ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


it says “When all things have been subjected unto him, then 


shall the Son also himself be subjected unto him that did ~ 


subject all things to him” (1 Cor 15:28), as if he who now is 
not subjected to the Father will then be subjected when the 
Father has first subjected the universe to him. 

~ But I wonder how this can be the meaning, that he who 


when all things are not yet subjected to him is not himself 


» subjected should then, when all things have been subjected 
to him, when he is king over all and holds power over the 
universe, be thought worthy of being subjected although he 
was not subjected before. Such men do not understand that 
the subjection of Christ to the Father reveals the blessedness of 
dic paxeson anil GanRSunGes the avhe plorpaaT che work 
sum total of all ruling and reigning which he has amended 
throughout the entire universe but also the laws, corrected and 
renewed, of the obedience and subjection due from the human 

‘race. If therefore that subjection by which the Son is said to 
be subjected to the Father is taken to be good and salutary, 
it is a sure and logical consequence that the subjection of his 
enemies which is said to happen to the Son of God should 
also be understood to be salutary and useful; so that, just as 
when the Son is said to be subjected to the Father the perfect 
restoration of the entire creation is announced, so when his 
enemies are said to be subjected to the Son of God we are to 
understand this to involve the salvation of those subjected and 
the restoration of those that have been lost. — 

8. But this subjection will be accomplished through cer- 


tain means and courses of discipline and periods of time; that 
is, the whole world will not become subject to God by the 
———————— 


»¢. pressure of some necessity that compels it into subjection, 


nor by the use of force, but by word, by reason, by teaching, 
by the exhortation to better things, by the best methods of 


- 


Book III, Chapter V 319 


education, and also by such merited and appropriate threat- 
enings as are justly held over the heads of those who contemp- 
tuously neglect to care for their own salvation and advantage 
and their spiritual health. For even we men, in training slaves 
or children, restrain them by means of threats and fear so long 
as their age renders them incapable of listening to reason; but 
when they have acquired an understanding of what is good, 
sahableand Fore them the far of lows may cease and 
they can be persua y word and by reason to acquiesce in 
everything that is good. 

But how, consistently with the preservation of free will 
in all rational creatures, each person ought to be dealt with, 
that is, who they are whom the Word of God discovers to be 
prepared and capable and so instructs; who they are whom 
he puts off for a time; who they are from whom the word is 
utterly hidden and who are destined to be far away from the 
hearing of it (cf. Prv 15:29); who again they are that despise 
the word when it is declared and preached to them and con- 
sequently are visited with God's corrections and chastisements 
and pressed into salvation and whose conversion is as it were 
compelled and extorted; who they are for whom God even 
provides special occasions for salvation so that sometimes a 
man has obtained an assured salvation when his faith was 
revealed by a mere answer; from what causes or on what 
occasions these things happen, or what the divine wisdom 
sees as it looks into these men or what movements of theirs 
will lead God to arrange all these things thus, is known to 
God alone and to his only-begotten Son, through whom 
all things were created and restored, and to the Holy Spirit, 
through whom all things are sanctified, who proceedeth from 
the Father himself (cf. Jn 15:26), to whom is the glory forever 
and ever, Amen. = ar 


~ 
7 


Chapter VI | 2231F 
2 ¢- 


THE CONSUMMATIO 
OF THE WORLD 


1. In regard to the end and consummation of all things we © ' © 


have already in a previous chapter discussed to the best of 
our ability, so far as the authority of divine scripture allowed 
us, those points which we consider sufficient for purposes of 
instruction.’ Now, however, we call to mind a few further 
‘points, since the course of our inquiry has brought us again 
‘to that topic. The highest good, towards which all rational 
‘nature is progressing, and which is also/called the end of all 
things, is defined by very many even among philosophers in 
the following way, namely, that the highest good is to become 
as far as possible like God.* But this definition is not so much, 
I think, a discovery of their own, as something taken by them 
out of the divine books. For Moses, before all others, points 
to it when in recording the first creation of man he says, “And 
God said, Let us make man in our own image and likeness” 
(Gn 1:26). Then he adds afterwards, “And God made man; 
in the image of God made he him; male and female made he 
them, and he blessed them” (Gn 1:27, 28). 

Now the fact that he said, “He made him in the image 
of God,” and was silent about the likeness, points to nothing 
else but this, that man received the honor of God's image in 
his first creation, whereas the perfection of God's likeness was 


—————— 


— 


321 1 
Ay 


322 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


was that man should acquire it for himself by his own earnest 
efforts to imitate God, so that while the possibility of attain- 
ing perfection was given to him in the beginning through 
the honor of the “image,” he should in the end through the 
accomplishment of these works obtain for himself the perfect 
“likeness.” More openly and unmistakably the apostle John 
lays down that such is the case when he makes this declaration: 
“Little children, we know not yet what we shall be; but if he 
shall be revealed”—speaking undoubtedly of the Savior—‘“we 
shall be like him” (1 Jn 3:2). Here he most certainly indicates 
that we are to hope both for the end of all things, the nature 
of which he says is still unknown to him, and also for the 
likeness to God which will be conferred on us in proportion 
to the perfection of our merits. The Lord himself also in the 
gospel points out that these things will not only come to pass 
but will come to pass by his own intercession, when he deigns 
to make this request to the Father for his disciples: “Father, I 
will that, where I am, they also may be with me,” and, “as I 
and thou art one, so they may be one in us” (Jn 17:24, 21). 
Here indeed the likeness seems, if we may say so, to make an 
advance and from being something similar to become “one 
thing”; for this reason undoubtedly, that in the consummation 


~ or end God is “all in all” (1 Cor 15:28). < 


In this connection‘ the question is asked by some whether 
the essence of our bodily nature, however perfectly purified it 
may be and rendered completely spiritual, does not appear to 
offer an obstacle both to the honor of our likeness to God and 
to our fitness for union with him. For it does not seem possible 


to say that the nature which is in a body can either be like the 


divine nature, which is certainly above all things incorporeal 
or that it can be truly and rightly described as becoming one 


with it; especially* since the fact of the Son being “one with 
—_ 7 —__ 


nS CL of 


Book III, Chapter VI P22 cag lstone 323 


the Father” (cf. Jn 10:30) is shown by the true doctrine of our 
faith to refer to that nature which is peculiar to him. 

(And further,® when the same apostle says that “the whole 
creation shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption 
into the liberty of the glory of the sons of God,” we under- 
stand it in such a way as to say that the first creation of rational 
creatures was also an incorporeal one, which was not meant 
to be in bondage to corruption for the reason that it was not 
clothed with bodies; for wherever bodies are, corruption fol- 
fows immediately. But it will afterwards be “delivered from 


the bondage of corruption” when it has receive of 


C26; 


the Son of God and when “God-shall be all in all” [cf. Rom “707 


8:21; 1 Cor 15:28]. D. a 
We ed to believe that the end of all things-will be 


e are 
incorporeal by the statement of our Savior, in which he says, 


—*That as I and thou are one, so they also may be one in us” 
[Jn 17:21]. For we ought to know what God is and what the 
Savior will be in the end, and how the Jikeness of the Father 
and the Son has been promised to the saints, so that as the 


Father and the Son are one in themselves, so, too, the saints 
may be one in them. For we must éither suppose that the God 


of the universe is clothed with/a body and enveloped with 
Some Torr OF RATE Ta the Sans Way as we are with Aesh, in 
order that the likeness of God's life may in the end be brought 
to the level of the saints; or, if this view is unseemly, as it most 
certainly is to those who desire even in the smallest degree to 
dwell on the majesty of God and to apprehend the glory of 
his unbegotten and all-surpassing nature, then we are com- 
pelled to accept one of two alternatives and either despair of 
ever attaining the likeness of God if we are destined always to 
have bodies, or else, if there is promised to us a blessedness 


of the same life that God has, then we must live in the same 


condition in which God lives).’ 


324 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


2. Now* when it is promised that in the end God is “all 
in all” (1 Cor 15:28), we must not imagine, in strictly logical 
wise, that animals, either cattle or wild beasts, will come to 
that end, lest it should be implied that God dwells even in 
animals, whether cattle or wild beasts; neither will stocks and 


stones, lest it should be said that God dwells in them also. So, _ 


too, we must not suppose that any evil reaches that end, lest 
even in some vessel of evil. 

For although we say that even now God is everywhere 
and in all things, for the reason that nothing can be empty of 
God, still we do not say it so as to mean that he now actually 
is all things in which he is present. Hence we must look more 
carefully to see what this condition is which marks the per- 
fection of blessedness, and the end of things, in which God is 
said not only to be in all things but even to be all things. Let 
us inquire, therefore, what are these “all things” which God 
shall be “in all things” (1 Cor 15:28). 

3. Now | myself think that when it is said that God is “all 


in all,” it means that he is also all things in each individual 


person. And he will be all things in each person in such a way 
that everything which the rational mind, when purified from 
all the dregs of its vices and utterly cleared from every cloud 


of wickedness, can feel or understand or think will be all God 


and that the mind will no longer be conscious of anything 
besides or other than God, but will think God and see God 
and hold God and God will be the mode and measure of its 
every movement; and in this way God will be all to it. For 
there will no longer be any contrast of good and evil, since evil 
nowhere exists; for God, whom evil never approaches, is then 
all things to it; nor will one who is always in the good and to 
whom God is all things desire any longer to eat of the tree of 
the knowledge of good and evil (Gn 2:17). 


- Ay § 
Ans 

Book III, Chapter VI 325 
If then the end is renewed after the pattern of the origin 
and the issue of thir things made to resemble their beginning and 
that condition restored which rational nature once enjoyed 
when it had no need/to eatjof the tree of the knowledge of 
good and evil, so that all consciousness of evil has departed 
and given place to what is sincere and pure and he alone who 
is the one good God becomes all things to the soul and he 
himself is all things not in some few or in many things but in 
all things; when there is nowhere any death, nowhere any sting 
of death (cf. 1 Cor 15:55), nowhere any evil at all, then truly 
God will be all in all. But some think that this perfection and 
blessedness of rational natures can only remain in the condi- 
tion which we have described above, that is, the condition in 
which all things possess God and God is all things to them, 
if they are in no way impeded by union with a bodily nature. 


Otherwise, if there were any intermingling of a material sub- 


stance, they consider that the glory of the highest blessedness 
‘-would be prevented.’ On this subject the arguments that may 


w 
be raised have been fully dealt with and discussed by us in a 


previous chapter.'"°C~ |» 

4. But now, since we find the apostle Paul making men- 
tion of a “spiritual body” (cf. 1 Cor 15:44), let us inquire to | 
the best of our ability what sort of idea we ought to form from 
this passage about such a body. So far then as our understand- 
ing can grasp it, we believe that the quality of a spiritual body 
is something such as will make a fitting habitation not only for 
all saints and perfected souls but also for that “whole creation” 


which is to be delivered from the bondage of corruption (cf. 
Rom 8:21). Of this body the same apostle has also said that 
“we have a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens” 
(2 Cor 5:1), that is, in the dwelling-places of the blest. From 
this statement we may then form a conjecture of what great 
purity, what extreme fineness, what great glory is the quality of 


402 


326 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


that body, by comparing it with those bodies which, although 
heavenly and most splendid, are yet made with hands and vis- 
ible. For of that body it is said that it isa house not made with 
hands but “eternal in the heavens” (cf. 2 Cor 5:1). Now since 
“the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which 
are not seen are étemnal (2 Cor 4:18), all those bodies which 
we see whether on earth or in the heavens, which are capable 
of being seen and are made with hands and not eternal, are 
very greatly surpassed in excellence by that which is neither 
visible nor made with hands but is eternal. 
From this comparison we may gain an idea of how great is 


the beauty, how great the splendor and how great the bright- 


* ness of a spiritual body, and how true is the saying that “eye 


hath not seen nor ear heard, nor hath it entered into the heart 
of man to conceive what things God hath prepared for them 
that love him” (1 Cor 2:9). But we must not doubt that the 
nature of this present body of ours may, through the will of 


God who made it what it is, be developed by its Creator into 


the quality of that exceedingly refined and pure and splendid 
body, according as the condition of things shall require and 


the merits of the rational being shall demand. Finally, when 
the world was in need of variety and diversity, matter lent itself 
to the fashioning of the diverse aspects and classes of things 
in wholly obedient service to the Maker, as to its Lord and 
Creator, that from it he might produce the diverse forms of 


things heavenly and earthly. But when events have begun to 


hasten towards the ideal of all being one as the Father is one 
with the Son (cf. Jn 17:21; 10:30), we are bound to believe 
as a logical consequence that‘where all are one there will no 


longer be any diversity. ''. 


5. It is on this account, moreover, that the last enemy, 


who is called death, is said to be destroyed (cf. 1 Cor 15:26); 


in order, namely, that there may be no longer any sadness 


a 
a 


Book III, Chapter VI 327 


when there is no death nor diversity when there is no enemy. 
For the destruction of the last enemy must be understood in 


this way, not that its substance which was made by God shall 


perish, but that the hostile purpose and will which proceeded ' 


not from God but from itself will come to an end. It will be 
destroyed, therefore, not in the sense of ceasing to exist, but 
of being no longer an enemy and no longer death." For to 
the Almighty nothing is impossible (cf. Jb 42:2), nor is any- 
thing beyond the reach of cure by its Maker; for it was on this 


+ =. ee 
account that he made all things, that they might exist, and 
those things which were made in order to exist cannot cease 


to exist. Consequently they will suffer change and difference ° 


of such a kind as to be placed in a better or worse position 
in accordance with their merits; but things which were made 
by God for the purpose of permanent existence cannot suffer 
a destruction of their substance. Those things which in the 
opinion of the common people are believed to perish have 
not really perished, as the principles of our faith and of the 
truth alike agree. ; 

Our flesh indeed is considered by the uneducated and by 


unbelievers to perish so completely after death that nothin 
whatever of its substance is left. We, however, who believe in 


ee os i, Ne ee a . . 
its resurrection, know that death only causes a change in it 
and that its substance certainly persists and is restored to life 
ie Bers ane) Bh aah ant et 
again at a definite time by the will of its Creator and once 


more undergoes a transformation; so that what was at first ~ 


flesh, “of the earth earthy” (cf. 1 Cor 15:47), and was then 
dissolved through death and again made “dust and ashes” 
(cf. Gn 18:27),—for “dust thou art,” it is written, “and unto 
dust shalt thou return” (Gn 3:19)—is raised again from the 
earth and afterwards, as the merits of the “indwelling soul” 
shall demand, advances to the glory of a “spiritual body” (cf. 
1 Cor 15:44).1°¢ Far, is es, = pec 


328 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


6. Into this condition, therefore, we must suppose that 
the entire substance of this body of ours will develop at the 
time when all things are restored and become one and when 
“God shall be all in all” (1 Cor 15:28). We must not think, 
however, that it will happen all of a sudden, but gradually and 
by degrees, during the lapse of infinite and immeasurable ages, 
seeing that the improvement and correction will be realized 
slowly and separately in each individual person. Some will 
take the lead and hasten with swifter speed to the highest 
goal, others will follow them at a close interval, while others 
will be left far behind; and so the process will go on through 
the innumerable ranks of those who are making progress and 
becoming reconciled to God from their state of enmity, until 
it reaches even to the last enemy, who is called death (cf. 1 Cor 
15:26),"* in order that he, too, may be destroyed and remain 
an enemy no longer. 


When therefore all rational souls have been restored to 


_/ a condition like this, then also the nature of this body of 


ours will develop into the glory of a “spiritual body” (cf. 1 
Cor 15:44). For just as in the case of rational natures-we see 
that there is not one kind which on account of its sins has 
lived in dishonor and another kind which on account of its 


merits has been summoned to blessedness, but that these are 


. the same natures, which were formerly sinful and afterwards 


through being converted and reconciled to God were recalled _ 


V/ 


to blessedness; so, too, in regard to our bodily nature we must __| 


understand that there is not one body which we now use in 
lowliness and corruption and weakness, and a different one 
which we are to use hereafter in incorruption and power and 
glory,but that this same body,\having cast off the weaknesses 
of its present existence, will be transformed into a thing of 
glory and made spiritual, with the result that what was a ves- 
sel of dishonor shall itself be purified and become a vessel of 


Vv 


Book III, Chapter VI 329 


honor and a habitation of blessedness (cf. Rom 9:21). And 
we must believe that in this condition it remains forever 
unchangeably by the will of the Creator, of which fact we are 


~made certain by the statement of the apostle Paul in which he 


says, “We have a house not made with hands, eternal in the 
heavens” (2 Cor 5:1). 

For the faith of the Church does not accept the opinion 
derived from certain Greek philosophers, that besides this 
body which is composed of the four elements, there is a fifth 
body which is entirely other than and diverse from our present 
body;'* since we can neither produce from the holy scriptures 
the least suspicion of such an opinion, nor can its acceptance 
be allowed as a logical inference, particularlyfas t the holy apos- 
tle clearly lays it down that no new bodies are to be given to 
those who rise from the dead but that they are to receive the 
same ones which they possessed during life, only transformed 


from a worse to a better condition} For he says: “It is sown ~ 
a nat y; it will rise a spiritual body,” and, “it is sown 


in corruption, it will rise in incorruption; it is sown in weak- 


ness, it will rise in power; it is sown in dishonor, it will rise in 


_ glory” (cf. 1 Cor 15:42-44). As therefore man makes a kind of 


progress, so that although he is first a “natural man,” who does 
not understand the “things of the Spirit of God,” he arrives by 
means of instruction at the stage of becoming spiritual and of 
“judging all things while he himself is judged of no man” (1 
Cor 2:14, 15); so also’in regard to the condition of the body 
we must suppose that this same body which now on account 
of its service to the soul is called a soul-like or natural body 
will “advance through a kind of progress, when the soul has 
been joined to God and made “one = spirit” (cf. 1 Cor 6:17) 
with him and the body then as it whic renders service to the 
spirit, into a spiritual condition and quality, especially since 
the bodily nature, as we have often shown, was so made by 


330 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


the Creator that it could easily pass into whatever, quality he 
should wish or the circumstances should demand." 

7. The whole argument, then, comes to this, that God has 
created two universal natures, a visible, that is, a bodily one, 
and an invisible one, which is incorporeal.'” These two natures 
each undergo their own different changes. The invisible, which 
is also the rational nature, is changed through the action of the 

mind and will by reason of the fact that it has been endowed 
~ with freedom of choice; and as a result of this it is found 
existing sometimes in the good and sometimes in its opposite. 
The bodily nature, however, admits of a change in substance, 
so that God the Artificer of all things, in whatever work of 
design or construction or restoration he may wish to engage, 
has at hand the service of this material for all purposes, and 
can transform and transfer it into whatever forms and species 
he desires, as the merits of things demand. It is to this, clearly, 
that the prophet points when he says, “God who makes and 
transforms all things” (Am 5:8 [LXX)). 

8. And now we must certainly ask whether in the consum- 
mation of all things, when “God shall be all in all” (cf. 1 Cor 
15:28), the whole of bodily nature will consist of one species 
and whether the only quality of body will be that which will 
shine with that unspeakable glory which we must believe will 
belong to the spiritual body. Now if we interpret correctly 
the passage which Moses writes in the forefront of his book, 
namely, “In the beginning God made the heaven and the 
earth” (Gn 1:1), as referring to the beginning of the entire 
creation, it is appropriate that the end and consummation of 
all things should consist of a return to this beginning;'* that 
is, that the heaven and earth there spoken of should exist as a 
dwelling place anid rest for the pious, so that the saints and the 
meek may be the first to obtain an inheritance in that earth (cf. 
Dt 4:38; Ps 37:11; Mt 5:4; Heb 4:9);"° for this is the teaching 


s | 


Book III, Chapter VI 331 


of both the law and the prophets and the gospel. In that earth 
there exists, I believe, the true and living forms of that divine 
service which Moses handed down through the “shadow” of 
the law (cf. Heb 10:1). For it is said of them, that is, of those 
who served under the law, that “they serve that which is a 
copy and shadow of the heavenly things” (Heb 8:5). Moreover 
it was said to Moses himself, “See that thou make all things 
according to the form and likeness which was shown thee in 
the mount” (Ex 25:40). It seems to me, therefore, that as in 
this earth the law was a kind of schoolmaster to those who 
by it were appointed to be led to Christ (cf. Gal 3:24) and 
to be instructed and trained in order that after their training 
in the law they might be able with greater facility to receive 
the more perfect precepts of Christ, so also that other earth, 
when it receives all the saints, first imbues and educates them 
in the precepts of the true and eternal law in order that they 
may with greater facility accept the precepts of heaven which 
are perfect and to which nothing can ever be added. And in 
heaven will truly exist what is called the “eternal gospel” and 
the testament that is always new, which cam never grow old 
(cf. Rv 14:6; Heb 9:15, 12:24, 8:13). 

9. This, then, is how we must suppose that events happen 
in the consummation and restitution of all things, namely, that 
souls, advancing and ascending little by | lietle in due measure 
and order, first attain to that other earth and the instruction 
that is init, -and are there prepafed for those better precepts to 


which nothing can ever be added. For in the place of “stew- 


ards” and “governors” (cf. Gal 4:2) Christ the Lord, who is 
King of all, will himself take over the kingdom; that is, he 
himself will instruct those who are able to receive him in his 
character of wisdom, after their preliminary training in the 
holy virtues, and will reign in them until such time as he 
subjects them to the Father who subjected all things to him;”° 


332 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


or in other words, when they have been rendered capable of 
receiving God, then God will be to them “all in all.” It follows 
of necessity that then even their bodily nature will assume that 
supreme condition to which nothing can ever be added." 

So far, then, we have discussed the question of our bodily 
nature and of the spiritual body. We leave it to the reader's 
judgment to choose which of the two opinions he decides to 
be the better. For our part we shall here bring the third book 


to a conclusion. 


BOOK IV 


Chapter I 


THE DIvINE INSPIRATION 
OF THE SCRIPTURES! 


Greek 


1. Now in our investigation 
of these important matters 
we do not rest satisfied with 
common opinions and the 
evidence of things that are 
seen, but we use in addition, 
for the manifest proof of 
our statements, testimonies 
drawn from the scriptures 
which we believe to be divine, 
both from what is called the 
Old Testament and also from 
the New, endeavoring to con- 
firm our faith by reason. We 
have not yet, however, dis- 
cussed the divine character 
of the scriptures. Well then, 
let us deal in a brief manner 
with a few points concerning 
them, bringing forward in 


333 


Latin 

1. Now since in our dis- 
cussion of these great and 
important subjects it is not 
sufficient to leave the con- 
clusion of the matter to 
human opinions and the 
common understanding and, 
so to speak, to pronounce 
on things invisible through 
visible means, we must take 
into account, for the proof 
of these statements of ours, 
the testimonies of the divine 
scriptures. And in order that 
these testimonies may carry 
an assured and indubitable 
conviction both in regard 
to what we are about to say 
and in regard to what we 
have said already, it seems 


334 


Greek 


this connection the reasons 
that influence us to regard 
them as divine writings. 
And first of all, before we 
make use of statements from 
the writings themselves and 
from the events disclosed in 
them, let us speak of Moses, 
the Hebrew lawgiver, and of 
Jesus Christ, the introducer 
of the saving doctrines of 
Christianity. 


For although there have 
been very many lawgivers 
among both Greeks and bar- 
barians, and teachers who 
proclaimed doctrines which 
professed to be the truth, 
we have no record of a law- 
giver who has succeeded in 
implanting an enthusiasm for 
the acceptance of his teach- 
ings among nations other 
than his own. A great appara- 
tus of supposed logical proof 
has been introduced by men 
who profess that their phi- 


losophy is concerned with 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

necessary first of all to show 
that the scriptures themselves 
are divine, that is, are inspired 
by the Spirit of God. We shall 
therefore set our seal to this 
proposition in as brief a man- 
ner as we can by quoting from 
the divine scriptures them- 
selves the passages that chiefly 
influence us, that is, first the 
passages from Moses the law- 
giver of the Hebrew people, 
and then from the words of 
Jesus Christ, the author and 
leader of the Christian reli- 
gion and doctrine. 

For although there have 
been very many lawgivers 
among both Greeks and 
barbarians, as well as innu- 
merable teachers or philos- 
ophers who professed that 
they taught the truth, we 
remember no lawgiver who 
has succeeded in instilling 
into the minds of foreign 
nations a desire and enthusi- 
asm either to adopt his laws 
voluntarily or to defend them 
whole-heartedly. Nor has any- 
one succeeded in introduc- 
ing and implanting what he 


Book IV, Chapter I 


Greek 


truth, and yet none of them 
has succeeded in implanting 
what he regarded as the truth 
among different nations or 
even among any number of 
persons worth mentioning in 
a single nation. 

Yet it would have been 
the wish of the lawgivers to 
put in force the laws which 
appeared to them to be 
good among the whole race 
of mankind, had that been 
possible; while the teachers 
would have wished that what 
they imagined was the truth 
should be spread everywhere 
throughout the world. But 
knowing that they could not 
summon men of other lan- 
guages and of many nations 
to the observance of their 
laws and the acceptance of 
their teachings they wholly 
refrained even from attempt- 
ing to do this, considering 
not unwisely how impossi- 
ble it was that such a result 
should happen to them. Yet 


_ , all over Greece and in the bar- 


barian part of our world there 
are thousands of enthusiasts 


335 
Latin 
regarded as the truth among, 
I will not say many other for- 
eign nations, but even among 
the people of a single nation, 
in such a way so to cause a 
knowledge of and belief in it 
to extend to all. 

Yet we cannot doubt 
that the lawgivers would 
have wished their laws to 
be observed by all men, had 
that been possible; while the 
teachers would have wished 
that what they regarded as the 
truth should become known 
to all. But knowing that this 
was altogether impossible and 
that they did not possess the 
enormous influence that was 
necessary to summon men of 
foreign nations to the obser- 
vance of their laws and teach- 
ings they did not venture to 
make the least attempt at this, 
for fear lest an ineffective and 
futile effort to do so should 
stamp their conduct with 
folly. Yet all over the world, 
in the whole of Greece and in 
every foreign nation, there are 
innumerable people who have 


abandoned their ancestral 


336 


Greek 


who have abandoned their 
ancestral laws and their rec- 
ognized gods for observance 
of the laws of Moses and of 
the teaching contained in the 
words of Jesus Christ, in spite 
of the fact that those who 
submit to the law of Moses 
are hated by the worship- 
pers of images and that those 
who accept the word of Jesus 
Christ are not only hated but 
in danger of death.” 


2. Now if we consider 
how in a very few years, 
although those who profess 
Christianity are persecuted 
and some are put to death 
on account of it while others 
suffer the loss of their posses- 
sions, yet the word has been 
able, in spite of the fewness of 
its teachers, to be “preached 
everywhere in the world” (cf. 
Mt 24:14) so that Greeks and 
barbarians, wise and foolish 
(cf. Rom 1:14) have adopted 
the religion of Jesus, we shall 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

laws and their recognized 
gods and have submitted 
themselves to the observance 
of the law of Moses and to 
the discipleship and worship 
of Christ, and this in spite of 
the fact that an intense hatred 
has been aroused against 
them by those who worship 
images, to such an extent that 
they are often subjected to 
tortures at the hands of these 
men and sometimes even led 
to death. Nevertheless they 
embrace and guard with all 
affection the word of Christ’s 
teaching.” 

2. Now we can see how 
in a short time this religion 
has grown up, making prog- 
ress through the persecution 
and death of its adherents and 
through their endurance of 
confiscation of property and 
every kind of torture. And 
this is particularly wonderful 
since its teachers themselves 
are neither very skillful nor 
very numerous. For in spite 
of all, this word is “preached 
in all the world” (cf. Mt 
24:14) so that Greeks and 


Book IV, Chapter I 


Greek 


not hesitate to say that this 
achievement is more than 
human, remembering that 
Jesus taught with all author- 
ity and convincing power that 
his word should prevail (cf. 
Mk 13:31). 


Consequently we may 
reasonably regard as ora- 
cles those utterances of his 
such as, “Ye shall be brought 
before kings and governors 
for my sake, for a testimony 
to them and to the Gen- 
tiles” (Mt 10:18; Mk 13:9); 
and. . . .. “Many shall say to 
me in that day, Lord, Lord, 
did we not eat in thy name 
and drink in thy name and 
in thy name cast out dae- 
mons? And I shall say unto 
them, Depart from me, ye 
workers of iniquity; I never 
knew you” (Mt 7:22, 23; Lk 
13:26). Now there was once 
a possibility that in uttering 
these words he was talking 
idly, because they were not 
true; but when words spoken 


337 
Latin 
barbarians, wise and foolish 
(cf. Rom 1:14) now adopt 
the Christian religion. Hence 
there can be no doubt that it 
is not by human strength or 
resources that the word of 
Christ comes to prevail with 
all authority and convinc- 
ing power in the minds and 
hearts of all men. 

Moreover it is plain that 
this result was predicted by 
him and established by the 
divine oracles he uttered, as 
when he says, “Ye shall be 
brought before governors 
and rulers for my sake, for 
a testimony to them and to 
the gentiles” (Mt 10:18; Mk 
13:9); and again, “This gos- 
pel shall be preached to all 
nations” (Mt 24:14); and 
also, “Many shall say to me in 
that day, Lord, Lord, have we 
not eaten and drunk in thy 
name, and in thy name cast 
out daemons? And I shall say 


unto them, Depart from me, 


ye workers of iniquity; I never 
knew you” (Mt 7:22, 23; Lk 
13:26). Now if these words 
had been spoken by him and 


338 


Greek 


with such authority have 
come to pass it shows that 
God has really become man 


and delivered to men the doc- 


trines of salvation. 


3. And what need is 
there to say also that it was 
predicted that those who are 
called “rulers” “shall fail from 
Judah and the leaders from 
his thighs, when he shall 
come for whom it”—that 
is, clearly, the kingdom—“is 
reserved,” and when “the 
expectation of the gentiles 
shall dwell here” (cf. Gn 
49:10 [LXX]). For it is abun- 
dantly clear, from history and 
from what we see at the pres- 
ent day that after the times 
of Jesus there were no longer 
any who were called kings of 
the Jews, and that all those 


Jewish customs on which 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

had not come to the pre- 
dicted fulfillment they might 
have appeared to be scarcely 
true and to possess no author- 
ity; but now, since the events 
which were predicted by him 
do come to pass, and since 
they were predicted with so 
great power and authority, it 
is most plainly shown that he 
is really God who has become 
man and has delivered to men 
the precepts of salvation. 

3. And what are we to 
say of this, that the prophets 
have predicted beforehand of 
him that “rulers shall not fail 
from Judah nor leaders from 
his thighs, until he shall come 
for whom it”—that is, clearly, 
the kingdom—“is reserved,” 
and “until the expectation of 
the gentiles shall come” (cf. 
Gn 49:10 [LXX]). For it is 
abundantly clear from his- 
tory and from what we see at 
the present day that after the 
times of Christ kings have not 
existed among the Jews. . 

Moreover all those Jew- 
ish ceremonies of which they 
boasted so much and on 


Book IV, Chapter I 


Greek 


they prided themselves, I 
mean those connected with 
the temple and the altar and 
the performance of worship 
and the garments of the high 
priest, have been destroyed.* 
For the prophecy has been 
fulfilled which says, “The 
children of Israel shall sit 
for many days without king 
or ruler, without sacrifice or 
altar or priesthood or oracles” 
(Hos 3:4). 


Now we use these say- 
ings as an answer to those 
who, in regard to the diffi- 
culty arising from the words 
in Genesis spoken by Jacob 


~ to Judah, say that the Ethn- 


arch,’ who comes from the 
tribe of Judah, is the ruler 
of the people, and that men 
of his seed will not fail until 
the advent of the Christ as 
they picture him. For if “the 
children of Israel shall sit 
for many days without king 
or ruler, without sacrifice or 
altar or priesthood or ora- 
cles” (Hos 3:4) and if from 


339 
Latin 
which they prided themselves, 
that is, those connected with 
the adorning of the temple 
and the decorations of the 
altar and all those sacerdotal 
fillets and the garments of the 
high priests were destroyed at 
one blow.’ For the prophecy 
has been fulfilled which said, 
“The children of Israel shall 
sit for many days without 
king, without ruler; there 
shall be neither sacrifice nor 
altar nor priesthood nor ora- 
cles” (Hos 3:4). 

Now we use these say- 
ings as evidence against those 
who apparently maintain that 
what is said by Jacob in Gen- 
esis is said of Judah, and who 
declared that there remains 
to this day a ruler who comes 
from the tribe of Judah, that is 
to say, that person who is the 
ruler of the Jewish nation and 
whom they call the Patriarch, 
and, they add, men of his seed 
cannot fail to continue until 
the advent of that Christ 
whom they picture to them- 
selves. But if what the prophet 
says is true, that “the children 


340 


Greek 


the time the temple was razed 
to the ground there has been 
“neither sacrifice nor altar nor 
priesthood,” it is clear that a 
ruler has “failed from Judah 
and a leader from his thighs.” 
And when the prophecy says, 
“A ruler shall not fail from 
Judah nor a leader from his 
thighs until there shall come 
what is reserved for him” (Gn 
49:10)° it is clear that he has 
come for whom are the things 
reserved, that is, he who is the 
expectation of the gentiles. 
This is evident from the num- 
ber of gentiles who through 
Christ have believed in God. 


4. And in the song in 
Deuteronomy it is prophet- 
ically revealed that there 
shall be an election of fool- 
ish nations on account of 
the sins of God's former peo- 
ple; which has come to pass 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

of Israel shall sit for many days 
without king, without ruler; 
neither shall there be sacri- 
fice nor altar nor priesthood” 
(Hos 3:4), and if certainly 
from the time the temple 
was overthrown no sacrifices 
have been offered nor has an 
altar been found there nor a 
priesthood existed, then it is 
quite clear that rulers have 
“failed from Judah,” as it was 
written, “and a leader from 
his thighs, until he comes for 
whom it was reserved” (Gn 
49:10).° It is evident, then, 
that he has come, “for whom 
it was reserved,” he in whom 
also is “the expectation of the 
gentiles.” This seems plainly 
to have been fulfilled in the 
multitude of those who from 
different gentile nations have 
through Christ believed in 
God. 


4. Moreover in the song 
in Deuteronomy it is pro- 
phetically revealed that there 
shall be an election of a fool- 
ish nation on account of the 
sins of God's former people; 
which election is certainly 


Book IV, Chapter I, 


Greek 


through no other than Jesus. 
For it says: “They moved me 
to jealousy with that which is 
not God; they have provoked 
me to anger with their idols; 
and I will move them to jeal- 
ousy with that which is not 
a nation, and with a foolish 
nation I will provoke them 
to anger” (Dt 32:21). Now it 
can be very clearly perceived 
in what manner the Hebrews, 
who are said to have moved 
God to jealousy with that 
which is not God and to 
have provoked him to anger 
with their idols, have them- 
selves been provoked to anger 
and jealousy with that which 
is not a nation, and with a 
“foolish nation,” which God 
chose-through the advent of 
Christ Jesus and his disciples. 

We see, then, our calling, 
that “not many wise after the 
flesh, not many mighty, not 
many noble are called; but 
God chose the foolish things 
of the world, that he might 
put to shame them that are 
wise; and the base things and 
the things that are despised 


Latin 

none other than that which 
has come to pass through 
Christ. For it speaks thus: 
“They have provoked me to 
anger with their idols, and 
I will move them to jeal- 
ousy; with a foolish nation I 
will stir them to anger” (Dt 
32:21). Now it can be very 
clearly perceived in what 
manner the Hebrews, who 
are said to have moved God 
to anger with those that are 
no gods and to have provoked 
him with their idols, have 
themselves been provoked to 
anger and jealousy by a “fool- 
ish nation,” which God chose 
through the advent of Christ 


Jesus and his disciples. 


For the apostle speaks as 


follows: “Ye see your call- 
ing, brethren, that not many 
among you are wise after the 
flesh, not many mighty, not 
many noble; but God chose 
the foolish things of the 
world and those which are 
not, that he might destroy 


342 


Greek 


did God choose, yea, and 
the things that are not, that 
he might bring to nought 
those things that were before 
them.” So let not “Israel after 
the flesh,” which is called by 
the apostle “flesh,” “glory 
before God” (1 Cor 1:26-29, 
10:18). 

5. And what need is 
there to speak of the prophe- 
cies relating to Christ in the 
Psalms, in which a certain ode 
is headed “For the beloved,” 
whose tongue is said to be the 
“pen of a ready writer” who 
is “fairer than the children 
of men” because “grace was 
poured on his lips” (Ps 45:1— 
3)?” Now a proof that “grace 
was poured on his lips” is the 
fact that although the time he 
spent in teaching was short-— 
for he taught only about a 
year and a few months*—the 
world has been filled with this 
teaching and with the religion 
that came through him. For 
there has arisen “in his days” 
“righteousness and an abun- 
dance of peace” lasting until 
the consummation, which is 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

those things that were before 
them.” Therefore let not 
Israel after the “flesh"— 
for so is Israel called by the 
apostle—” glory”; let “no 
flesh,” I say, “glory before 
God” (1 Cor 1:26-29, 
10:18). 


5. What must we say, 
moreover, of the prophe- 
cies relating to Christ in the 
Psalms, and particularly in 
that one which is headed “A 
song for the beloved,” where 
it is said that his tongue is 
the “pen of a ready writer” 
who is “fairer than the chil- 
dren of men” because “grace 
was poured on his lips” (Ps 
45:1-3)?’ Now a proof that 
“grace was poured on his lips” 
is the fact that although the 
time he spent in teaching was 
short—for he taught but a 
year and a few months*—nev- 
ertheless the whole world has 
been filled with his teaching 
and religious faith. For there 
has arisen “in his days” “righ- 
teousness and an abundance 
of peace” lasting until the end, 


Book IV, Chapter I 


Greek 
here called the “taking away 


of the moon”; and he contin- 
ues to “have dominion from 
sea to sea and from the riv- 
ers to the ends of the earth” 
(cf. Ps 72:7, 8). And a “sign” 
has been given to the house 
of David, for “the virgin” did 
“conceive and bear a son,” 
and his name is “Emmanuel,” 
which means “God with us” 
(Is 7:14; Mt 1:23). 


There has also been ful- 
filled that which the same 
prophet says, “God is with 
us. Know it, ye nations, and 
be overcome; ye that are 
strong, be overcome” (Is 8:8, 
9 [LXX]). For we who have 
been captured from among 
the nations have been over- 
come and conquered by the 
grace of His word. Moreover 
the place of his birth is fore- 
told in Micah. “And thou, 
Bethlehem,” it says, “land 
of Judah, art in no way least 
among the rulers of Judah; 
for out of thee shall come a 
governor, who shall shepherd 
my people Israel” (Mt 2:6; Mi 


343 


Latin 

which end is called the “taking 
away of the moon”; and he 
has “dominion from sea even 
to sea and from the river even 
to the ends of the earth” (cf. 
Ps 72:7, 8). And a sign also 
has been given to the house 
of David; for “the virgin” has 
“conceived in the womb and 
has borne Emmanuel,” which 
means, “God is with us” (Is 
7:14; Mt 1:23). 

There has also been ful- 
filled that which the same 
prophet says, “God is with 
us. Know it ye nations, and be 
overcome’ (Is 8:8, 9 [LXX]). 
For we have been overcome 
and conquered, we who 
come from the nations and 
are as it were the spoils of his 
victory, we who have bowed 
our necks to the yoke of his 
grace. Moreover the place of 
his birth is foretold in the 
prophet Micah, who says; 
“And thou, Bethlehem, land 
of Judah, art in no way least 
among the rulers of Judah; for 
out of thee shall come a gov- 
ernor, who shall rule my peo- 
ple Israel” (Mt 2:6; Mi 5:2). 


344 


Greek 


5:2). And the “seventy weeks” 
until the coming of Christ 
the governor were fulfilled 
in accordance with Daniel’s 
prophecy (cf. Dn 9:24). He, 
too, has come who accord- 
ing to Job has “subdued the 
great fish” (Jb 3:8 [LXX]) 
and who has given to his true 
disciples authority to “tread 
on serpents and scorpions 
and over every power of the 
enemy, without being in any 
way harmed by them (cf. Lk 
10:19). 


Let anyone also consider 
how the apostles who were 
sent by Jesus to preach the 
gospel sojourned everywhere, 
and he will see that their dar- 
ing venture was not merely 
human and that the com- 
mand was from God. And if 
we examine how, when peo- 
ple heard the new teachings 
and strange words, they wel- 
comed these men, the desire 
to plot against them being 
frustrated by some divine 
power that watched over 
them, we shall not refuse to 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 
Latin 
Further, the weeks of years 
until the coming of Christ 
the governor, which Daniel 
the prophet foretold, have 
been fulfilled (cf. Dn 9:24). 
He, too, has come who was 
foretold by Job to be about 
to “destroy the huge beast” 
(Jb 3:8 [LXX]) and who also 
gave to his personal disciples 
authority to “tread on serpents 
and scorpions and over every 
power of the enemy,” without 
being in any way harmed by 
them (cf. Lk 10:19). 

And if anyone will con- 
sider the journeyings of 
Christ's apostles through all 
the various places in which 
they were sent by him to 
preach the gospel, he will 
find that what they ventured 
to undertake was beyond the 
power of man and that their 
success in having accom- 
plished what they ventured 
upon is from God. If we 
consider how, when people 
heard that a new teaching was 
being introduced by these 
men, they were able to receive 
them, or rather how while 


Book IV, Chapter I 


Greek 
believe that they even worked 


miracles, “God bearing wit- 
ness with their words, and 
through signs and wonders 


and manifold powers” (cf. 
Heb 2:4; Acts 5:12). 


6. Now when we thus 


- briefly demonstrate the divine 


nature of Jesus and use the 


words spoken in prophecy 


about him, we demonstrate at 
the same time that the writ- 
ings which prophesy about 
him are divinely inspired 
and that the words which 
announce his sojourning here 
and his teaching were spoken 
with all power and authority 
and that this is the reason 
why they have prevailed over 
the elect people taken from 
among the nations. And we 
must add that it was after the 
advent of Jesus that the inspi- 
ration of the prophetic words 


345 


Latin 

often desiring to destroy them 
they were restrained by some 
divine power that was present 
with them, we shall find that 
in this matter nothing was 
wrought by human strength 
but all by divine power and 
providence, “signs and pow- 
ers manifest beyond all doubt 
bearing witness to their word 
and teaching” (cf. Heb 2:4; 
Acts 5:12). 

6. Now that we have 
briefly demonstrated these 
points, namely, the deity of 
Jesus Christ and the fulfill- 
ment of all those prophecies 
that were spoken about him, 
it is, I think, also proved at the 
same time that the writings 
themselves which have proph- 
esied about him were divinely 
inspired, those which fore- 
told either his advent or the 
power of his teaching or the 
ingathering of all the nations. 
To which must also be added 
the following, that the divine 
nature and inspiration both 
of the oracles of the proph- 
ets and of the law of Moses 
has been specially brought 


346 


Greek 


and the spiritual nature of 
Moses’s law came to light. For 
before the’advent of Christ 
it was not at all possible to 
bring forward clear proofs of 
the divine inspiration of the 
old scriptures. But the advent 
of Jesus led those who might 
have suspected that the law 
and the prophets were not 
divine to the clear conviction 
that they were composed by 
the aid of heavenly grace. 


And he who approaches 
the prophetic words with care 
and attention will feel from 
his very reading a trace of 
their divine inspiration and 
will be convinced by his own 
feelings that the words which 
\ are believed by us to be from 
God are not the compositions 
of men. Now the light which 
was contained within the 
law of Moses, but was hid- 
den away under a veil, shone 
forth at the advent of Jesus, 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 

Latin 
to light and proved since the 
time when Christ came into 
this world. For before the pre- 
dictions made by these were 
fulfilled, although they were 
true and inspired by God, still 
they could not be shown to be 
true because they were not yet 
proved to have come to pass; 
but the advent of Christ pro- 
claimed the truth and divine 
inspiration of what had been 
spoken, whereas before it 
would certainly have been 
considered doubtful whether 
the issue of what had been 
predicted would come to pass. 
Further, if any one pon- 
ders over the prophetic say- 
ings with all the attention 
and reverence they deserve, 
it is certain that in the very 
act of reading and diligently 
studying them his mind and 
feelings will be touched by a 
divine breath and he will rec- 
ognize that the words he is 
reading are not the utterances 
of man but the language of 
God; and so he will perceive 
from his own experience 
that these books have been 


Book IV, Chapter I 


Greek 


when the veil was taken away 
and there came at once to 
men’s knowledge those “good 
things” of which the letter of 
the law held a “shadow” (cf. 2 
Cor 3:15, 16; Heb 10:1). 


7. It would be a long 
business if we were to record 
at this point the ancient 
prophecies relating to every 
future event, in order that 
the doubter might be struck 
by their divine origin and, 
putting away all hesitation 
and indecision, might devote 
himself with his whole soul to 
the words of God. But if in 
every passage of the scriptures 
the superhuman element of 
the thought does not appear 
obvious to the uninstructed, 
that is no wonder. For in 


347 


Latin 

composed not by human art 
or mortal eloquence but, if I 
may so speak, in a style that 
is divine. The splendor of 
Christ's advent has, therefore, 
by illuminating the law of 
Moses with the brightness of 
the truth, withdrawn the veil 
which had covered the letter 
of the law and has disclosed, 
for everyone who believes in 
him, all those “good things” 
which lay concealed within 
(cf. 2 Cor 3:15, 16; Heb 
10:1). 

7. It would be a matter of 
considerable labor if we were 
to record the time and man- 
ner in which every event pre- 
dicted of old by the prophets 
has been fulfilled, in the 
hope that we might thereby 
confirm those who are in 
doubt; although it is possible 
for anyone who desires more 
accurate knowledge about 
these things to gather proofs 
in abundance from the books 
of the truth themselves. But if 
at first sight of the letter the 
superhuman meaning does 
not at once appear obvious to 


348 


Greek 


regard to the works of that 
providence which controls 
the whole world, while some 
show themselves most plainly 
to be works of providence, 
others are so obscure as to 
appear to afford grounds for 
disbelief in the God who with 
unspeakable skill and power 
superintends the universe. 
‘The skillful plan of the prov- 
idential ruler is not so clear 
in things on earth as it is in 
regard to the sun and moon 
and stars, and not so plain 
in the events that happen to 
men as it is in regard to the 
souls and bodies of animals, 
where the purpose and reason 
of the impulses, the mental 
images and the natures they 
possess and the structures of 
their bodies are accurately 
discovered by those who 
investigate these matters. 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 
Latin 
those who have been but little 
instructed in divine things, 
that is no wonder; because 
divine things are commu- 
nicated to men somewhat 
obscurely and are the more 
hidden in proportion to the 
unbelief or unworthiness 
of the inquirer. For while 
it is certain that everything 
which exists or happens in 
this world is arranged by the 
providence of God, there 
are some things which show 
themselves quite plainly to be 
subject to the control of prov- 
idence, whereas others evolve 
in a manner so obscure and 
so hard to understand that in 
their case the plan of divine 
providence is utterly con- 
cealed. The result is that occa- 
sionally there are some who 
disbelieve that certain things 
have any connection with 
providence, since the plan 
on which the works of divine 
providence are arranged with 
unspeakable skill is hidden 
from them; although this plan 
is not equally concealed in 
regard to all things. Moreover 


Book IV, Chapter I 


Greek 


349 


Latin 

among men themselves it is 
pondered over less by one and 
more by another, while the 
inhabitant of heaven, who- 
ever he may be, knows more 
of it than any man on the 
earth.” And the plan of bodies 
is apparent to us in one way, 
that of trees in another, while 
that of souls, in yet another 
way, is concealed from us. In 
what manner, too, the divine 
movements of rational minds 
are ordered by divine provi- 
dence is to a large extent 
hidden from men, and not 
a little, in my opinion, from 
the angels also. 

But just as divine provi- 
dence is not proved to be a 
fiction, particularly for those 
who are convinced of its 
existence, because its work- 
ings and arrangements are 
beyond the comprehension 
of human minds, so neither 
will the divine inspiration of 
holy scripture, which extends 
through its entire body, be 
supposed to be nonexistent 
because the weakness of 
our understanding cannot 


350 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 
Latin 
discover the deep and hidden thoughts in every sentence; for 
the treasure of divine wisdom is concealed in vessels of poor 
and humble words, as the apostle points out when he says: 
“We have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the greatness of 
the divine power may shine forth the more” (2 Cor 4:7), when 
no taint of human eloquence is mingled with the truth of the 
doctrines. For if our books had attracted men to belief because 
they were composed with rhetorical skill or with philosophical 
cleverness, our faith would undoubtedly have been supposed 
to rest in the skillful use of words and in human wisdom, and 
not in the power of God (1 Cor 2:5). But now it is well known 
to all that “the word of this preaching” has been so accepted by 
multitudes in almost the whole world that they have realized 
that their belief rests “not in persuasive words of wisdom, but 
in demonstration of the Spirit and of power” (cf. 1 Cor 2:4). 
Since therefore we have been drawn by a celestial, nay, 
by an even super-celestial power, to faith and trust, for this 
purpose, that we may worship the only Creator of all things 
as our God, let us also endeavor to strive earnestly to “leave 
behind the doctrine of the first principles of Christ,” which 
are the elementary principles of knowledge, and to “press on 
to perfection” (cf. Heb 6:1), that that wisdom which is deliv- 
ered to the perfect may be delivered also to us. For such is the 
promise of him to whom the preaching of this wisdom was 
committed, and who says, “Howbeit we speak wisdom among 
the perfect, yet a wisdom not of this world nor of the rulers 
of this world, who are to come to nought” (cf. 1 Cor 2:6). By 
this he shows that our wisdom, so far as concerns polished 
language, has nothing in common with the wisdom of this 
world. This wisdom, therefore, will be the more clearly and 
perfectly inscribed in our hearts, if it is made known to us 
“according to the revelation of the mystery which hath been 


Book IV, Chapter I 351 


Latin 

hidden through times eternal, but now is manifested through 
the scriptures of the prophets” and “through the coming of our 
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,” to whom is the glory forever 
and ever. Amen (cf. Rom 16:25—27; 2 Tm 1:10; 1 Tm 6:14). 


_~ 


Chapter II 


Many, Not UNDERSTANDING 
THE SCRIPTURES SPIRITUALLY, 
AND INTERPRETING THEM 
ERRONEOUSLY, HAVE FALLEN 
INTO HERESIES 


Greek 


1. Now that we have spoken 
cursorily about the inspira- 
tion of the divine scriptures 
it is necessary to discuss the 
manner in which they are 
to be read and understood, 
since many mistakes have 
been made in consequence 
of the method by which the 
holy documents ought to be 
interpreted not having been 
discovered by the multitude. 
For the hard-hearted and 
ignorant members of the 
circumcision have refused to 


» believe in our Savior because 


Latin 

1. Now that we have dealt, 
therefore, with this point, 
that the divine scriptures were 
inspired by the Holy Spirit, 
it appears necessary also 
to explain how some men 
have involved themselves in 
numerous errors through 
not reading or understand- 
ing them aright, because the 
method by which we should 
approach the interpretation 
of the divine writings is 
unknown to the multitude. 
For the Jews, owing to their 
hardness of heart and their 


353 


354 


Greek 


they think that they are keep- 
ing closely to the language of 
the prophecies that relate to 
him, and they see that he did 
not literally “proclaim release 
to captives” or build what 
they consider to be a real “city 
of God” or “cut off the char- 
iots from Ephraim and the 
horse from Jerusalem” or “eat 
butter and honey, and choose 
the good before he knew or 
preferred the evil” (cf. Is 61:1, 
Lk 4:19; Ps 46:4; Ez 48:15fF; 
Zec 9:10; Is 7:15). 


Further, they think that 
it is the wolf, the four- 
footed animal, which is said 
in prophecy to be going to 
“feed with the lamb, and the 
leopard to lie down with the 
kid, and the calf and bull and 
lion to feed together, led by 
a little child, and the ox and 
the bear to pasture together, 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 
Latin 
desire to appear wise in their 
own sight, have refused to 
believe in our Lord and Say- 
ior because they suppose that 
the prophecies that relate to 
him must be understood lit- 
erally, that is, that he ought 
actually and visibly to have 
“proclaimed release to cap- 
tives,” and that he ought 
to have at once built a city 
such as they think the “city 
of God” really is, and at the 
same time to have “cut off the 
chariots from Ephraim and 
the horse from Jerusalem,” 
and also to have eaten “but- 
ter and honey” and “chosen 
the good before he knew how 
to prefer the evil” (cf. Is 61:1; 
Lk 4:19; Ps 46:4; Ez 48:15ff; 
Zec 9:10; Is 7:15). 

Further, they think that 
it is the wolf, the four-footed 
animal, of which it is proph- 
esied that at the coming of 
Christ it must “feed with 
lambs, and the leopard lie 
down with the kids, and the 
calf and the bull feed with 
lions and be led to their 
pastures by a little child, 


Book IV, Chapter II 


Greek 


their young ones growing up 
with each other, and the lion 
to eat straw like the ox” (cf. 
Is 11:6, 7); and having seen 
none of these events literally 
happening during the advent 
of him whom we believe to 
be Christ they did not accept 
our Lord Jesus, but crucified 
him on the ground that he 
had wrongly called himself 
Christ. 


And the members of 
the heretical sects, reading 
the passage, “A fire has been 
kindled in mine anger” (Dt 
32:22; Jer 15:14); and “I 
am a jealous God, visiting 
the sins of the fathers upon 
the children to the third and 
fourth generation” (Ex 20:5); 
and “It repenteth me that I 


355 


Latin 

and the ox and the bear lie 
down together in the green 
fields and their young ones 
be brought up side by side, 
and lions to stand at stalls 
with oxen and feed on straw” 
(cf. Is 11:6, 7). Seeing, then, 
that there was no fulfill- 
ment in history of all these 
things which were proph- 
esied of him and in which 
they believed that the signs 
of the advent of Christ were 
specially to be observed, they 
refused to acknowledge the 
presence of our Lord Jesus 
Christ; nay, contrary to all 
right and justice, that is, con- 
trary to the faith of prophecy, 
they nailed him to the cross 
for assuming for himself, the 
name of Christ. 

Then again the heretics, 
reading in the law, “A fire has 
been kindled in my anger” 
(Dt 32:22; Jer 15:14); and 
“I am a jealous God, visiting 
the sins of the fathers upon 
the children to the third 
and fourth generation” (Ex 
20:5); and “It repenteth me 
that I have anointed Saul to 


356 


Greek 


have anointed Saul to be 
king” (1 Sm 15:11); and “I, 
God, make peace and create 
evil” (Is 45:7); and elsewhere, 
“There is no evil in a city, 
which the Lord did not do” 
(Am 3:6); and further, “Evils 
came down from the Lord 
upon the gates of Jerusalem” 
(Mi 1:12); and “An evil spirit 
from the Lord troubled Saul” 
(1 Sm 18:10); and ten thou- 
sand other passages like these, 
have not dared to disbelieve 
that they are the writings of 
God, but believe them to 
belong to the Creator, whom 
the Jews worship.' Conse- 
quently they think that since 
the Creator is imperfect and 
not good, the Savior same 
here to proclaim a more per- 
fect God who they say is not 
the Creator, and about whom 
they entertain diverse opin- 
ions. Then having once fallen 
away from the Creator, who 
is the sole unbegotten God, 
they have given themselves up 
to fictions, fashioning myth- 
ical hypotheses according to 
which they suppose that there 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 
Latin 
be king” (1 Sm 15:11); and 
“I am God, that; maketh 
peace and createth evil” (Is 
45:7); and again “There is no 
evil in a city, which the Lord 
hath not done” (Am 3:6); 
and “Evils came down from 
the Lord upon the gates of 
Jerusalem” (Mi 1:12); and 
“An evil spirit from God 
troubled Saul” (1 Sm 18:10); 
and many other passages of 
scripture like these, have not 
dared to say that they are not 
the writings of God, but have 
supposed them to belong to 
that Creator God whom the 
Jews worshipped,' and who 
they think should be believed 
to be merely just, and not 
good as well. For they think 
that the Savior came here to 
proclaim to us a more perfect 
God, who they say is not the 
Creator of the world, and 
about whom they entertain 
diverse opinions; since hav- 
ing once fallen away from 
their faith in God the Cre- 
ator, who is the God of all, 
they have given themselves up 
to various fictions and fables, 


Book IV, Chapter IT 


Greek 


are some things that are seen 
and others that are not seen, 
all of which are the fancies of 


their own minds. 


Moreover, even the sim- 
pler of those who claim to 
belong to the Church, while 
believing indeed that there is 
none greater than the Cre- 
ator, in which they are right, 
yet believe such things about 
him as would not be believed 
of the most savage and unjust 
of men. 


2. Now the reason why 
all those we have mentioned 
hold false opinions and make 
impious or ignorant asser- 
tions about God appears to 
be nothing else but this, that 
scripture is not understood 
in its spiritual sense, but is 
interpreted according to the 
bare letter. On this account 
we must explain to those who 


believe that the sacred books 


357 


Latin 

inventing false opinions and 
saying that there are certain 
visible things made by one 
power and certain invisible 
things created by another 
power, just as they are led by 
the fancy and vanity of their 
own minds. 

Moreover some of the 
simpler of those who appear 
to remain within the faith of 
the Church, while holding 
that there is none greater than 
the Creator God, in which 
they maintain a right and 
sound opinion, yet believe 
such things about him as 
would not be believed even 
of the most unjust and say- 
age of men. 

2. Now the reason why 
those we have mentioned 
above have a false appre- 
hension of all these mat- 
ters is nothing else but this, 
that the holy scripture is not 
understood by them in its 
spiritual sense, but accord- 
ing to the sound of the let- 
ter. On this account we shall 
try to demonstrate, so far 
as our moderate ability will 


358 


Greek 


are not the works of men, 
but that they were composed 
and have come down to us 
as a result of the inspiration 
of the Holy Spirit by the will 


of the Father of the universe 


- through Jesus Christ, what 
are the methods of interpre- 
.), tation that appear right to 


us, who keep to the rule of 
the heavenly Church of Jesus 
Christ through the succession 
from the Apostles. 


That there are certain 
mystical revelations made 
known through the divine 
scriptures is believed by all, 
even by the simplest of those 
who are adherents of the 
word; but what these reve- 
lations are, fair-minded and 
humble men confess that 
they do not know. If, for 
instance, an inquirer were to 
be in a difficulty, about the 


intercourse of Lot with his 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

permit, to those who believe 
that the holy Scriptures were 
not composed by means of 
merely human words but 
were written under the inspi- 
ration of the Holy Spirit and 
were also handed down and 
entrusted to us by the will 
of God the Father through 
his only-begotten Son Jesus 
Christ, what is the method 
of interpretation that appears 
right to us, who keep to that 
rule and discipline delivered 
by Jesus Christ to the apostles 
and handed down by them in 
succession to their posterity, 
the teachers of the heavenly 
Church. 

That there are certain 
mystical revelations made 
known through the holy 
scriptures is admitted, I 
think, by all, even by the 
simpler kind of believers; but 
what these revelations are, or 
of what nature they are, any 
man who is fair-minded and 
not possessed by the vice of 
boasting will reverently con- 
fess that he does not know. 
If, for instance, we are asked 


Book IV, Chapter II 


Greek 


daughters (cf. Gn 19:30ff,), 
or the two wives of Abraham 
(cf. Gn 16), or the two sis- 
ters married to Jacob (cf. Gn 
29:21ff.), or the two hand- 
maids who bore children 
by him (Gn 30:1—13), they 
can say nothing except that 
these things are mysteries not 
understood by us. 


But when the passage 
about the equipment of 
the tabernacle is read (cf. 
Ex 25ff.), believing that the 
things described therein are 
types, they seek for ideas 
which they can attach to 
each detail that is mentioned 
in connection with the taber- 
nacle. Now so far as concerns 
their belief that the taber- 
nacle is a type of something 
they are not wrong; but in 
rightly attaching the word 
of scripture to the partic- 
ular idea of which the tab- 
ernacle is a type, here they 


359 
Latin 
about the daughters of Lot 
and their apparent unlawful 
intercourse with their father 
(cf. Gn 19:30ff.), or about 
the two wives of Abraham 
(cf. Gn 16), or the two sisters 
who were married to Jacob 
(cf. Gn 29:21ff.), or the two 
handmaids who increased the 
number of his sons (Gn 30:1— 
13), what else can we reply 
than that these are sacraments 
and figures of spiritual things 
but that we are ignorant of 
their precise nature? 

When, moreover, we 
read of the equipment of 
the tabernacle (cf. Ex 25ff.), 
we hold it as certain that the 
things described therein are 
figures of some hidden real- 
ities, but to attach them to 
their appropriate meanings 
and to bring to light and dis- 
cuss each separate detail is, I 
think, a very difficult, not to 
say impossible task. However, 
as I said, it does not escape 
even the common intellect 
that that description is full of 
mysteries. And all those nar- 
ratives which appear to be 


360 


Greek 


sometimes fall into error. 
And they declare that all nar- 
ratives that are supposed to 
speak about marriage or the 
begetting of children or wars 
or any other stories whatever 
that may be accepted among 
the multitude are types; but 
when we ask, of what, then 
sometimes owing to the lack 
of thorough training, some- 
times owing to rashness, and 
occasionally, even when one 
is well trained and of sound 
judgment, owing to man’s 
exceedingly great difficulty in 
discovering these things, the 
interpretation of every detail 
is not altogether clear. 


y 


3. And what must we say 
about the prophecies, which 
we all know are filled with 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 
composed about marriages 
or the begetting of children 
or different kinds of battles 
or any other stories what- 
ever, what else can we believe 
them to be but the forms and 
figures of hidden and sacred 
things? But either because 
men pay too little attention 
to the training of their mind, 
or because they think they 
already know before they 
learn, the consequence is that 
they never begin to know; 
otherwise if neither earnest- 
ness is lacking, nor a master, 
and if these questions are 
studied as befits divine, and 
not merely human matters, 
that is, in a reverent and pious 
spirit, and as questions that 
we hope will in most cases be 
made clear by the revelation 
of God, since to human sense 
they are exceedingly difficult 
and obscure, then, perhaps, 
he who thus seeks will at last 
find all that it is lawful for us 
to find. 

3. But it may possibly be 
supposed that this difficulty 
belongs only to the prophetic 


Book IV, Chapter II 


Greek 


riddles and dark sayings? 
(cf. Prv 1:6).? Or if we come 
to the gospels, the accurate 
interpretation even of these, 
since it is an interpretation of 
the mind of Christ, demands 
that grace that was given to 
him who said, “We have the 
mind of Christ, that we may 
know the things that were 
freely given to us by God. 
Which things also we speak, 
not in words which man’s 
wisdom teacheth, but which 
the Spirit teacheth” (1 Cor 
2:16, 12, 13). And who, on 
reading the revelations made 
to John, could fail to be 
amazed at the deep obscurity 
of the unspeakable mysteries 
contained therein, which are 
evident even to him who does 
not understand what is writ- 
ten? And as for the apostolic 
epistles, what man who is 
skilled in literary interpreta- 
tion would think them to be 
plain and easily understood, 
when even in them there 
are thousands of passages 
that provide, as if through a 


window, a narrow opening 
> 


361 
Latin 
writings, seeing it is certain 
to all of us that the prophetic 
style is everywhere sprin- 
kled with figures and riddles 
(cf. Prv 1:6).? What, then, 
when we come to the gos- 
pels? Is there not also hidden 
in them an inner meaning 
which is the Lord’s meaning, 
and which is only revealed 
through the grace that was 
given to him who said, “We 
have the mind of Christ, that 
we may know the things that 
were freely given to us by 
God. Which things also we 
speak, not in words which 
man’s wisdom teacheth, but 
which the Spirit teacheth” (1 
Cor 2:16, 12, 13). And who 
indeed, on reading the reve- 
lations made to John, could 
fail to be amazed at the deep 
obscurity of the unspeakable 
mysteries contained therein? 
For even those who cannot 
understand what is concealed 
in these writings yet under- 
stand clearly that something 
is concealed there. And as for 
the apostolic epistles, which 
to some appear to be simpler, 


(m2 


362 


Greek 


leading to multitudes of the 
deepest thoughts? 


Seeing, therefore, that 
these things are so, and that 
thousands of men make 
mistakes, it is dangerous for 
us when we read to declare 
lightly that we understand 
things for which the “key 
of knowledge” is necessary, 
which the Savior says is with 
“the lawyers” (cf. Lk 11:52). 
And as for those who are 
unwilling to admit that these 


7 men held the truth before the 


coming of Christ, let them 
explain to us how it is that 
our Lord Jesus Christ says 
that the “key of knowledge” 
was with them, that is, with 
men who as these objectors 
say, had no books containing 


the secrets of knowledge and 


the all-perfect mysteries.’ For 
the passage runs as follows: 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

are they not filled with deep 
meaning, so that men who 
can understand the inner 
meaning of divine wisdom 
seem through them, as if 
through some narrow open- 
ing, to be flooded with the 
brightness of immeasurable 
light? 

Seeing, therefore, that 
these things are so, and that 
there are many who in this 
life make mistakes, I do not 
think that anyone can with- 
out danger declare that he 
knows or understands those 
things for the opening of 
which the “key of knowl- 
edge” is necessary, which key 
the Savior said was with those 
“learned in the law” (cf. Lk 
11:52). And at this point, 
though by a slight digres- 
sion, I think we should ask 
those who tell us that before 
the coming of the Savior the 
truth did not rest with those 
who were trained in the law, 
how it is that our Lord Jesus 
Christ says that the “keys of 
knowledge” were with those 
who had in their hands the 


Book IV, Chapter II 


Greek 


“Woe unto you lawyers, for 
ye have taken away the key 
of knowledge. Ye entered not 
in yourselves, and them that 
were entering in ye hindered” 


(Lk 11:52). 


4. The right way, there- 
fore, as it appears to us, of 
approaching the scriptures 
and gathering their mean- 
ing, is the following, which 
is extracted from the writings 
themselves. We find some 
such rule as this laid down by 
Solomon in the Proverbs con- 
cerning the divine doctrines 
written therein: “Do thou 
portray them threefold in 
counsel and knowledge, that 
thou mayest answer words of 
truth to those who question 
thee” (Prv 22:20, 21). 


One must therefore por- 
tray the meaning of the sacred 
writings in a threefold way. 
upon one’s own soul, so that 


363 
Latin 
books of the law and the 
prophets. For the Lord spoke 
as follows: “Woe to you, doc- 
tors of the law, for ye have 
taken away the key of knowl- 
edge. Ye entered not in your- 
selves, and them that wished 
to enter in ye hindered” (Lk 
11:52). 

4. But, as we had begun 
to say, the right way, as it 
appears to us, of understand- 
ing the scriptures and inves- 
tigating their meaning, is the 
following; for indeed we are 
taught out of scripture itself 
how we ought to think of it. 
We find some such rule as 
this laid down in the Prov- 
erbs of Solomon concerning 
the examination of divine 
scripture. “Do thou,” it says, 
“portray these things to thy- 
self threefold in counsel and 
knowledge, so that thou may- 
est answer words of truth to 
those who question thee” 
(Prv 22:20, 21). 

Each one must therefore 
portray the meaning of the 
divine writings in a threefold 
way upon his own soul; that 


364 


Greek 


the simple man may be edi- 
fied by what we may call 
the flesh of the scripture, 
this name being given to the 
obvious interpretation; while 
the man who has made some 
progress may be edified by its 
soul, as it were; and the man 
who is perfect and like those 
mentioned by the apostle: 
“We speak wisdom among” 
the perfect; yet a wisdom 
not of this world, nor of the 
rulers of this world, which 
are coming to nought; but 
we speak God’s wisdom in 
a mystery, even the wisdom 
that hath been hidden, which 
God foreordained before the 
worlds unto our glory” (1 
Cor 2:6, 7)—this man may 
be edified by the spiritual law 
(cf. Rom 7:14), which has “a 
shadow of the good things 
to come” (cf. Heb 10:1). For 
just as man consists of body, 
soul and spirit, so in the same 
way does the scripture, which 
has been prepared by God to 
be given for man’s salvation. 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

is, so that the simple may be 
edified by what we may call 
the body of the scriptures (for 
such is the name we may give 
to the common and literal 
interpretation); while those 
who have begun to make a 
little progress and are able 
to perceive something more 
than that may be edified by 
the soul of scripture; and 
those who are perfect and 
like the men of whom the 
apostle says: “We speak wis- 
dom among the perfect; yet 
a wisdom not of this world, 
nor of the rulers of this world, 
which are coming to nought; 
but we speak God’s wisdom 
hidden in a mystery, the wis- 
dom which God foreordained 
before the worlds unto our 
glory” (1 Cor 2:6, 7)—such 
as these may be edified by 
that spiritual law (cf. Rom 
7:14); which has “a shadow 
of the good things to come” 
(cf. Heb 10:1), as if by the 
Spirit. Just as man, therefore, 
is said to consist of body, 
soul and spirit, so also does 
the holy scripture, which has 


Book IV, Chapter II 


Greek 


We therefore read in 
this light the passage in The 
Shepherd, a book which is 
despised by some, where 
Hermas is bidden to “write 
two books,” and after this to 
“announce to the presbyters 
of the Church” what he has 
learned from the Spirit. This 
is the wording: “Thou shalt 
write two books, and shalt 
give one to Clement and one 
to Grapte. And Grapte shall 
admonish the widows and the 
orphans. But Clement shall 
send to the cities without, and 
thou shalt announce to the 
presbyters of the Church.”* 


Now Grapte, who admon- 
ishes the widows and orphans, 
is the bare letter, which 
admonishes those child souls 
that are not yet able to enroll 
God as their Father and 
are on this account called 
orphans, and which also 
admonishes those who while 
no longer associating with 


365 
Latin 
been bestowed by the divine 
bounty for man’s salvation. 
It is this fact that we 
believe to be referred to in the 
book called The Shepherd, 
which apparently is despised 
by some, in the passage where 
Hermas is bidden to “write 
two books,” and after this to 
“announce to the presbyters 
of the Church” what he has 
learned from the Spirit. It is 
written in these words: “Thou 
shalt write two books, and 
shalt give one to Clement and 
one to Grapte. And Grapte 
shall admonish the widows 
and the orphans, but Clem- 
ent is to send through all the 
cities that are without, and 
thou shalt announce to the 
presbyters of the Church.” 
Now Grapte, who is bid- 
den to admonish the orphans 
and widows, is the bare 
meaning of the letter, by 
which child souls, who have 
not yet deserved to have God 
for their Father and are on 
that account called orphans, 
are admonished. The widows 
are those who have departed 


366 


Greek 


the unlawful bridegroom are 
in widowhood because they 
have not yet become worthy 
of the true one. But Clement, 
who has already gone beyond 
the letter, is said to send the 
sayings “to the cities with- 
out,” as if to say, to the soul 
that are outside all bodily and 
lower thoughts; while the dis- 
ciple of the Spirit is bidden to 
announce the message in per- 
son, no longer through letters 
but through living words, to 
the presbyters or elders of 
the whole Church of God, 
to men who have grown grey 
through wisdom. 


5. But since there are 
certain passages of scripture 
which, as we shall show in 
what follows, have no bodily 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 


from the wicked husband 
to whom they had been 
united contrary to the law, 
but remain widows because 
they have not yet advanced 
to the point of being united 
to the heavenly bridegroom. 
Clement is bidden to send 
the sayings to those who are 
already departing from the 
letter, into the “cities that 
are without,” as if to say, to 
those souls which by means 
of these sayings have begun 
to be built up into a condi- 
tion superior to the cares of 
the body and the desires of 
the flesh. Hermas himself is 
bidden to announce what he 
has learned from the Holy 
Spirit, not through letters nor 
through a book but by the 
living voice, to the presbyters 
of the Church of Christ, that 
is, to those who, owing to 
their capacity to receive spir- 
itual doctrine, possess a ripe 
endowment of wisdom. 

5. But we must certainly 
not forget that there are some 
passages of scripture in which 
this that we call the body, 


Book IV, Chapter II 


Greek 


sense at all, there are occa- 
sions when we must seek only 
for the soul and the spirit, as 
it were, of the passage. And 
possibly this is the reason why 
the water pots which, as we 
read in the gospel according 
to John, are said to be set 
there “for the purifying of the 
Jews,” contain two or three 
firkins apiece (cf. Jn 2:6). 
The language alludes to those 
who are said by the apostle to 
be Jews “inwardly” (cf. Rom 
2:29), and it means that 
these are purified through 
the word of the scriptures, 
which contain in some cases 
“two firkins,” that is, so to 
speak, the soul meaning and 
the spiritual meaning, and in 
other cases three, since some 
passages possess, in addition 
to those before mentioned, a 
bodily sense as well, which is 
capable of edifying the hear- 
ers. And six water pots may 
reasonably allude to those 
who are being purified in the 
world, which was made in six 
days, a perfect number.’ 


367 
Latin 
that is, the logical and literal 
meaning, is not found, as we 
shall show in what follows; 
and there are places where 
those meanings which we 
have called the soul and the 
spirit are alone to be looked 
for. I believe that this fact 
is indicated in the gospels, 
when six water pots are said 
“to be set there for the puri- 
fying of the Jews, containing 
two or three firkins apiece” 
(cf. Jn 2:6), Here, as I said, 
the language of the gospel 
seems to allude to those who 
are said by the apostle to be 
Jews “inwardly” (cf. Rom 
2:29), and to mean that these 
are purified through the word 
of scripture, by receiving 
in some cases “two firkins,” 
that is, by accepting the soul 
meaning and the spiritual 
meaning in accordance with 
what we said above, and in 
other cases three firkins, when 
the reading also retains for 
the edification of the hearers 
a bodily meaning, namely the 
literal one. And six water pots 
are approximately mentioned 


+ 


368 


Greek 


6. That it is possible to 
derive benefit from the first, 
and to this extent helpful 
meaning, is witnessed by 
the multitudes of sincere 
and simple believers. But 
of the kind of explanation 
which penetrates as it were 
to the soul an illustration is 
found in Paul’s first epistle 
to the Corinthians. “For,” 
he says, “it is written; thou 
shalt not muzzle the ox that 
treadeth out the corn.” Then 
in explanation of this law 
he adds, “Is it for the oxen 
that God careth? Or saith 
he it altogether for our sake? 
Yea, for our sake it was writ- 
ten, because he that ploweth 
ought to plow in hope, and 
he that thresheth, to thresh 
in hope of partaking” (1 Cor 
9:9, 10; Dt 25:4). And most 
of the interpretations adapted 
to the multitude which are in 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 
Latin 
in allusion to those who are 
being purified while living in 
the world. For we read that 
this world and all that is in 
it were finished in six days, 
which is a perfect number.’ 
6. How much value there 
is in this first meaning, which 
we have called the literal one, 
is witnessed by the entire 
multitude of those believers 
who accept the faith quite 
trustfully and simply; and 
this needs no long argument 
because it is obvious to all. 
But of the kind of explana- 
tion which we have spoken of 
above as the soul, as it were, 
of Scripture, many illus- 
trations are given us by the 
apostle Paul, as, for exam- 
ple, first of all in his epistle 
to the Corinthians. “For,” he 
says, “it is written; thou shalt 
not muzzle the ox that trea- 
deth out the corn.” Then in 
explaining how this precept 
ought to be understood, he 
adds: “Is it for the oxen that 
God careth? Or saith he it 
altogether for our sake? Yea, 


for our sake it was written, 


Book IV, Chapter II 


Greek 
circulation and which edify 


those who cannot under- 
stand the higher meanings 
have something of the same 
character. } 


But it is a spiritual expla- 
nation when one is able to 
show of what kind of “heav- 
enly things” the Jews “after 
the flesh” served a copy 
and a shadow, and of what 
“good things to come” the 
law has a “shadow” (cf. Heb 
8:5; Rom 8:5; Heb 10:1). 
And, speaking generally, we 
have, in accordance with the 
apostolic promise, to seek 
after “the wisdom in a mys- 
tery, even the wisdom that 
hath been hidden, which 
God foreordained before the 


worlds unto the glory” of the 
righteous, “which none of the 
rulers of this world knew” (cf. 
1 Cor 2:7, 8). The same apos- 
tle also says somewhere, after 
mentioning certain narratives 


369 
Latin 
because he that ploweth 
ought to plow in hope, and 
he that thresheth, to thresh 
in hope of partaking” (1 Cor 
9:9, 10; Dt 25:4).° Moreover, 
many other similar passages 
which are interpreted in this 
manner out of the law, impart 
the utmost instruction to 
those who hear them. 

But a spiritual explana- 
tion is like this, when one is 
able to show of what “heav- 
enly things” those who are 
Jews “after the flesh” serve a 
copy and a shadow, and of 
what “good things to come” 
the law has a “shadow” (cf. 
Heb 8:5; Rom 8:5; Heb 
10:1), and any other matters 
of this kind which may be 
found in the holy scriptures; 
or when we inquire what is 
that “wisdom hidden in a 
mystery, which God foreor- 
dained before the worlds unto 
our glory, which none of the 
rulers of this world knew” 
(cf. 1 Cor 2:7, 8), or ask the 
meaning of the same apostle’s 
statement, when he makes 
use of certain illustrations 


370 


Greek 


from Exodus and Numbers, 
that “these things happened 
unto them figuratively, and 
they were written for our 
sake, upon whom the ends 
of the ages are come” (1 Cor 
10:11). He also gives hints to 
show what these things were 
figures of, when he says: “For 
they drank of that spiritual 
rock that followed them, and 
that rock was Christ” (1 Cor 
10:4). 


In another epistle, when 
outlining the arrangements 
of the tabernacle he quotes 
the words: “Thou shalt make 
all things according to the 
figure that was shown thee 
in the mount” (Heb 8:5; Ex 
25:40). Further, in the epis- 
tle to the Galatians, speaking 
in terms of reproach to those 
who believe that they are 
reading the law and yet do 
not understand it, and laying 
it down that they who do not 
believe that there are allego- 


ries in the writings do not 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

from Exodus and Numbers 
and says that “these things 
happened unto them figura- 
tively, and they were written 
for our sake, upon whom the 
ends of the ages are come” 
(1 Cor 10:11), and when he 
affords us an opportunity of 
understanding how we can 
learn of what those events 
that happened to them were 
figures, by saying, “For they 
drank of that spiritual rock 
that followed them, and 
that rock was Christ” (1 Cor 
10:4). 

Moreover in another 
epistle he mentions that com- 
mand about the tabernacle 
which was enjoined upon 
Moses: “Thou shalt make 
all things according to the 
figure that was shown thee 
in the mount” (Heb 8:5; Ex 
25:40). And when writing to 
the Galatians and reproach- 
ing some who believe they 
are reading the law and yet 
do not understand it, because 
they are unaware that there 
are, allegories in these writ- 
ings, he addresses them in a 


Book IV, Chapter II 


Greek 


understand the law, he says: 
“Tell me, ye that desire to be 
under the law, do ye not hear 
the law? For it is written, that 
Abraham had two sons, one 
by the handmaid and one by 
the free woman. Howbeit the 
son by the handmaid is born 
after the flesh; but the son 
by the free woman is born 
through promise. Which 
things contain an allegory; 
for these women are two 
covenants” (Gal 4:21-—24), 
and what follows. Now we 
must carefully mark each of 
the words spoken by him. 
He says, “Ye that desire to be 
under the law” (not, “ye that 
are under the law”) “do ye not 
hear the law?” hearing being 
taken to mean understanding 
and knowing. 

And in the epistle to the 
Colossians, briefly epitomiz- 
ing the meaning of the entire 
system of the law, he says: 
“Let no man therefore judge 
you in meat or in drink or in 
respect of a feast day or a new 
moon or a sabbath, which 
are a shadow of the things 


371 
Latin 
tone of rebuke: “Tell me, ye 
that desire to be under the 
law, do ye not hear the law? 
For it is written that Abra- 
ham had two sons, one by 
the handmaid and one by 
the free woman. Howbeit he 
who was born of the hand- 
maid was born according to 
the flesh, but he of the free 
woman was born according 
to promise. Which things 
contain an allegory. For these 
are the two covenants” (Gal 
4:21—24), and what follows. 
Here we must also observe 
this point, how carefully the 
apostle says, “Ye that desire to 
be under the law” (and not, 
“ye that are under the law”) 
“do ye not hear the law?” Do 
ye not hear? that is, do ye not 
understand and know? 
Moreover in the epistle 
to the Colossians he briefly 
sums up and condenses the 
meaning of the entire law 
and says: “Let no man there- 
fore judge you in meat or in 
drink or in respect of solemn 
days or a new moon ora 
sabbath, which are a shadow 


372 


Greek 


to come” (Col 2:16, 17). 
Further, in the epistle to the 
Hebrews, when discoursing 
about those who are of the 
circumcision, he writes: “They 
who serve that which is a copy 
and shadow of the heavenly 
things” (Heb 8:5). Now it is 
probable that those who have 
once admitted that the apos- 
tle is a divinely inspired man 
will feel no difficulty in regard 
to the five books ascribed to 
Moses; but in regard to the 
rest of the history they desire 
to learn whether those events 
also “happened figuratively” 
(cf. 1 Cor 10:11). We must 
note the quotation in the 
epistle to the Romans: “I have 
left for myself seven thousand 
men, who have not bowed the 
knee to Baal (Rom 11:4; 1 
Kgs 19:18), found in the third 
book of the Kings. Here Paul 
has taken it to stand for those 
who are Israelites “according 
to election” (cf. Rom 11:5), 
for not only are the gentiles 
benefited by the coming of 
Christ, but also some who 
belong to the divine race. 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 


of the things to come” (Col 
2:16, 17). Also when writ- 
ing to the Hebrews and dis- 
coursing about those who are 
of the circumcision he says: 
“They who serve that which 
is a copy and shadow of the 
heavenly things” (Heb 8:5). 
But probably through the 
above examples those who 
accept the apostle’s writings 
as divinely inspired will feel 
no doubt in regard to the five 
books of Moses. In regard to 
the rest of the history, how- 
ever, they will ask whether 
the events related therein may 
also be said to have “hap- 
pened figuratively” (cf. 1 Cor 
10:11) to those about whom 
they are written. We notice 
that this point has been spo- 
ken of in the epistle to the 
Romans, where the apostle 
takes an illustration from 
the third book of the Kings, 
which says: “I have left for 
myself seven thousand men, 
who have not bowed the 
knee to Baal” (Rom 11:4; 1 
Kgs 19:18). This Paul takes 


as spoken figuratively of 


Book IV, Chapter II 


Greek 


\ | 
7. This being so, we 
must outline what seems to 
us to be the marks of a true 
understanding of the scrip- 
tures. And jin the first place 
we must point out that the 
aim of the Spirit who, by the 
providence of Godthrough 
the Word who was “in the 
beginning with God” (cf. 
Jn 1:1), enlightened the ser- 
vants of the truth, that is, the 


prophets and apostles, was 
- . 
pre-eminently concerned 


with the unspeakable myster- 
ies connected with the affairs 
of men—and by men I mean 
at the present moment souls 
that make use of bodies— 
his purpose being that the 
man who is capable of being 


» taught might by “searching 


out” and devoting himself to 
the “deep things” (cf. 1 Cor 


373 
Latin 
those who are called Israelites 
“according to election” (cf. 
Rom 11:5), in order to show 
that the coming of Christ 
was beneficial not only to the 
gentiles but also to very many 
of the race of Israel who have 
been called to salvation. 

7. This being so, we shall 
now outline the manner in 
which divine scripture should 
be understood on these sev- 
eral points using such illus- 
trations and examples as may 
occur to us. And in the first 


» place we must call to mind 


and point out that the Holy 
Spirit, who by the providence 
and will of God through the 
power of his only begotten 
Word who was “in the begin- 
ning with God” (cf. Jn 1:1), 
enlightened the servants of 
the truth, that is, the proph- 
ets and apostles, (wished 
above all to lend them)’ to 
the knowledge of the mys- 
teries connected with those 
affairs and causes which con- 
cern the lives and relation- 
ships of men. By men I mean 
at the present moment souls 


i 


374 


Greek 


2:10) revealed in the spiritual 
meaning of the words become 


partaker ofall the doctrines of 


the Spirit's counsel. 


And when we speak of the 


needs of souls, who cannot 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 
that are located in bodies. 
These mysteries which were 
made known and revealed 
to them by the Spirit, the 
prophets portrayed figura- 
tively through the narration 
of what seemed to be human 
deeds and the handing down 
of certain legal ordinances 
and precepts. The aim was 
that not everyone who wished 
should have these mysteries 
laid before his feet to tram- 
ple upon (cf. Mt 7:6), but 
that they should be for the 
man who had devoted him- 
self to studies of this kind 
with the utmost purity and 
sobriety and through nights 
of watching, by which means 
perchance he might be able 
to trace out the deeply hid- 
den meaning of the Spirit of 
God, concealed under the 
language of an ordinary nar- 
rative which points in a dif- 
ferent direction, and that so 
he might become a sharer of 
the Spirit’s knowledge and a 
partaker of his divine counsel. 
For in no other way can 


the soul reach the perfection 


Book IV, Chapter II 


Greek 


otherwise reach perfection 
except through the rich 
and wise truth about God, 
we attach of necessity pre- 
eminent importance to the 
doctrines concerning God 
and His only-begotten Son; 
of what nature the Son is, 
and in what manner he can 
be the Son of God, and what 
are the causes of his descend- 
ing to the level of human 
flesh and completely assum- 
ing humanity; and what, also, 
is the nature of his activity, 
and towards whom and at 
what times it is exercised. It 
was necessary, too, that the 
doctrines concerning beings 
akin to man and the rest of 
the rational creatures, both 
those that are nearer the 
divine and those that have 
fallen from blessedness, and 
the causes of the fall of these 
latter, should be included in 
the accounts of the divine 
teaching; and the question of 
the differences between souls 
and how these differences 
arose, and what the world is 
and why it exists, and further, 


375 
Latin 
of knowledge except by being 
inspired with the truth of the 
divine wisdom. Therefore it 
is chiefly the doctrine about 
God, that is, about the Father, 
Son and Holy Spirit, which is 
indicated by those men who 
were filled with the divine 
Spirit. Then, too, the myster- 
ies relating to the Son of God, 
how the Word became flesh, 
and for what reason he went 
to the length of “taking upon 
him the form of a servant” 
(cf. Phil 2:7), have also been 
made known by those who 
were filled, as we have said, 
with the divine Spirit. After 
that it followed of necessity 
that they should instruct the 
race of mortal men by divine 
teaching concerning rational 
creatures, both heavenly and 
earthly, the more blessed and 
the lower ones alike, and also 
concerning the differences 
between souls and how these 
differences arose; and then 
the question what this world 
is and why it was made, and 
further, how it comes about 
that evil is so widespread 


376 


Greek 


how it comes about that evil 
is so widespread and so terri- 
ble on earth, and whether it is 
not only to be found on earth 
but also in other places—all 
this it was necessary that we 
should learn. 

8. Now while these and 


similar subjects were in 


» the mind of the Spirit who 


enlightened the souls of the 
holy servants of the truth, 
there was a second aim) pur- 
sued for the sake of those 
who were unable to endure 
the burden of investigat- 
ing matters of such impor- 
tance. This was to conceal 
the doctrine relating to the 
before-mentioned subjects 
in words forming a narrative 
that contained a record deal- 
ing with the visible creation, 
the formation of man and 
the successive descendants of 
the first human beings until 
the time when they became 
many; and also in other sto- 
ries that recorded the acts of 
righteous men and the sins 
that these same men occa- 
sionally committed, seeing 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

and so terrible on earth, and 
whether it is found only on 
earth or in some other places 
as well—all this it was nec- 
essary that we should learn 
from the divine teaching. 


8. But while it was the 
intention of the Holy Spirit 
to enlighten holy souls, who 
had devoted themselves to 
the service of the truth, on 
these and similar subjects, 
there was in the second place 
another aim in view, namely, 
that for the sake of such as 
either could not or would 
not give themselves up to 
this labor and industry in 
order to prove themselves 
worthy of being taught and 
of coming to know matters of 
such value and importance, 
the Spirit should wrap up 
and conceal within ordinary 
language under cover of some 
historical record or account 
of visible things certain secret 
mysteries. There is introduced 
therefore an account of the 


visible creation and of the 
formation and fashioning of 


Book IV, Chapter II 


Greek 


they were but human, and 
the deeds of wickedness, 
licentiousness and greed done 
by lawless and impious men. 


But the most wonderful 
thing is, that by means of sto- 
ries of wars and the conquer- 
ors and the conquered certain 
secret truths are revealed 
to those who are capable of 
examining these narratives; 
and, even more marvelous, 
through a written system of 
law the laws of truth are pro- 
phetically indicated, all these 
having been recorded in a 
series with a power which is 
truly appropriate to the wis- 
dom of God. For the inten- 
tion was to make even the 
outer covering of the spiritual 
truths, I mean the bodily part 


of the scriptures, in many 


377 


Latin 

the first man, and then of the 
descendants that follow in 
succession from him. There 
are also recorded certain 
acts performed by righteous 
men and occasionally, too, 
mention is made of the sins 
these same men committed, 
seeing they were hut human; 
and then also a considerable 
number of the licentious and 
wicked deeds of impious men 
are related. 

In a wonderful manner, 
too, an account of wars is 
presented, and the different 
fortunes now of the conquer- 
ors, now of the conquered 
are described, and by this 
means, to those who know 
how to examine writings of 
this kind, certain unspeakable 
mysteries are revealed. Fur- 
ther, by a marvelous example 
of wisdom, in the writings 
of the law the law of truth is 
implanted and prophetically 
indicated; and all these are 
by the divine skill and wis- 
dom woven together to form 
a kind of outer covering and 
veil for spiritual meanings, 


378 


Greek 
respects not unprofitable but 


capable of improving the 
multitude in so far as they 
receive it. 


9. But if the usefulness 
of the law and the sequence 
and case of the narrative 
were at first sight clearly 
discernible throughout, we 
should be unaware that there 
was anything beyond the 
obvious meaning for us to 
understand in the scriptures. 
Consequently the Word of 
God has arranged for certain 
‘stumbling-blocks, as it were, 
and hindrances and impossi- 
bilities to be inserted in the 
midst of the law and the his- 
tory, in order that we may not 
be completely drawn away by 
the sheer attractiveness of the 
language, and so either reject 
the true doctrines absolutely, 
on the ground that we learn 
from the scriptures nothing 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

which is what we meant by 
the body of holy scripture; 
with the result that even 
through this that we have 
called the outer covering of 
the letter, woven by the art 
of wisdom, very many read- 
ers may be edified and make 
progress, who otherwise 
could not do so. 

9. But if in every detail of 
this outer covering, that is, the 
actual history, the sequence of 
the law had been preserved 
and its order maintained, we 
should have understood the 
scriptures in an unbroken 
course and should certainly 
not have believed that there 
was anything else buried 
within them beyond what 
was indicated at a first glance. 
Consequently the divine wis- 
dom has arranged for certain 
stumbling-blocks and inter- 
ruptions of the historical 
sense to be found therein, 
by inserting in the midst a 
number of impossibilities 
and incongruities, in order 
that the very interruption of 
the narrative might as it were 


Book IV, Chapter II 


Greek 
worthy of God or else by 


never moving away from the 
letter fail to learn anything of 


the more divine element. 


And we must also know 
this, that because the princi- 
pal aim was to announce the 
connection that exists among 
spiritual events, those that 
have already happened and 
those that are yet to come 
to pass, whenever the Word 
found that things which had 
happened in history could be 
harmonized with these mysti- 
cal events he used them, con- 
cealing from the multitude 
their deeper meaning. But 
wherever in the narrative the 
accomplishment of some par- 
ticular deeds, which had been 
previously recorded for the 
sake of their more mystical 


379 


Latin 

present a barrier to the reader 
and lead him to refuse to pro- 
ceed along the pathway of the 
ordinary meaning and so, by 
shutting us out and debarring 
us from that, might recall us 
to the beginning of another 
way, and might thereby bring 
us, through the entrance of a 
narrow footpath, to a higher 
and loftier road and lay open 
the immense breadth of the 
divine wisdom. 

And we must also know 
this, that because the aim of 
the Holy Spirit was chiefly to 
preserve the connection of 
the spiritual meaning, both in 
the things that are yet to be 
done and in those which have 
already been accomplished, 
whenever he found that 
things which had been done 
in history could be harmo- 
nized with the spiritual mean- 
ing, he composed in a single 
narrative a texture compris- 
ing both kinds of meaning, 
always, however, concealing 
the secret sense more deeply. 
But wherever the record of 
deeds that had been done 


380 


Greek 


meanings, did not correspond 
with the sequence of the intel- 
lectual truths, the scripture 
wove into the story some- 
thing which did not happen, 
occasionally something which 
could not happen, and occa- 
sionally something which 
might have happened but in 
fact did not. Sometimes a few 
words are inserted which in 
the bodily sense are not true, 
and at other times a greater 
number. 


A similar method can 
be discerned also in the law, 
where it is often possible to 
find a precept that is useful 
for its own sake, and suitable 
to the time when the law 
was given. Sometimes, how- 
ever, the precept does not 
appear to be useful. At other 
times even impossibilities are 
recorded in the law for the 
sake of the more skillful and 
inquiring readers, in order 
that these, by giving them- 
selves to the toil of examin- 
ing what is written, may gain 
a sound conviction of the 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 

Latin 
could not be made to cor- 
respond with the sequence 
of the spiritual truths, he 
inserted occasionally some 
deeds of a less probable char- 
acter or which could not have 
happened at all, and occa- 
sionally some which might 
have happened but in fact 
did not. Sometimes he does 
this by a few words, which 
in their bodily sense do not 
appear capable of containing 
truth, and at other times by 
inserting a large number. 

This is found to happen 
particularly in the law, where 
there are many things which 
as literal precepts are clearly 
useful, but also a considerable 
number in which no princi- 
ple of utility whatever is dis- 
closed, while sometimes even 
impossibilities are detected. 
All this, as we have said, 
the Holy Spirit supervised, 
in order that in cases where 
that which appeared at the 
first glance could neither be 
true nor useful we should be 
led on to search for a truth 
deeper down and needing 


Book IV, Chapter II 


Greek 


necessity of seeking in such 
instances a meaning worthy 


of God. 


And not only did the 
Spirit supervise the writ- 
ings which were previous to 
the coming of Christ, but 
because he is the same Spirit 
and proceeds from the one 
God he has dealt in like man- 
ner with the gospels and the 
writings of the apostles. For 
the history even of these is 
not everywhere pure, events 
being woven together in the 
bodily sense without having 
actually happened; nor do the 
law and the commandments 
contained therein entirely 
declare what is reasonable. 


381 


Latin 
more careful examination, 
and should try to discover 
in the scriptures which we 
believe to be inspired by God 
a meaning worthy of God. 
And not only did the 
Holy Spirit supervise the 
writings which were previ- 
ous to the coming of Christ, 
but because he is one and 
the same Spirit and pro- 
ceeds from the one God he 
has acted similarly in regard 
to the gospels and the writ- 
ings of the apostles. For 
even the narratives which he 
inspired through them were 
not woven together without 
the spell of that wisdom of 
his, the nature of which we 
explained above. And so it 
happens that even in them 
the Spirit has mingled not a 
few things by which the his- 
torical order of the narrative 
is interrupted and broken, 
with the object of turning 
and calling the attention of 
the reader, by the impossi- 
bility of the literal sense, to 
an examination of the inner 
meaning. 


Chapter III 


ILLUSTRATIONS FROM THE 
SCRIPTURES OF THE METHOD 
IN WHICH SCRIPTURE 
SHOULD BE UNDERSTOOD 


Greek 


I. Now! what man of intelli- 
gence will believe that the first 
and the second and the third 
day, and the evening and the 
morning existed without the 
sun and moon and stars? And 
that the first day, if we may 
so call it, was even without a 
heaven? (cf. Gn 1:5—13). And 
who is so silly as to believe 
that God, after the manner of 
a farmer, “planted a paradise 
eastward in Eden,” and set in 
it a visible and palpable “tree 
of life,” of such a sort that 
anyone who tasted its fruit 


with his bodily teeth would 


Latin 

1. But in order to learn the 
truth of what we say from the 
facts themselves, let us now 
examine the actual passages of 
scripture. What man of intel- 
ligence, I ask, will consider it 
a reasonable statement that 
the first and the second and 
the third day, in which there 
are said to be both morning 
and evening, existed with- 
out sun and moon and stars, 
while the first day was even 
without a heaven? (cf. Gn 
1:5—13). And who could be 
found so silly as to believe 
that God, after the manner 


383 


— 


384 


Greek 


gain life; and again that one 
could partake of “good and 
evil” by masticating the fruit 
taken from the tree of that 
name? (cf. Gn 2:8, 9).2 And 
when God is said to “walk in 
the paradise in the cool of the 
day” and Adam to hide him- 
self behind a tree, I do not 
think anyone will doubt that 
these are figurative expressions 


. which indicate certain mys- 


teries through a semblance 
of history and not through 
actual events (cf. Gn 3:8). 


Further, when Cain “goes 
out from the face of God” 
it seems clear to thought- 
ful men that this statement 
impels the reader to inquire 
what the “face of God” is and 
how anyone can “go out” 
from it (cf. Gn 4:16).2 And 
what more need I say, when 
those who \are not altogether 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 
Latin 
of a farmer, “planted trees in 
a paradise eastward in Eden,” 
and set therein a “tree of life,” 
that is, a visible and palpable 
tree of wood, of such a sort 
that anyone who ate of this 
tree with bodily teeth would 
gain life; and again that any- 
one who ate of another tree 
would get a knowledge of 
“good and evil” (cf. Gn 2:8, 
9)?? And further, when God 
is said to “walk in the paradise 
in the evening” and Adam to 
hide himself behind a tree, 
I do not think anyone will 
doubt that these statements 
are made by scripture in a fig- 
urative manner, in order that 
through them certain mysti- 
cal truths may be indicated 
(cf. Gn 3:8). 

Again, when Cain “goes 
out from the face of God,” 
the statement clearly impels 
a thoughtful reader to inquire 
what the “face of God” is, 
and how anyone can “go 
out” from it (cf. Gn 4:16).3 
But not to extend unduly the 
work we have in hand, it is 
quite easy for anyone who 


Book IV, Chapter III 


Greek 


blind can collect thousands 
of such instances, recorded as 
actual events, but which did 
not happen literally? 


Even the gospels are full 
of passages of this kind, as 
when the devil takes Jesus 
up into a “high mountain” 
in order to show him from 
thence “the kingdoms of the 
whole world and the glory of 
them” (cf. Mt 4:8). For what 
man who does not read such 
passages carelessly would fail 
to condemn those who believe 
that with the eye of the flesh, 
which requires a great height 
to enable us to perceive what 
is below and at our feet, the 
kingdoms of the Persians, 
Scythians, Indians and Par- 
tisans were seen, and the 
manner in which their rulers 
are glorified by men? And 
the careful reader will detect 
thousands of other passages 
like this in the gospels, which 
will convince him that events 


which did not take place at all 


385 


Latin 
wills to collect from the holy 

scriptures instances that are 

recorded as actual events, but 

which it would be inappro- 

priate and unreasonable to 

believe could possibly have 

happened in history. 

This kind of scripture is 

to be found in considerable 

abundance even in the gos- 

pels, as when the devil is said 

to have taken Jesus up into 

“a high mountain” in order 
to show him from thence “all 

the kingdoms of the world 

and the glory of them” (cf. Mt 
4:8). How could it possibly 
have happened literally, either 
that the devil should have led 
Jesus up into a high moun- 
tain or that to his fleshly eyes 
he should have shown all the 
kingdoms of the world as if 
they were lying close to the 
foot of a single mountain, 
the kingdoms for instance of 
the Persians, Scythians and 
Indians, and in addition, the 
manner in which the rulers 
of these kingdoms are glori- 
fied by men. And the diligent 
reader will find in the gospels 


386 


Greek 


are woven into the records of 


what literally did happen. 


2. And to come to the 
Mosaic legislation, many of 
the laws, so far as their literal 
observance is concerned, are 
clearly irrational, while others 
are impossible. An example 
of irrationality is the prohi- 
bition to eat vultures, see- 
ing that nobody even in the 
worst famine was ever driven 
by want to the extremity of 
eating these creatures (Lv 
11:14).* And in regard to the 
command that children of 
eight days old who are uncir- 
cumcised “shall be destroyed 
from among their people” 
(cf. Gn 17:14 [LXX]) if the 
law relating to these children 
were really meant to be car- 
ried out according to the let- 
ter, the proper course would 


be to order the death of their 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 
Latin 
very many other passages like 
this, from which he may learn 
that among those narratives 
which appear to be recorded 
literally there are inserted 
and interwoven others which 
cannot be accepted as history 
but which contain a spiritual 
meaning. 

2. Moreover in the pas- 
sages containing the laws sim- 
ilar things are found. In the 
Mosaic law it is ordered that 
“every male who has not been 
circumcised on the eighth 
day is to be destroyed” (cf. 
Gn 17:14 [LXX]); which is 
most illogical, since if the law 
were meant to be carried out 
according to the letter, the 
proper course would certainly 
be to order the punishment 
of the parents who had not 
circumcised their children, or 
else of those who were bring- 
ing up the little ones. But as it 
is the scripture says: “A male 
that is uncircumcised,” that 
is, “who shall not be circum- 
cised on the eighth day, shall 
be destroyed from among his 
people” (ibid.). 


Book IV, Chapter III 


Greek 


fathers or those by whom 
they were being brought up. 
But as it is the Scripture says: 
“Every male that is uncir- 
cumcised, who shall not be 
circumcised on the eighth 
day, shall be destroyed from 
among his people” (ibid.). 
And if you would like to 
see some impossibilities that 
are enacted in the law, let us 
observe that the goat-stag,” 
which Moses commands us 
to offer in sacrifice as a clean 
animal, is a creature that 
cannot possibly exist; while 
as to the griffin,® which the 
lawgiver forbids to be eaten, 
there is no record that it has 
ever fallen into the hands 
of man. Moreover in regard 
to the celebrated sabbath, a 
careful reader will see that 
the command, “Ye shall sit 
each one in your dwellings; 
let none of you go out from 
his place on the sabbath day” 
(Ex 16:29), is an impossible 


. one to observe literally, for 


no living creature could sit 
for a whole day and not move 
from his seat. 


387 


Latin 


And if we are to look for 
laws that are impossible, we 
find mention made of an 
animal called the goat-stag,” 
which cannot possibly exist, 
but which Moses allows to 
be eaten among the clean 
animals; while as to the grif- 
fin,® which the lawgiver for- 
bids to be eaten, there is no 
record or knowledge that it 
has ever fallen into the hands 
of man. Moreover in regard 
to the celebrated observance 
of the sabbath he speaks 
thus: “Ye shall sit each one in 
your dwellings; no one shall 
move from his place on the 
sabbath day” (Ex 16:29). It is 
certainly impossible for this 
to be observed literally; for no 
man can sit for a whole day 
so as never to move from the 
place where he is sitting. 


388 


Greek 


Consequently the mem- 
bers of the circumcision and 
all those who maintain that 
nothing more than the actual 
wording is signified make no 
inquiry whatever into some 
matters, such as the goat- 
stag, the griffin and the vul- 
ture, while on others they 
babble copiously, bringing 
forward lifeless traditions, 
as for instance when they 
say, in reference to the sab- 
bath, that each man’s “place” 
is two thousand cubits (cf. 
Nm 35:5). Others, however, 
among whom is Dositheus 
the Samaritan,’ condemn 
such an interpretation, and 
believe that in whatever 
position a man is found on 
the Sabbath day he should 


remain there until evening. 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 
Latin 
In dealing with these 
various points the members 
of the circumcision and all 
those who maintain that in 
the holy scriptures nothing 
is to be understood beyond 
the meaning of the letter, 
think that no inquiry need 
be made concerning the 
goat-stag, the griffin and the 
vulture; but in regard to the 
sabbath they produce certain 
vain and trifling fables drawn 
from some traditional source 
or other, and allege that each 
man’s “place” is reckoned as 
extending to two thousand 
cubits (cf. Nm 35:5). Oth- 
ers, however, among whom 
is Dositheus the Samaritan,’ 
condemn interpretations of 
this kind, and yet themselves 
maintain something still more 
ridiculous, namely, that in 
whatever posture or place or 
position a man is found on 
the sabbath day he should 
remain there until evening; 
that is, if sitting, he should sit 
all the day, or if lying down, 
he should lie down all the day. 


Book IV, Chapter III 


Greek 


Further, the command 
“not to carry a burden on the 


sabbath day” (cf. Jer 17:21) 


_ is impossible; and on this 


account the teachers of the 
Jews have indulged in end- 
less chatter, asserting that 
one kind of shoe is a burden, 
but another is not, and that a 
sandal with nails is a burden, 
but one without nails is not, 
and that what is carried on 
one shoulder is a burden, but 


not what is carried on both. 


3. If now we approach 
the gospel in search of similar 
instances, what can be more 
irrational than the command: 
“Salute no man by the way” 
(cf. Lk 10:4), which simple 
people believe that the Savior 
enjoined upon the apostles? 
Again, to speak of the right 
cheek being struck (cf. Mt 
5:39) is most incredible, for 
every striker, unless he suffers 
from some unnatural defect, 
strikes the left cheek with his 


389 


Latin 

Further, the command 
“not to carry a burden on the 
sabbath day” (cf. Jer 17:21) 
seems to me to be an impos- 
sible one. For in consequence 
of these words the teachers 
of the Jews have become 
involved in “endless fables” 
(cf. 1 Tm 1:4) as the holy 
apostle says, asserting that it 
is not reckoned as a burden 
if a man wears shoes without 
nails, but that it is a burden if 
he wears galoshes with nails, 
and deeming it a burden if 
a man carries something on 
one shoulder, but not a bur- 
den if he carries it on both. 

3. If now we seek for 
similar instances from the 
gospels, how can it seem any- 
thing but absurd to interpret 
literally the saying: “Salute 
no man by the way” (cf. Lk 
10:4)? This, however, is what 
simple people, suppose that 
our Savior enjoined upon the 
apostles. Further, how would 
it be possible, especially in 
those. countries where the 
bitterness of winter is accen- 
tuated by icy frosts, to observe 


390 


Greek 


right hand. And it is impossi- 
ble to accept the precept from 
the gospel about the “right 
eye that offends”; for grant- 
ing the possibility of a person 
being “offended” through his 
sense of sight, how can the 
blame be attributed to the 
right eye, when there are two 
eyes that see? And what man, 
even supposing he accuses 
himself of “looking on a 
woman to lust after her” and 
attributes the blame to his 
right eye alone, would act 
rationally if he were to cast 
this eye away? (cf. Mr 5:28, 
29; 18:9). 


Further, the apostle lays 
down this precept: “Was any 
called being circumcised? 
Let him not become uncir- 
cumcised” (1 Cor 7:18). 
Now in the first place any- 
one who wishes can see that 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 
Latin 
the precept that a man should 
NOt possess two coats, nor 
any shoes? (cf. Mr 10:10). 
Again, what shall we say of 
the command that if anyone 
strikes us on the right cheek 
we are to offer him the left 
one also (cf. Mt 5:39), seeing 
that a man who strikes with 
the right hand will strike the 
left cheek? As for the saying 
in the gospel; “If thy right eye 
offend thee, let it be plucked 
out,” this must be reckoned 
among the impossibilities for 
even if we grant that it refers 
to eyes of flesh, how can it be 
logical, when both eyes see, 
to attribute the blame of the 
offence to one only, and that 
the right one? (cf. Mr 5:28, 
29; 18:9). Or who would be 
accounted innocent of a most 
serious crime, if he were to 
lay hands on himself? 

But perhaps the letters of 
Paul the apostle will appear 
to be free from these difficul- 
ties. Yet what is the meaning 
of his saying: “Was any called 
being circumcised? Let him 
not become uncircumcised” 


Book IV, Chapter III 


Greek 


these words have no relation 
to the subject in hand; and 
how can we help thinking 
that they have been inserted 
at random, when we remem- 
ber that the apostle is here 
laying down precepts about 
marriage and purity? In the 
second place who will main- 
tain that it is wrong for a man 
to put himself into a condi- 
tion of uncircumcision, if 
that were possible, in view 
of the disgrace which is felt 
by most people to attach to 
circumcision? 


4. We have mentioned 
all these instances with the 
object of showing that the 
aim of the divine power 
which bestowed on us the 
holy scriptures is not that we 
should accept only what is 
found in the letter; for occa- 
sionally the records taken in a 


literal sense are not true, but 


actually absurd and impossi- 


_ble, and even with the history 


that actually happened and 


391 


Latin 
(1 Cor 7:18). Now in the 
first place, if you consider 
the saying carefully, it does 
not appear to be related to 
the subject which the apostle 
had in hand; for he was laying 
down precepts about mar- 
riage and purity, and on such 
a subject the words in ques- 
tion would certainly seem to 
be a superfluous addition. 
In the second place, what 
objection could there be if, 
in order to avoid the disgrace 
which comes from being cir- 
cumcised, a man were able to 
become uncircumcised? In 
the third place, it is certain 
that this is utterly impossible. 
4. We have mentioned all 
these instances with the object 
of showing that the aim of the 
Holy Spirit, who deigned to 
bestow on us the divine scrip- 
tures, is not that we may be 
edified by the letter alone or 
in every case by it at all; for 
we recognize that the letter is 
often impossible and incon- 
sistent with itself, that is, 
that things not only irratio- 
nal but even impossible are 


392 


Greek 


the legislation that is in its 
literal sense useful there are 
other matters interwoven. 


But someone may sup- 
pose that the former statement 
refers to all the scriptures, and 
may suspect us of saying that 
because some of the history 
did not happen, therefore 
none of it happened; and 
because a certain law is irra- 
tional or impossible when 
taken literally, therefore no 
laws ought to be kept to the 
letter; or that the records of 
the Savior’s life are not true 
in a physical sense; or that 
no law or commandment of 
his ought to be obeyed. We 
must assert, therefore, that in 
regard to some things we are 
clearly aware that the histor- 

“ical fact is true; as that Abra- 
ham was buried in the double 
cave at Hebron, together with 
Isaac and Jacob and one wife 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

occasionally described by it; 
but that we are to realize that 
with this external story are 
interwoven certain other mat- 
ters which, when considered 
and comprehended in their 
inward meaning, provide us 
with a law which is useful to 
men and worthy of God. 

But someone may suspect 
us of saying this, that because 
we suppose that some of the 
scriptural history did not 
happen, we do not believe 
that any of it happened; or 
that because we maintain 
that some precepts of the 
law cannot be kept accord- 
ing to the letter, those, that 
is in regard to which either 
reason or the possibility of 
the case do not admit of a 
literal observance, therefore 
no precepts of the law are 
valid according to the letter; 
or that we do not believe that 
the events of our Savior's life 
occurred in a physical sense; 
or that his precepts ought 
not to be obeyed literally. We 
must reply, therefore, that it 
is perfectly obvious to us that 


Book IV, Chapter III 


Greek 


of each of them (cf. Gn 23:2, 
9, 19; 25:9, 10; 49:29-32; 
50:13); and that Shechem 
was given as a portion to 
Joseph (cf. Gn 48:22; Jos 
24:32); and that Jerusalem 
is the chief city of Judaea, in 
which a temple of God was 
built by Solomon; and thou- 
sands of other facts. 


And again, who would 
deny that the command 
which says: “Honor thy father 
and thy mother, that it may 
be well with thee” (Ex 20:12) 
is useful quite apart from any 
spiritual interpretation, and 
that it ought certainly to be 
observed, especially when 
we remember that the apos- 
tle Paul has quoted it in the 


393 


Latin 
in most instances the truth 
of the historical record can 
and ought to be preserved. 
For who can deny that Abra- 
ham was buried in the double 
cave at Hebron, together with 
Isaac and Jacob and one wife 
of each of them? (cf. Gn 23:2, 
9, 19; 25:9, 10; 49:29-32; 
50:13). Or who doubts that 
Shechem was given as a por- 
tion to Joseph? (cf. Gn 48:22; 
Jos 24:32). Or that Jerusalem 
is the chief city of Judaea, in 
which a temple of God was 
built by Solomon; and count- 
less other facts? For the pas- 
sages which are historically 
true are far more numerous 
than those which contain a 
purely spiritual meaning. 
Then again, who would 
deny that the command 
which says: “Honor thy 
father and mother that it may 
be well with thee” (Ex 20:12), 
is sufficient of itself apart 
from any spiritual interpreta- 
tion and that its observance 
is binding on us, especially 
when we remember that Paul 
has confirmed the command 


394 


Greek 


self-same words? (cf. Eph 6:2, 
3). And what are we to say 
of the following: “Thou shalt 
not kill; chou shalt not com- 
mit adultery; thou shalt not 
steal; thou shall not bear false 
witness” (Ex 20:13—16)? 


Once again, in the gos- 
pel there are command- 
ments written which need 
no inquiry whether they are 
to be kept literally or not, as 
that which says, “I say unto 
you, whosoever is angry with 
his brother” (Mt 5:22)' and 
what follows; and, “I say unto 
you, swear not at all” (Mt 
5:34). Here, too, is an injunc- 
tion of the apostle of which 
the literal meaning must be 
retained: “Admonish the dis- 
orderly, encourage the faint- 
hearted, support the weak, 
be longsuffering toward all” 
(1 Thes 5:14); though in the 
case of the more earnest read- 
ers it is possible to preserve 
each of the meanings, that 
is, while not setting aside the 
commandment in its literal 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 
Latin 
by quoting it in the self-same 
words? (cf. Eph 6:2, 3). And 
what are we to say of the pas- 
sage: “Thou shalt not commit 
adultery; thou shalt not kill; 
thou shalt not steal, thou 
shalt not bear false witness” 
(Ex 20:13—16), and others of 
this kind? 

Then in regard to the 
commandments given in the 
gospel, there can be no doubt 
that very many of these are to 
be kept according to the let- 
ter; as when it says... “But 
I say unto you, swear not 
at all” (Mt 5:34); and also, 
“But whosoever looketh on a 
woman to lust after her hath 
committed adultery with her 
already in his heart” (cf. Mt 
5:28);? and the injunctions 
given by the apostle Paul: 
“Admonish the disorderly, 
encourage the faint-hearted, 
support the weak, be long- 
suffering toward all” (1 Thes 
5:14); and very many others. 


Book IV, Chapter III 


Greek 


sense, to preserve the “depths 
of the wisdom of God” (cf. 
Rom 11:33; 1 Cor 2:10). 

5. Nevertheless the exact 
reader will hesitate in regard 
to some passages, finding 
himself unable to decide 
without considerable inves- 
tigation whether a particu- 
lar incident, believed to be 
history, actually happened 
or not, and whether the lit- 
eral meaning of a particular 
law is to be observed or not. 
Accordingly he who reads 
in an exact manner must, 
in obedience to the Savior's 
precept which says, “Search 
the scriptures” (Jn 5:39)" 
carefully investigate how far 
the literal meaning is true and 
how far it is impossible, and 
to the utmost of his power 
must trace out from the use 
of similar expressions the 
meaning scattered everywhere 
through the scriptures of that 
which when taken literally is 
impossible. 

When, therefore, as will 
be clear to those who read, the 


passage as a connected whole 


395 


Latin 


5. Nevertheless I have no 
doubt that the careful reader 
will be uncertain in very 
many cases whether this or 
that story is to be regarded as 
literally true, or true in a less 
degree, and whether this or 
that precept is to be literally 
observed or not. 

Much effort and toil 
must therefore be exercised, 
so that each reader may in all 
reverence become aware that 
he is dealing with words that 
are divine and not human, 
inserted in the holy books. As 
for us, therefore, the method 
of interpretation which we 
think ought rightly and logi- 
cally to be employed in deal- 
ing with the holy scriptures is 
as follows. 


396 


Greek 


is literally impossible, whereas 
the outstanding part of it is 
not impossible but even true, 
the reader must endeavor to 
grasp the entire meaning, 
connecting by an intellectual 
process the account of what 
is literally impossible with 
the parts that are not impos- 
sible but are historically true, 
these being interpreted alle- 
gorically in common with 
the parts which, so far as the 
letter goes, did not happen 
at all. For our contention 
with regard to the whole of 
divine scripture is, that it all 
has a spiritual meaning, but 
not all a bodily meaning; for 
the bodily meaning is often 
proved to be an impossibility. 
Consequently the man who 
reads the divine books rev- 
erently, believing them to be 
divine writings, must exercise 


_ great care. And the method of 


understanding them appears 
to us to be as follows. 

6. The accounts tell us 
that God chose out a cer- 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 


6. The divine writings 
declare that a certain nation 


tain nation on the earth, and | on the earth was chosen by 


they call this nation by many | God, and they call this nation 


Book IV, Chapter III 


Greek 


names. For the nation as a 
whole is called Israel, and it 
is also spoken of as Jacob. 
But when it was divided in 
the days of Jeroboam the son 
of Nebat (cf. 1 Kgs 12:2ff.), 
the ten tribes said to have 
been subject to him were 
named Israel, and the other 
two together with the tribe of 
Levi, which were ruled over 
by men of the seed of David, 
were called Judah. The entire 
country which was inhabited 
by men of this race and which 
had been given them by God, 
is called Judaea, the metrop- 
olis of which is Jerusalem, 
this being the mother city 
of a number of others whose 
names lie scattered about in 
many different places of scrip- 
ture but are gathered together 
into one list in the book of 
Joshua the son of Nun (cf. Jos 
13-21). 


This being so, the apostle, 
raising our spiritual appre- 
hension to a high level, says 


397 
Latin 
by many names. Sometimes 
the nation as a whole is called 
Israel, sometimes Jacob; 
and in particular, when the 
nation was divided into two 
parts by Jeroboam the son 
of Nebat (cf. 1 Kgs 12:2ff.), 
the ten tribes which became 
subject to him were called 
Israel, and the other two, with 
which was included the tribe 
of Levi and the tribe which 
sprang from the royal family 
of David, were named Judah. 
The entire country inhab- 
ited by this race, which had 
been given them by God, was 
called Judaea, the metropolis 
of which was Jerusalem, called 
the metropolis or mother city 
as being a kind of mother 
of many cities. The names 
of these cities you will find 
frequently mentioned here 
and there in the other divine 
books, but they are gathered 
together into a single group in 
the book of Joshua the son of 
Nun (cf. Jos 13-21). 
This being so, the holy 
apostle, desiring as it were 
to raise up and exalt our 


398 


Greek 


somewhere: “Behold Israel 
after the flesh” (1 Cor 10:18), 
inferring that there is an Israel 
after the spirit. He says also in 
another place: “For it is not 
the children of the flesh that 
are children of God” (Rom 
9:8),'' nor are “all they Israel, 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

understanding above the 
earth, says in a certain place: 
“Behold Israel after the flesh” 
(1 Cor 10:18). In saying this 
he certainly indicates that 
there is also another Israel, 
which is not “after the flesh” 
but after the spirit. And again 


who are of Israel” (Rom 9:6). | he says in another place: “For 
they are not all Israel, who are 
of Israel” (Rom 9:6). 

Greek « 


And” again: “Neither is he a Jew, who is one outwardly, 
nor is that circumcision, which is outward in the flesh; but 
he is a Jew, who is one inwardly, and circumcision is of the 
heart, in the spirit, not in the letter” (Rom 2:28, 29). For if 
we take the phrase “a Jew inwardly” as a test, we shall realize 
that as there is a race of bodily Jews, so, too, there is a race of 
those who are “Jews inwardly,” the soul having acquired this 
nobility of race in virtue of certain unspeakable words.'> More- 
over there are many prophecies spoken of Israel and Judah, 
which relate what is going to happen to them. And when 
we think of the extraordinary promises recorded about these 
people, promises that so far as literary style goes are poor and 
distinguished by no elevation or character that is worthy of 
a promise of God, is it not clear that they demand a mystical 
interpretation? Well, then, if the promises are of a spiritual 
kind though announced through material imagery, the people 
to whom the promises belong are not the bodily Israelites. 


Book IV, Chapter III 399 


Greek 


7. But we must not spend time discussing who is a “Jew 
inwardly” and who an Israelite “in the inner man,” since the 
above remarks are sufficient for all who are not dull-witted. 
We will return to the subject before us and say that Jacob was 
the father of the twelve patriarchs, and they of the rulers of 
the people, and they in their turn of the Israelites who came 
after.'* Is it not the case, then, that the bodily Israelites carry 
back their descent to the rulers of the people, the rulers of 
the people to the patriarchs, and the patriarchs to Jacob and 
those still more ancient; whereas are not the spiritual Israelites, 
of whom the bodily ones were a type, descended from the 
clans, and the clans from the tribes, and the tribes from one 
whose birth was not bodily, like that of the others, but of a 
higher kind (i.e., as in Gn 25:21—23); and was not he born of 
Isaac, and Isaac descended from Abraham, while all go back 
to Adam, who the apostle says is Christ? (cf. 1 Cor 15:45). 
For the origin of all families that are in touch with the God of 
the whole world began lower down with Christ, who comes 
next after the God and Father of the whole world (cf. Lk 3:38) 
and is thus the father of every soul, as Adam is the father of 
all men. And if Eve is interpreted by Paul as referring to the 
Church (cf. Eph 5:31-32), it is not surprising (seeing that 
Cain was born of Eve and all that come after him carry back 
their descent to Eve) that these two should be figures of the 
Church; for in the higher sense all men take their beginning 
from the Church. 


400 


Greek 


8. Now if what we have 
stated about Israel, its tribes 
and its clans, is convincing, 
then when the Savior says, “I 
was not sent but unto the lost 
sheep of the house of Israel” 
(Mt 15:24), we do not take 


these words in the same sense 


as the poor-minded Ebionites: 


do (men whose very name 
comes from the poverty of 
their mind, for in Hebrew 
ebion is the word for poor),'° 
so as to suppose that Christ 
came especially to the Israel- 
ites after the flesh. For “it is 
not the children of the flesh 
that are children of God” 
(Rom 9:8).'° 


Again, the apostle gives 
us the following instances 
of teaching about Jerusa- 
lem: “The Jerusalem which 
is above is free, which is our 
mother” (Gal 4:26); and in 
another epistle: “But ye are 
come to Mount Sion and to 
the city of the living God, 
the heavenly Jerusalem, and 


to an innumerable company 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

8. Now’? that we have 
learned from him, therefore, 
that there is one Israel accord- 
ing to the flesh and another 
according to the spirit, then 
when the Savior says, “I am 
not sent but unto the lost 
sheep of the house of Israel” 
(Mt 15:24), we do not take 
these words in the same sense 
as do they who “mind earthly 
things,” that is, the Ebionites, 
who even by their very name 
are called poor (for in Hebrew 
the word ebion means poor),'” 
but we understand that it is a 
race of souls which is called 
Israel, as the meaning of the 
word itself indicates; for Israel 
means “the mind seeing God” 
or “man seeing God.”” 

Again, the apostle gives 
us revelations such as this 
concerning Jerusalem, that 
“Jerusalem which is above is 
free, which is our mother” 
(Gal 4:26). And in another 
epistle of his he says: “But 
ye are come to Mount Sion 
and to the city of the living 
God, the heavenly Jerusalem, 


and to a multitude of praising 


Book IV, Chapter III 


Greek 


of angels, to the general 
assembly and church of the 
firstborn who are written in 
heaven” (Heb 12:22, 23). 

If therefore Israel consists 
of a race of souls, and Jeru- 
salem is a city in heaven, it 
follows that the cities of Israel 
have for their mother city the 
Jerusalem in the heavens; and 
so consequently does Judaea 
as a whole.'” 


In all prophecies concern- 
ing Jerusalem, t therefore, and 
in all statements made about 
it, we must understand, if 
we listen to Paul’s words'*® 


as the words of God and the 


401 


Latin 
angels, and to the church of 


the firstborn which is written 
in heaven” (Heb 12:22, 23). 


If then there are in this 
world certain souls who 
are called Israel, and a city 
in heaven which is named 
Jerusalem, it follows that 
those cities which are said to 
belong to the Israelite nation 
have for their mother city the 
heavenly Jerusalem, and that 
we are to understand in this 
way all references to Judaea as 
a whole. For we believe that 
the prophets were speaking 
about this heavenly country 
by means of mystical narra- 
tives whenever they uttered 
prophecies concerning Judaea 
or Jerusalem, or whenever the 
sacred records declare that 
this or that kind of invasion 
had happened to Judaea or 
Jerusalem. 

All statements or proph- 
ecies, therefore, which are 
made concerning Jerusalem 
we must understand, if we 
listen to the words of Paul 
as being those of Christ 


402 


Greek 


utterances of wisdom, that 
the scriptures are telling us 
about the heavenly city and 
the whole region which con- 
tains the cities of the holy 
land. Perhaps it is to these 
cities that the Savior lifts 
our attention when he gives 
to those who have deserved 
praise for the good use of 
their talents authority over 
ten or over five cities (cf. Lk 
19:17-19). 


9. If therefore the proph- 
ecies relating to Judaea, to 
Jerusalem, and to Israel, 
Judah and Jacob suggest to 
us, because we do not inter- 
pret them in a fleshly sense, 
mysteries such as these, it will 
follow also that the prophe- 
cies which relate to Egypt and 
the Egyptians, to Babylon 
and the Babylonians, to Tyre 
and the Tyrians, to Sidon and 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 
Latin 
speaking in him (cf. 2 Cor 
13:3), to refer in the thought 
of Paul himself to that coun- 
try which he calls the heav- 
enly Jerusalem, and to all 
those regions or cities which 
are said to belong to the 
holy land, the mother city of 
which is Jerusalem. Moreover 
we must suppose that these 
are the cities from among 
which the Savior, desiring to 
raise us to a higher level of 
understanding, promises to 
those who have made good 
use of the money committed 
to them by him, that they 
shall have authority “over ten 
cities,” or “over five” (cf. Lk 
19:17-19). 

9. If therefore the proph- 
ecies relating to Judaea and 
Jerusalem, and to Israel, 
Judah and Jacob indicate to 
us, because we do not inter- 
pret them in a fleshly sense, 
various divine mysteries, it 
certainly follows that those 
prophecies which were 
uttered concerning Egypt 
and the Egyptians, or Bab- 
ylon and the Babylonians, 


Book IV, Chapter III 


Greek 


the Sidonians, or to any of the 
other nations, are not spoken 
solely of the bodily Egyp- 
tians, Babylonians, Tyrians 
and Sidonians (cf. Ez 29ff.). 
If the Israelites are spiritual, 
it follows that the Egyptians 
and Babylonians are also 
spiritual. For the statements 
made in Ezekiel about Pha- 
raoh king of Egypt entirely 
fail to apply to any particular 
man who was or will be ruler 
of Egypt, as will be clear to 
those who study the passage 
carefully (cf. Ez 29:19). 
Similarly the statements 
concerning the ruler of Tyre 
cannot be understood of any 
particular man who is to rule 
over Tyre (cf. Ez 28). And as 
for the numerous statements 
made about Nebuchadnezzar 
(cf. Is 14:3—23), especially in 
Isaiah, how it is possible to 
interpret them of that par- 
ticular man? For the man 
Nebuchadnezzar neither “fell 
from heaven,” nor was he the 
“morning star,” nor did he 
“rise in the morning” over the 


earth (cf. Is 14:12). 


403 


Latin 

or Sidon and the Sidonians, 
must not be understood to 
refer to the Egypt which is 
situated on the earth, or to 
the earthly Babylon or Tyre 
or Sidon (cf. Ez 29ff.). Nor 
can the prophecies which 
the prophet Ezekiel utters 
concerning Pharaoh king of 
Egypt apply to any particular 
man who may have reigned 
in Egypt, as the context of the 
passage clearly shows (cf. Ez 
29:1-9). 


Similarly the statements 
concerning the prince of 
Tyre cannot be understood 
as being made in respect of 
any man who was an actual 
king of Tyre (cf. Ez 28); and 
further, in regard to the state- 
ments made about Nebu- 
chadnezzar (cf. Is 14:3—23), 
which are found in many 
places of scripture and espe- 
cially in Isaiah, how is it pos- 
sible for us to accept them as 
spoken of a man? For he is 
no man, who is said to have 
“fallen from heaven,” or to be 


404 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 
Latin 

Let us see,” however, whether the above passages may 
not be more worthily interpreted as follows. Just as there is a 
heavenly Jerusalem and Judaea, and no doubt a people dwell- 
ing therein who are called Israel, so it is possible that near to 
these there exist certain other places, which apparently are 
called Egypt or Babylon, or Tyre or Sidon; and the princes of 
these Places and the souls, if there are any, who dwell in them, 
may be called Egyptians, Babylonians, Tyrians and Sidonians. 
From among these souls, in accordance with the manner of 
life which they lead there, a kind of captivity would seem to 
have taken place. As a result of which they are said to have 
gone down from higher and better places into Egypt, or to 


have been scattered among other nations. 


Greek 


Nor indeed will any man 
of intelligence interpret the 
statements made in Ezekiel 
concerning Egypt, that it shall 
be “laid waste forty years” so 
that “no foot of man” shall be 
found there, and that it shall 
one day be so overwhelmed 
with war, throughout the 
whole land shall be blood up 
to the knees, as referring to 
the Egypt which lies next to 
the Ethiopians whose bodies 
are blackened by the sun (cf. 


Latin 

the “morning star,” or to have 
“risen in the morning” (cf. Is 
14:12). 

Moreover, as for the 
statements which are made 
in Ezekiel concerning Egypt, 
that it shall be “laid waste 
forty years” so that “no 
foot of man” shall be found 
there, and that it shall be so 
overwhelmed with war that 
throughout the land human 
blood shall flow to a height 
up to the knees, I do not 
know how any man of intel- 
ligence could interpret these 
as referring to that earthly 


Book IV, Chapter III 


Greek 


Ez 29:11-12; 30:7, 10-12; 
32:5-6, 12-13, 15). 


10. And perhaps,” just 
as people on earth when 
they die the common death 
of all, are in consequence of 
the deeds done here so dis- 
tributed as to obtain differ- 
ent positions according to 
the proportion of their sins, 
if they are judged to be wor- 
thy of the place called Hades; 
so the people there, when 
they die, if I may so speak, 
descend into this Hades, and 
are judged worthy of different 
habitations, better or worse, 
‘in the whole of this region of 


405 
Latin 
Egypt which lies next to Ethi- 
opia (cf. Ez 29:11—12; 30:7, 
10—12; 32:5-6, 12-13, 15). 


10. For perhaps,” just 
as those who depart from 


‘this world by the common 


death of all, are distributed 
according to their deeds and 
merits, as a result of the judg- 
ment, some going to a-place 
which is called the “lower 
world”? others to “Abra- 
ham’'s bosom” (cf. Lk 16:22) 
and to the various position 
and dwelling-places™ in it; so 
the inhabitants of the regions 
above, when they die here, if 
one may so speak, descend 
from those upper places to 
this lowerworld. 

For the other lower 
world, to which are conveyed 
the souls of those who die on 
earth, is called by scripture, I 
believe on account of this dis- 
tinction, “the lower Hades,” 
as it says in the Psalms, “And 
thou hast delivered my soul 
from the lower Hades” (cf. 
Ps 86:13).” Each of those, 
therefore, who descend into 
the earth, is destined in 


406 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Latin 

It would appear to follow” from this that the prophe- 
cies which are uttered concerning the various nations ought 
rather to be referred to souls and the different heavenly 
dwelling-places occupied by them.” Moreover in regard to 
the records of events that are said to have happened to the 
nation of Israel, or to Jerusalem or Judaea, when they were 
assailed by this people or that, there is need of careful inquiry 
and examination, seeing that in very many cases the events did 
not happen in a physical sense, to discover in what way these 
events are more suitably ascribed to those nations of souls who 
~ once dwelt in that heaven which is said to “pass away” (cf. Mt 
24:35) or who may be supposed to dwell there even now. 7°” 

11. If, however, anyone should demand of us clear and 
manifest declarations on these matters out of the holy scrip- 
tures, we must reply that it was the method of the Holy Spirit 
rather to conceal these truths and to hide them deeply under- 
neath narratives which appear to be records of actual events, 
narratives in which people are said to go down into Egypt or to 
be led captive to Babylon, where some were greatly humiliated 
and put under bondage to masters, while others in the very 
places of their captivity were regarded as famous and illustri- 
ous, so that they held positions of power and leadership and 
were set to rule over nations. 


Greek Latin 
accordance with his merits 
or with the position which he 
... and of being born of | had held above to be born in 


such or such parents, so that 
an Israelite will occasionally 
fall among Scythians and 
an Egyptian descend into 


a particular place or nation, 
or in a particular walk of 
life, or with particular infir- 
mities, or to be the offspring 


Book IV, Chapter III 


Greek 


Judaea. Nevertheless the Sav- 
ior came to gather together 
the “lost sheep of the house 
of Israel” (cf. Mt 15:24), and 
since many from Israel have 
not submitted to his teach- 
ing, those from the Gentiles 
are also called... . 


11. But these truths, as we 
think, have been concealed in 
the narratives. For “the king- 
dom of heaven is like unto a 
treasure hid in a field, which 
when a man findeth he hideth 
it, and for joy thereof goeth 
and selleth all that he hath, 
and buyeth that field” (cf. Mt 
13:44). Now let us consider 
whether the outward aspect 
of scripture and its obvious 
and surface meaning does 
not correspond to the field 
as a whole, full of all kinds of 
plants, whereas the truths that 
are stored away in it and not 
seen by all, but lie as if buried 


407 


Latin 

of religious parents or the 
reverse, so that it happens 
occasionally that an Israelite 
falls among the Scythians, 
and a poor Egyptian is con- 
veyed to Judaea. Nevertheless 
our Savior came to gather 
together the “lost sheep of 
the house of Israel” (cf. Mt 
15:24), and since most of the 
Israelites have not submitted 
to his teaching, those who 
belonged to the Gentiles have 
been called. 

All these truths, as we have 
said, lie hidden and concealed, 
covered up in the narratives of 
holy scripture; because “the 
kingdom of heaven is like 
unto a treasure hid in a field, 
which when a man findeth he 
hideth it, and for joy thereof 
goeth and selleth all that he 
hath, and buyeth that field” 
(cf. Mt 13:44). Now con- 
sider carefully whether there 
is not here an indication that 
the actual soil and surface, 
so to speak, of scripture, that 
is, the literal meaning, is the 
field, abundantly filled with 
all kinds of plants, whereas 


408 


Greek 


beneath the visible plants, are 
the hidden “treasures of wis- 
dom and knowledge” (cf. Col 
2:3), which the Spirit speak- 
ing through Isaiah calls “dark 
and unseen and concealed” 
(cf. Is 45:3). 

These treasures require 
for their discovery the help 
of God, who alone is able to 
“break in pieces the gates of 
brass” (cf. Is 45:2) that con- 
ceal them and to burst the 
iron bars that are upon the 
gates, and so to make known 
all the truths taught in Gen- 
esis concerning the various 
legitimate races and as it were 
seeds of souls, whether closely 
akin to Israel or far apart from 
him, and the descent of the 
“seventy souls” into Egypt, 
in order that they may there 
become “as the stars of the 
heaven in multitude.”” But 
since not all who are sprung 
from these are a “light of the 
world” (cf. Mt 5:14), for 
“they are not all Israel, who 
are of Israel” (Rom 9:6), there 
come from the seventy a peo- 
ple “even as the sand which is 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 
Latin 
the higher and profounder 
spiritual meaning is the “hid- 
den treasures of wisdom and 
knowledge” (cf. Col 2:3), 
which the Holy Spirit speak- 
ing through Isaiah, calls “dark 
and unseen and concealed 
treasures” (cf. Is 45:3). 

These treasures require 
for their discovery the help 
of God, who alone is able 
to “break in pieces the gates 
of brass” (cf. Is 45:2) By 
which they are shut in and 
concealed, and to burst the 
iron, bolts and bars which 
prevent us from entering in 
and reaching all those truths 
written in veiled language 
in Genesis concerning the 
various races of souls and 
the seeds and generations 
named there, whether closely 
akin to Israel or widely sep- 
arated from his posterity; as 
well as the meaning of the 
descent of the seventy souls 
into Egypt, that these sev- 
enty may become in Egypt 
“as the stars of the heaven in 
multitude.”” But since not 
all who are sprung from these 


Book IV, Chapter III 


Greek 


by the sea shore innumerable” 


(Heb 11:12; Gn 32:12). 


409 


Latin 
are a “light of this world” (cf. 
Mt 5:14), for “they are not 


all Israel, who are of Israel” 

(Rom 9:6), there come from 

these seventy souls people 

even “as the sand which is by 

wee 40% the sea shore innumerable” 
| (Heb 11:12; Gn 32:12). 


Latin 
12. This Kon of the holy fathers into Egypt, that is, 


into this world, will be seen to have been granted by the provi- 


dence of God for the enlightenment of the rest of men and for 
the instruction of the human race, that through them all other 


souls might be enlightened and succored. “For to them first 


were entrusted the oracles of God” (Rom 3:2), it being this 
people alone which is said to “see God”; for the name Israel 
when translated has this meaning." It follows at once that we 
must adapt and interpret in the light of these principles the 
statement that Egypt was scourged with ten plagues to allow 
God's people to depart (cf. Ex 7:14-12:36), or the account 
of what happened to the people in the desert (cf. Ex 19ff.), 
or of the construction of the tabernacle by means of contri- 
butions from all the people (cf. Ex 25ff.), or of the weaving 
of the priestly garments (cf. Ex 28), or the description of the 
vessels of the ministry (cf. Ex 30:17f£.); because, as it is writ- 
ten, these things truly contain within them a “shadow” and 
form of the “heavenly things.” For Paul clearly says of them 
that they “serve a shadow and pattern of the heavenly things” 
(Heb 8:5). In the same law there is also contained an account 
of the particular laws and institutions under which men are 
to live in the holy land. Threats, too, are held over those who 


= 


410 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


shall transgress the law; and for those who stood in need of 
purification various kinds of purifications are given, adapted 
to men who were liable to frequent pollution (cf. Lv 12-15); 
the object being that by means of these they should arrive 
at last at that our purification, after which they must not be 
polluted any more (cf. Heb 9, 6:6). 

Moreover a reckoning is made of the number of this peo- 
ple, though not of all (cf Nm 1-4, 26). For the childlike souls 
have not yet lived long enough to be numbered in accordance 
with the divine command (cf. Nm 1:3 et al.); while those 
souls which cannot become the head of some other but are 
themselves subject to others as to a head, souls which the 
scripture terms “women,” these, too, are not reckoned in that 
numbering which is ordered by God (cf. Nm 1:2, 4, et al.; cp. 
1 Cor 11:3). Only those called men are numbered, in order 
to show that the former souls could not be numbered apart 
by themselves but that they are included in the number of 
those called men. 

Especially, however, there come to the holy number they 
who are ready to go forth to the wars of Israel, they who can 
fight against those enemies and adversaries whom the Father 
puts in subjection to the Son who sits on his right hand, 
in order that he may destroy every principality and power 
(cf. Eph 1:20, 22; 1 Cor 15:27, 24). By these numbers; of 
his soldiers, who because they are fighting for God do not 
entangle themselves in the affairs of this world (cf. 2 Tm 2:4), 
he intends to overthrow the kingdoms of the adversary.*? By 
these “the shields of faith” are borne and the “darts” of wisdom 
are hurled; on them gleams the helmet which is the hope of 
salvation, and the breast plate of charity guards their heart 
that is filled with God (cf. Eph 6:16; 1 Thes 5:8). Such are 
the soldiers who appear to me to be indicated in scripture, 
and such is the kind of warfare for which they are prepared 


Book IV, Chapter III 411 


who are ordered in the divine books to be numbered by God's 
command. 

But far more renowned and perfect than these are they, 
the very hairs of whose head are said to be numbered (cf. Mt 
10:30 and par.). Those, however who were punished for their 
sins, whose carcasses “fell in the wilderness,” appear to me to 
bear a resemblance to those who though they have made not a 
little progress, have yet been for various reasons quite unable to 
reach the goal of perfection because they are said either to have 
murmured, or to have worshipped idols, or to have committed 
fornication, or to have planned some wickedness such as it is 
wrong for the mind even to think of (cf. Nm 11, 14, 16, 21, 
25; Ex 32; and 1 Cor 10:5—10; Heb 3:17). 

Nor is the following fact, I believe, devoid of some mys- 
tical meaning, that certain of the people, who possess large 
flocks and much cattle, go and seize beforehand a region suit- 
able for pasturing their flocks, which was the first of all the 
places that the right hand of the Israelites secured by war. This 
region they beg Moses to grant them, and consequently they 
are placed apart beyond the streams of Jordan and cut off 
from the occupation of the holy land (cf. Nm 32). Now this 
Jordan would appear, when taken as a figure of the heavenly 
things, to water and flood the thirsty souls and minds that lie 
close beside it. 

And here this other fact will not appear to be without 
significance, that it is Moses who hears from God all that is 
written down in the law of Leviticus, whereas in Deuteronomy 

it is the people who are represented as listening to Moses and 
learning from him they could not hear from God (cf. Ly 1:1 
and throughout; Dt 1:1, 5:1). This indeed is why it is called 
Deuteronomy, meaning the second law; a fact which some 
will think points to this, that when the first law given through 


Moses came to an end (cf. Jn 1:17), a second legislation was 


412 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


apparently composed and this was specially delivered by Moses 
to his successor Joshua (cf. Dt 31); and Joshua is certainly 
believed to be a figure of our Savior, by whose second law, 
that is, by the precepts of the Gospels, all things are brought 
to perfection. 

13. We must also see, however, whether the scriptures 
may not perhaps indicate this further truth, that just as the 
legislation is presented with greater clearness and distinct- 
ness in Deuteronomy than in those books which were written 
at the first, so also we may gather from that coming of the 
Savior which he fulfilled in humility, when he “took upon 
him the form of a servant” (cf. Phil 2:7), an indication of the 
“more splendid and glorious second coming in the glory of his 
Father” (cf. Mt 16:27 and par.), at which coming, when in the 
es of heaven all the saints shall live by the laws of the 

“eternal gospel” (cf. Rv 14),® the figure of Deuteronomy will 
be fulfilled; and j just as by his present coming he has fulfilled 
that law which has-a “shadow of the good things to come” (cf. 
Heb 10:1), so also by that glorious coming the shadow of his 
first coming will be fulfilled and brought to perfection. For the 
prophet has spoken of it thus: “The breath of our countenance 
is Christ the Lord, of whom we said that under his shadow we 
shall live among the the nations” (Lam 4:20), that is, at the time 
when he shall duly transfer all the saints from the tem mporal 
to the eternal gospel, to use a phrase employed by John in the 
Anmealprena bare Se speaks of the “eternal gospel.”™ 

14. But in all these matters let it suffice us to conform 
our mind to the rule of piety and to think of the Holy Spirit's 
words not as a composition depending upon feeble human 
eloquence but in accordance with the sayings of scripture, “All 
the king’s glory is within” (Ps 45:13 [LXX]), and, “a treasure” 
of divine meanings lies hidden within the “frail vessel” of the 


poor letter (cf. 2 Cor 4:7). If, however, a reader is more\curious 


i) 


Re. 


2) 


Book IV, Chapter III 413 


and persists in asking for an explanation of every detail, let 
him come and hear along with us how the apostle Paul, scan- 
ning by the aid of the Holy Spirit, who “searches even the 
depths of God” (cf. 1 Cor 2:10), the “depth of the divine 
wisdom and knowledge” (cf. Rom 11:33), and yet not being 
able to reach the end and to attain, if I may say so, an inner- 
most knowledge, in his despair and amazement at the task 
cries out and says, “O the depth of the riches of the wisdom 
and knowledge of God!” (Rom 11:33). And in what despair 
of reaching a perfect understanding he uttered this cry, hear 
him tell us himself: “How unsearchable are his judgments and 
his ways past finding out!” (ibid.). He did not say that God's 
judgments were hard to search out, but that they could not 
be searched out at all; not that his ways were hard to find out, 
but that they were impossible to find out. For however far 
one may advance in the search and make progress through an 
increasingly earnest study, even when aided and enlightened 


in mind by God's grace, he will never be able to reach the final 


goal of his inquiries. 

For no created mind can by any means possess the capacity 
to understand all; but as soon as it has discovered a small frag- 
ment of what it is seeking, it again sees other things that must 
be sought for; and if in turn it comes to know these, it will 
again see arising out of them many more things that demand 
investigation. This is why Solomon, wisest of men, whose 
wisdom gave him a clear view of the nature of things, says: 
“T said, I will become wise; and wisdom herself was taken far 
from me, farther than she was before; and who shall find out 
her profound depth?” (Eccl 7:23, 24 [LXX 24, 25]). Moreover 
Isaiah, knowing that the beginnings of things could not be 
discovered by mortal nature, no, and not even by those natures 
which, though diviner than man’s nature, are yet themselves 
made and created, knowing, I say, that none of these could 


414 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


discover either the beginning or the end says; “Tell ye the 
former things, what they were, and we shall know that ye are 
gods; or declare the last things, what they are, and then shall 
_, We see that ye are gods” (Is 41:22, 23). 

~ My Hebrew teacher also used to teach as follows, that 
since the beginning or the end of all things could not be com- 
prehended by any except our Lord Jesus Christ and the Holy 
Spirit, this was the reason why Isaiah spoke of there being in 
the vision that appeared to him two seraphim only, who with 
two wings cover the face of God, with two cover his feet, and 
with two fly, crying one to another and saying, “Holy, holy, 
holy, is the Lord of hosts; the whole earth is full of thy glory” 
(cf. Is 6:2, 3).°° For because the two seraphim alone have their 
wings over the face of God and over his feet, we may venture 
to declare that neither the armies of the holy angels, nor the 
holy thrones, nor the dominions, nor principalities, nor pow- 
ers can wholly know the beginnings of all things and the ends 
; oft the universe. We must understand, however, that those holy 
spirits and powers who are here enumerated are nearest to the 
very beginnings of things and reach a point which the rest 
of creation cannot attain to. Nevertheless whatever it is that 
these powers may have learned through the revelation of the 
Son of God and of the Holy Spirit—and they will certainly be 
able to acquire a great deal of knowledge, and the higher ones 
much more than the lower—still it is impossible for them to 
comprehend everything; for it is written, “The more part of 
God's works are secret” (Sir 16:21). 

It is therefore to be desired that each one according to his 
capacity will ever “reach out to the things which are before, 
forgetting those things which are behind” (cf. Phil 3:14), that 
is, will reach out both to better works and also to a clearer 
understanding and knowledge, through Jesus Christ our Sav- 


ior, to whom is the glory forever. 


Es 


Book IV, Chapter III 415 


15. Let everyone, then, who cares for truth, care little 
about names and words (cf. 2 Tm 1:4, 6:4), for different kinds 
of speech are customary in different nations. Let him be more 
anxious about the fact signified than about the words by 
which it is signified, and particularly in questions of such dif- 
ficulty and importance as these. For example, we may inquire 
whether there exists any substance in which we can discern 
neither color nor shape nor possibility of touch nor size, a 
substance perceptible to the mind alone, which anyone can 
call whatever he pleases. The Greeks speak of this substance 
as asomaton, ot incorporeal;* but the divine scriptures call it 

“invisible”; for the apostle declares that God is invisible, when 
he says that Christ is the “image of the invisible God” (cf. Col 
1:15, 16). On the other hand he says that “all things, visible 
and invisible, were created through Christ” (ibid.). Here it 
is asserted that there exist even among created things certain 
existences which are in their own nature invisible. These, how- 


ever, while not in themselves corporeal, yet make use of bodies, / 
though they themselves are superior to bodily substance. But 


the substance of the Trinity, which is the beginning and cause 
of all things, “of which are all things and through which are all 
things and in which are all things,” must not be believed either 
to be a body or to exist in a body, but to be wholly incorporeal 
(cf. Rom 11:36).*” 

Let it suffice, however, for us to have spoken briefly on 
these matters, in a digression indeed, but one which has been 
forced upon us by the necessities of the subject. Our aim has 
been to show that there are certain things, the meaning of 
which it is impossible adequately to explain by any human 
language, but which are made clear rather through simple 
apprehension than through any power of words. This rule 
must control our interpretation even of the divine writings, in 
order that what is said therein may be estimated in accordance 


£9 2B, 


416 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


| not with the meanness of the language but with the divine 
power of the Holy Spirit who inspired their composition. 


alin ie te cee ee eS 


Chapter IV eagl.trans, 13% 


/ 


SUMMARY OF Rogen 
CONCERNING THE FATHER, THE 
SON, AND THE Howy SPIRIT, 
AND OF THE OTHER MATTERS 
DISCUSSED IN THE FOREGOING 


CHAPTERS 

/ j F we 

/ / 

} | 
1. It is now time for us, aft¢r having dealt to the best of our 
ability with the matters préviously discussed, to summarize *'-. «< 
the particular points, with the object gathering together xis 
what we have said in scattered references, and first of all to vy 
repeat our teaching concerning the Father, the Son and the 
Holy Spirit. God the Father, sinc¢ he is both invisible and 
inseparable from the Son, generated the Son not, as some 
suppose, by an act of Separation /from_ himself.? For if the Son 
is something separated from the Father, and if this expression 
signifies something resembling the offspring of animals and 
human beings, then both/he who separated and he who is 
separated are of necessity bodies. For we do not say, as the 
heretics suppose, that a part of God’s substance was chan; 
into the Son, or that the Son was procreated by the Father 


out of no substance at all, that is, from something external to 


Pay R 417 


CN 


Pit-fncocn? fe sete 


418 ON FIRST /PRINCIPLES 


God's own substance, so that there was a time when the Son 
did not exist; but setting aside all thought of a material bod 
we say that the Word and Wisdom was begotteh of the invis- 
ible and incorporeal God apart from any bodily feeling,’ like 
an act of will proceeding from the mind. Nor 


1:13), that he should also be regarded in this 
of his will.” 

Moreover John tells us that “God is light” 
Paul declares that the Son is the “brightness jof the eternal 
light” (cf. Heb 1:3). As therefore light can never exist with- 
out its brightness, so neither can the Son, who is called the 
“impress” of the Father's “substance,” and his Word and Wis- 
dom, be conceived as existing without the Father. How then 
can it be said that there was a time when the Son did not 
exist? For this is nothing else but to say that there was a time 
when truth did not exist, when wisdom did not exist, when 
life did not exist, whereas we must believe that in all these the 
substance of God exists in perfection. For these cannot be 
taken away from him or ever be separated from his substance. 
Although in our mind they are regarded as being many, yet 
‘in fact and substance they are oné, and in them resides the 

“fullness of the godhead” (cf. Col 2:9).° 
This phrase that we use, however, that there never was a 
time when he did not exist, must be accepted with a reser- 
vation. For the very words, when, or never, have a temporal 
significance, whereas the statements we make about the Father 
and the Son and the Holy Spirit must be understood as tran- 
scending all time and all ages and all eternity. For it is this 
‘Trinity alone which exceeds all comprehension, not only of 
temporal but even of eternal intelligence. The rest of things, 
however, which are external to the Trinity, must be measured 


by ages and periods of time. The fact, therefore, that the Word 


Book IV, Chapter IV 419 


is God, and was in the beginning with God (cf. Jn 1:1, 2), 
must not lead anyone to suppose that this Son of God is con- 
tained in any place; nor must the fact that he is wisdom, or 
truth, or righteousness, or sanctification, or redemption; for 
all these need no place in which to act or work, but each of 
them must be understood as referring to those who receive a 
share of the Word’s power and effectiveness. 

2. But if anyone should maintain that through those who 

receive a share of God’s Word, or of his wisdom or truth or life, 

pista hts 

the Word himself and the wisdom appear to exist in a place, 

we must answer him by saying that undoubtedly Christ, in his 

character of Word and Wisdom and all the rest, was in Paul, 

according to Paul’s own statement: “Or do ye seek a proof of 
him who speaks in me, even Christ?” (2 Cor 13:3). And again: 
“T live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in me” (Gal 2:20). Since 
then he was in Paul, who will doubt that he was similarly in 
Peter and in John and in every one of the saints, and not only 
in those on earth, but also in those in heaven? For it is absurd 
to say that Christ was in Peter and in Paul, but that he was 
not in Michael the archangel and in Gabriel. From this we 
can clearly perceive that the divinity of the Son of God is not 
confined in any place, otherwise it would be present in that 
place and not present in any other; but that while, in virtue 
of the majesty of its incorporeal nature, it is confined to no 
place, in no place, on the other hand, can we think of it as 
being absent. 

We must, however, bear in mind this one difference, that 
although he is present in various individuals such as those 
we have mentioned, Peter, Paul, Michael or Gabriel, he is 
not present in all beings whatsoever in the same degree. For 
he is more fully and clearly and, if I may say so, more openly 
present in the archangels than in other saints. This is plain 


from the following fact, that when the saints reach the height 


{fv 


a i ee ae 


= 


420 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


of perfection they are said to be made like, or equal to, the 
angels, according to the gospel statement (cf. Mt 22:30; Lk 
20:36). It is clear from this that Christ becomes present in 
each individual in such a degree as is warranted by the extent 
of his merits. 

3. Having therefore briefly repeated these points concern- 
ing the doctrine of the Trinity, our next step is to lay equal 
stress on this, that all things are said to have been created 
through the Son, “things in heaven and things on earth, things 
visible and invisible, whether thrones or dominions or princi- 
palities or powers; all were created through him and in him} 
and he is before all, and all things subsist for him, who is the 
head” (Col 1:16-18). With this agrees the statement made by 
John in the Gospel: “All things were made through him, and 
without him nothing was made” (Jn 1:3). David, too, points 


- to the mystery of the Trinity in the creation of the universe 


when he says: “By the word of the Lord were the heavens 
made strong, and all their power by the spirit of his mouth” 


(Ps 33:6). ; 435 ct 
After this it will be soror us to make mention 


of the bodily coming and incarhation of the only-begotten 
Son of God.’ And here we must not suppose that all the maj- 
esty of his godhead was confined within the lintits of a tiny 


body, in such a way that the whole of God’s Word’and his 
wisdom and essential truth and life was either separated from 


. the Father or forced and imprisoned within the tiny compass 
, of that body, so that it is not to be thodght of as operating 


anywhere else. The reverent confession of piety should rather 
lie between these extremes, neither admitting that any quality 
of the godhead was lacking in( Christ} nor yet supposing that 
there took place any separation whatever from the essence 
of the Father, which exists everywhere. Some such truth is 
indicated by John the Baptist, when with Jesus in the bodily 


Book IV, Chapter IV 421 


sense absent he thus addressed the multitudes: “There standeth 
one among you whom ye know not, who cometh after me, 
the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose” (Jn 
1:26, 27).8 Certainly it could not be said of one who so far as 
his bodily presence went was absent, that he stood “among” 
them with whom he was not bodily present. This shows that 
the Son of God was both wholly present in his body and also 
wholly present everywhere. 

4. Let no one imagine, however, that when we say this we 
are asserting that one part of the godhead of the Son of God 
was in ‘Chris®while the other part was elsewhere or every- 
where. This can only be believed by those who are ignorant 


of the nature of incorporeal and invisible substance. For it is 
impossible to speak of a part of what is incorporeal or to make 


any division in it. It exists rather in all things and through all 
things and above all things, in the way we have previously 


spoken of, that is, in the way in which it is understood as 


being either wisdom or word or life or truth, by which mode _ 
of understanding all idea of confinement in a particular place / 


is undoubtedly excluded. The Son of God; therefore, because 
for the salvation of the human race he wished to appear to 
men and to dwell among them, assumed) not only, as some 


think, a human body, but ot a soul, i in its nature indeed like ~’ 


our souls, but in will and/virtue like himself, and of such a 


kind that it could unsweyvingly carry into effect all the wishes 72 J 


and plans of the Word and Wisdom.2 Now that he possessed 
a soul, the Savior himself most clearly proves in thie e gospels 
when he says: “No/one taketh from me my soul, but I lay 
it down of myselff I have power to lay it down, and I have 
power to take it Ap again” (Jn 10:18). And again: “My soul 
is sorrowful eveh unto death” (Mr 26:38 and par.); and also: 
“Now is my sgul troubled” (Jn 12:27). For the soul"? that is 
“sorrowful” afd “troubled” must not be understood to be the 


“us 


422 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Word of God, because with the authority of his godhead he 
says: “I have power to lay down my soul” (Jn 10:18). Nor do 
we say that the Son of God was in that soul in the same way 
as he was in the soul of Paul or of Peter and the rest of the 
saints, in whom we believe that Christ spoke just as he did in 
Paul.'! Of all these, indeed, we must hold that opinion which 
the scripture expresses: “No man is pure from uncleanness, 
not even if his life has lasted but one day” (Jb 14:4, 5 [LXX]. 
But the soul that was in Jesus “chose the good, before it knew 
the evil” (cf. Is 7:15, 16);'? and because it “loved righteousness 
and hated iniquity, therefore God anointed it with the oil of 
gladness above its fellows” (cf. Ps 45: 7). Now it was anointed 
with the “oil of gladness” when it was united in a spotless 
partnership with the Word of God and thereby alone among 
all souls became incapable of sin, because it was well and fully 
capable of receiving the Son of God, and on that account is 
even one with him," and is addressed by his titles and called 
Jesus Christ; through whom all thi 
made (cf. Jn 1:3, Col 1:16). 

It was of this soul, since it had received into itself the 
whole wisdom of God and his tfuth and life, that I think 
the apostle spoke when he said: fYour life is hid with Christ 
in God; but when Christ, your life, shall appear, then shall 
ye also appear with him in glory” (Col 3:3, 4). For who else 
can be meant by this Christ, who is said to be hidden in God 
and to be destined afterwards to appear, except him who is 
related to have been anointed jwith the “oil of gladness,” that 
is, filled with the essence of God, in whom now he is said to 
be hidden. This is why Christ is set forth as an example to all 
believers, because as he evet chose the good, even before he 
knew the evil at all, and loved righteousness and hated iniq- 
uity, wherefore God anointed him with the oil of gladness (cf. 
Is 7:15, 16; Ps 45:7); so, too, should each one of us, after a fall 


Book IV, Chapter IV 423 


or a transgression, cleanse himself from stains by the example 
set before him, and taking a leader for the journey proceed 
along the steep path of virtue, that so perchance by this means 


we may as far as is possible become, through our imitation. 
of him, partakers of the divine nature (cf. 2 Pt 1:4); as it is 


written, “He who saith he believeth in Christ ought himself 
to walk even as he walked” (1 Jn 2:6). This Word, then, and 
this wisdom, by our imitation of whom we are called wise or 
rational, becomes “all things to all men, that he may gain all,” 

and to the weak becomes weak, that he may gain the weak 
(cf. 1 Cor 9:22); and because he is made to become weak it 
is said of him, “Though he was crucified in weakness, yet he 
liveth in the power of God” (2 Cor 13:4). Finally, in dealing 
with the Corinthians, who were weak, Paul determines that 


50 


he will “know nothing among them except Jesus Christ, and — 


him crucified” (1 Cor 2:2). ee a 

5. Some, however, would have i appear that it was in 
reference to this very soul, at the time when it assumed a body 
from My, that the following statement of the apostle was 
made;'4 “Who, though he was in the form of God, counted 
it not a prize to be equal with God, but emptied himself, 


taking the form of a servant” (Phil 2:6, 7); the object being, 


doubtless, to réstore the soul into the form of God by superior 
examples and precepts, and to recall it to that f fullness from 
which it had emptied itself. 3 


But as by participation in the Son of God a man is adopted : 


among God's sons, and by participation in the wisdom which 
is in God he becomes wise, so, too, by paggicipation in the 
Holy Spirit he becomes holy and spiritualFor this is one and 
the same thing as to receive a share of the Holy Spirit, who 
is the Spirit of the Father and the/Son, since the nature of 


the Trinity is one and incorporeal. And all that we have said 
about the tice Wea is to be understood of the 


424 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


angels and heavenly powers in a similar way to that in which 
it is understood of souls; for every rational creature needs to 
participate in the Trinity. 9% 403 


Moreover, in regard to the plan of this visible world, the 


very important question of how the world is constituted is 
frequently raised. We have therefore spgken on this point to 
‘the best of our ability in the preceding apters,"* for the ben- 
efit of those who set themselves t to 


~ arguments against us and who are 
the term “matter,” the meaning of 
have not yet succeeded in underst 
to make brief mention of this subject now. 

6. In the first place it must bd noted that up to the present 
we have nowhere found the term “matter” itself used in the 
canonical scriptures to denote fhat substance which is said to 
underlie bodies. For the sayi of Isaiah: “And he shall burn 
up the hyle,” that that is the mattey, “like hay” (Is 10:17), spoken in 
reference to those who have been appointed for punishment, 
uses the terms “matter” to denote sins. And even if the word 
happens to be written in any other place it will nowhere be 
found, | think, to bear the meaning with which our present 
inquiry is concerned. The okly exception is in Wisdom, a 
book which is said to be Solomipn’s, but which is certainly not 
regarded as authoritative by all \° Still, we do find it written 
there as follows: “For thine all-powerful hand, that created the 
world out of formless matter, lack 
them a multitude of bears, or fierce\ions” (Wis 11:17). Very 
many, indeed, think that the actual matter of which things 
are made is referred to in the passage written by Moses in the 
beginning of Genesis: “In the beginning God made the heaven 
and the earth, and the earth was invisible and without order” 
(Gn 1:1, 2); for by the phrase, “an earth invisible and without 


faecal 
not means to send upon 


Book IV, Chapter IV 425 


order,” it seems to them that Moses was alluding to nothing 
else but formless matter. Yet if this truly is matter, it is clear 
from this passage that the constituent parts of bodies are not 
things incapable of change. 

For those who assume that bodily substances are com- 
posed of atoms, either the ones which cannot be divided into 
parts or those which are divisible into equal parts, or else that 
they are composed of one of the elements, could not reckon 
matter, at least in the main sense of the term, among these 
constituents. Nor, if they suppose matter to be a substance 
underlying every body throughout the universe, a substance 
capable of change, alteration and division, will they maintain 
that it exists in its own proper nature without qualities. And 
we agree with them; since we absolutely deny that matter 
should be called unbegotten or uncreated, for the reasons 
which we have given to the best of our ability in previous 
chapters, for we have there pointed out that from water and 
earth, air and heat, various kinds of fruit are produced in the 
various kinds of trees, and that fire, air, water and earth are 
changed alternately into one another and that one element is 
resolved into another in virtue of a sort of mutual relationship, 
and further that from the food of men or of animals the sub- 
stance flesh comes into existence and that the seminal moisture 
is changed into solid flesh and bones. All these instances go to 
prove that bodily substance is capable of change and can pass 
from any given quality into any other.'7 < 
7. This, however, should be noted, that a substance never 
exists without quality, and that it is by the intellect alone 
that this substance which underlies bodies and is capable of 
receiving quality is discerned to be matter.'$ On this account 
some who were desirous of inquiring more: | yeeply into these 
questions have ventured to assert that bodily nature consists 
of nothing else but qualities. For if hardness and softness, 


a 


426 


G25 


426 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


heat and cold, wetness and dryness, are qualities, and when 
these and all the others like them are taken away nothing is 
conceived to lie beneath, then the qualities will appear to be 
everything. And so those who hold this opinion have endeay- 
ored to establish the following argument, that since all who say 
that matter is uncreated allow that its qualities were created 
by God, the result is that even according to their view matter 
is not uncreated if qualities are everything, for all without 
exception declare that qualities were created by God. 

Those; however, who desire to prove that qualities are 
added from without to an underlying matter employ illus- 
trations such as the following: Paul is without any question 
either silent or speaking, either awake or asleep, or again he is 
in a certain bodily posture, either sitting or standing or lying 
down. These things are accidental to men, who are scarcely 
ever perceived apart from them. Nevertheless our mind clearly 
does not include any of these things in the definition of man, 
but we think of him and consider him by their means in such 
a way as not to form a general idea of his condition, regarding 
him simply in respect of his being awake or asleep, speaking 
or silent, or in any of the other accidental conditions to which 
man is of necessity subject. Just as, then, we can think of 
Paul as existing apart from all these accidents to which he is 

“subject, so, too, we can conceive of the underlying substance 
apart from its qualities. And so, when our mind by a purely 
intellectual act sets aside every quality and gazes at the mere 
point, if I may so call it, of the underlying substance in itself 
and clings to that, without in the least considering its hardness 
or softness or heat or cold or wetness or dryness, then by this 
somewhat artificial mode of thought it will apparently behold 
matter stripped of all its qualities. 

8. But someone may perhaps ask whether we can obtain 
any support for this view of things from the scriptures. It 


Book IV, Chapter IV 427 


appears to me that some such view is indicated in the Psalms, 
when the prophet says: “Mine eyes have seen thine incom- 
pleteness” (Ps 139:16 [LXX]). In this passage the prophet's 


mind, examining with piercing insight the beginning of things _ 


and by reason and understanding alone separating matter from 
its qualities, appears to have perceived God's “incompleteness,” 
a state which we certainly think of as being brought to perfec- 
tion by the addition of qualities. Moreover Enoch speaks thus 
in his book: “I walked until I came to what is incomplete,”’” 
which I think may also be understood in a similar way, namely, 
that the prophet’s mind, in the course of its investigation and 
study of every visible thing, came right to the very beginning, 
where it beheld matter in an incomplete state without quali- 
ties. For it is written in the same book, Enoch himself being 
the speaker: “I perceived every kind of matter.””* Now this 
certainly means: “I beheld all the divisions of matter, | which 
from one original have been broken off into all the various 
species, of men, animals, sky, sun and everything else in the 


world.” 


Next, we have proved to the best of our ability in the 
going chapters, that all things that exist were made by God, 
and that there is nothing that was not made except the nature 


of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit; and that because 


God, who is good by nature, wished to have those whom he ~ 


might benefit and who might enjoy receiving his benefits, he 
made creatures worthy of himself, that is, creatures capable of 
worthily receiving him, whom he also says he has “begotten 
as sons” (cf. Is 1:2). But he made all things by number and 
measure; for to God there is nothing either without end or 
without measure.” 

For by his power he comprehended all things, while he 
himself is not comprehended by the mind of any created 
being.’ Tt he 


y 
1 


428 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 
= 

For that nature is known to itself alone. The Father alone 
knows the Son, and the Son alone knows the Father (cf. Jn 
10:15, 17:25), and the Holy Spirit alone searches out even the 
depths of God (cf. 1 Cor 2:10). 

Every created thing, therefore, is distinguished in God’s 
sight by its being confined within a certain number and mea- 
sure, that is, either number in the case of rational beings or 
measure in the case of bodily matter. Since, then, it was nec- 
essary for intellectual nature to make use of bodies, and this 
nature is proved to be changeable and convertible by the very 
condition of its being created—for what was not and began to 
be is by this very fact shown to be of a changeable nature and 
so to possess goodness or badness as an accident, and not as 
__ part of its essence—since, then, as we have said, rational nature 
is changeable and convertible, so of necessity God had fore- 


knowledge of the differences that were to arise among souls or 


spiritual powers, in order to arrange that each in proportion 
to its merits might wear a different bodily covering of this or 
that quality; and so, too, was it necessary for God to make 
>, a bodily nature, capable of changing at the Creator's will, by 
an alteration of qualities, into everything that circumstances 
might require. This nature must needs endure so long as those 
endure who need it for a covering; and there will always be 
rational natures who need this bodily covering. 
~~ There will always exist, therefore, this bodily nature whose 
coverings must necessarily be used by rational creatures; unless 
someone thinks” that he can prove | by any arguments that 
rational nature can lead a life without 2 body at all. How diffi- 
cult, if not altogether impossible, this is for our understanding, 
we have shown when discussing the particular questions in the 
foregoing chapters.”* 

9. It will certainly not, I think, appear contrary to the 
plan of this work of ours, if we repeat as briefly as possible 


Book IV, Chapter IV ns ‘ ~ 429 


the arguments concerning the immortality of rational natures. 
Everyone who shares in anything is undoubtedly of one 
substance and one nature with him who shares in the same 
thing. For example, all eyes share in the light, and therefore all 
eyes, which share in the light, are of one nature. But though 
every eye shares in the light, yet since one eye sees clearly and 
another dimly, every eye does not share equally in the light. 
Again, all hearing receives the voice and sound, and therefore 
all hearing is of one nature; but each person is quick or slow 
to hear in proportion to the pure and healthy condition of his 
hearing faculty. Now let us pass from these examples drawn 
from the senses to the consideration of intellectual things. 
Every mind which shares in intellectual light must 
undoubtedly be of one nature with every other mind which _ 
shares similarly in this light. If then the heavenly powers” 


receive a share of intellectual light, that is, of the divine nature, 2-—~ 


in virtue of the fact that they share in wisdom and sanctifi- 
cation, and if the soul of man receives a share of the same 
light and wisdom, then these beings will be of one nature / 
and one substance with each other,° But the heavenly powers 
are incorruptible and immortal; undoubtedly therefore the 
substance of the soul of man will also be incorruptible and 
immortal. And not only so, but sifice the nature of Father, Son 
and Holy Spirit, to whom alone belongs the intellectual light 
in which the universal creation has a share, is incorruptible and 
eternal, it follows logically and/of necessity that every existence 
which has a share in that eternal nature must itself also remain : 
forever incorruptible and etetnal, in order that the eternity of “ 
the divine goodness may be revealed in this additional fact, 
that they who obtain its blessings are eternal too. Nevertheless, 
just as in our illustrations we acknowledged some diversity in 


the reception of the light, when we described the individual 


power of sight as being either dim or keen, so also we must 


430 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


\- a 
_ acknowledge a diversity of participation in the Father, Son 


and Holy Spirit, varying in proportion to the earnestness of 


_ the soul and the capacity of the mind. 


On the other hand let us consider whether it does not 
appear almost impious to say that the mind, which is capable 
of receiving God, should admit of a destruction of its sub- 
stance; as if the very fact that it can perceive and ‘understand 
God would not be sufficient to secure its perpetual existence. 
This is the more likely since, even if the mind through care- 
lessness should fall away from the pure and perfect reception 
of God into itself, it nevertheless always possesses within some 
seeds as it were of restoration and recall to a better state, which 
become operative whenever the inner man, who is also termed 
the rational man, is recalled into the image and likeness of 
God who created him. This is why the prophet says: “All the 
ends of the earth shall remember and be turned unto the Lord, 
and all the families of the nations shall sani. before him” 
(cf. Ps 22:27). pr 

10. If, however, anyone dares to ascribe a corruption of 
substance to him who was made after the “image and likeness 
of God,” he will be extending this impious charge, in my 
opinion to the Son of God himself; for he, too, is called in 
the scriptures the “image of God” (cf. Col 1:15; 2 Cor 4:4). 
At least he who thinks thus will certainly be attacking the 
authonry pt scripture, which says that man was made in the 

“image of God.” Moreover the marks of the divine image in 
man may be clearly discerned, not,in the form of his body, 
which goes to corruption, but in the prudence | of his mind, 
in his righteousness, his self-control, his courage, his wisdom, 
his discipline, in fact, in the whole company of virtues; which 
exist in God essentially, and may exist in man as a result of his 
own efforts and his imitation of God, as the Lord points out 
in the gospel when he says: “Be ye merciful, as your Father 


Book IV, Chapter IV 431 


also is merciful” (Lk 6:36), and, “Be ye perfect, as your Father 
also is perfect” (Mt 5:48). Here we are clearly shown that in 
God all these virtues exist forever and that they can never 
come to him or depart from him, whereas men acquire them 
gradually and one by one. We see, therefore, that men have a 
kind of blood-relationship with God; and since God knows 
all things and not a single intellectual truth can escape his 
notice—for God the Father, with his only-begotten Son and 
the Holy Spirit, stands alone in his knowledge not only of the 


things heshas created but also of himself—it is possible that a 
rational mind also, by advancing from a knowledge of small 


7#-t0-a- knowledge of greater things and from things visible to 
~ things invisible; 


in to an increasingly perfect under- 
standing. For it has been p in a body, and of necessity 
advances from things of sense, which are bodily, to things 
beyond sense perception, which are incorporeal and intellec- 
tual. But in case it should appear mistaken to say as we have 
done that intellectual things are beyond sense perception we 
will quote as an illustration the saying of Solomon: “You will 
find also a divine sense” (Prv 2:5 [LXX]). By this he shows that 
intellectual things are to be investigated not by bodily sense 
but by some other which he calls divine. 
It is with this sense that each of the rational questions 
which we have dealt with above must be perceived; and with 


this sense that the words we speak must be listened to and our |. 


writings pondered. For the divine nature knows even the silent 
thoughts which revolve in our minds. Our belief, therefore, 
on the questions dealt with herein, and on all that follows 
logically from them, must be framed in accordance with the 
principles explained above. 


432 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Original Bibliography 7 


Bardy, Gustave. Recherches sur l'histoire du texte et des versions 
latines du De Principiis d’Origéne. Paris, 1923. 

Bigg, Charles. The Christian Platonists of Alexandria. Oxford, 
1886. Reprinted, with some additions and corrections by F. 
E. Brightman, 1913. 

Brochet, J. and Hieronymus Sanctus. /érome et ses ennemis, Paris, 
1906. 

Brooke, A. E. The Commentary of Origen on S. John’s Gospel. 
The ‘Text revised with a critical Introduction and Indices. 
Cambridge, 1896. 

. Origen in Lefroys Lectures on Ecclesiastical History. James 
Nisbet & Co., 1896. 

Cadiou, R. Introduction au systeme dOrigéne. Paris, 1932. 

Capitaine, G. De Origenis Ethica. Miinster. 1898. 

de Faye, Eugene. Origen and his Work. Authorized translation by 
Fred Rothwell. George Allen and Unwin, 1926. 

. Origéne, sa vie, son oeuvre, sa pensée. vol. 1, Sa biographie 

et ses écrits. vol. II, Lambiance philosophique. vol. III, La 

doctrine. [vols. 37, 43, and 44 of the Bibliotheque de | Ecole 
des Hautes Etudes, Sciences Religieuses.| Paris, 1927-8. The se- 
cond volume contains, on 216~239, a useful description of 
the works on Origen by Huet, Redepenning, Denis, Bigg and 

Harnack. 

. Gnostiques et Gnosticisme. Paris, 1925. 

Denis, M. J. De la Philosophie dOrigéne. Paris, 1884. 

Diekamp, F. Die Origenistischen  Streitigkeiten im sechsten 
Jahrhundert. Minster, 1899. 

Fairweather, W. Origen and Greek Patristic Theology. Edinburgh, 
1901. 

Harnack, A. History of Dogma. Translated into English by Neil 
Buchanan and others. For Origen, see vol. I], 319-380. 

Huet, P. D. Origeniana. Reprinted in Migne, P G., vol. XVII, 
633 ff. 

Inge, W. R. “Alexandrian Theology.” In Hastings’ Encyclopedia of 
Religion and Ethics, vol. 1, 308 ff. 

McClintock, John, and James Strong. Cyclopedia of Biblical, 


Original Bibliography 433 


Theological and Ecclesiastical Literature, vol. VII, 428 ff. 

Origen. The Writings of Origen. Iranslated into English by Rev. 
Frederick Crombie, being vols. X and XXIII of the Avte- 
Nicene Christian Library, Edinburgh, 1869 and 1872. Vol. X 
contains the De Principiis, together with the Letter of Africanus 
to Origen and Origen’ Reply and a Letter of Origen to Gregory 
Thaumaturgus; and also the first book of the Contra Celsum. 
Vol. XXIII contains the rest of the Contra Celsum. 

. St. Gregory of Nasianzus, St. Basil of Czsarea, and J. 

Armitage Robinson. The Philocalia of Origen. Translated into 

English by the Rev. George Lewis. Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 

1911. 

. Origenis Opera Omnia. Edited by C. and C. V. Delarue. 

Reprinted in Migne, Patrologia Graeca, vols. XI-XVII. ‘The 

De Principiis and the Epistle of Africanus to Origen, with 

Origen’s Reply, are in vol. XI. Pamphilus Defence of Origen 

is in vol. XVII, where it is followed by Rufinus’s tract on 

The Corruption of the Works of Origen. The Panegyric of St. 

Gregory Thaumaturgus on Origen is to be found in P G., vol. 

X, 1049 ff. 

. Origenis Opera Omnia. Edited by C. H. E. Lommatzsch. 

Based upon Delarue, vols. I-XXXV. Berlin, 1831-48. 

. Origenes Werke, in the series ‘Die griechischen christlichen 
Schriftsteller der ersten drei Jahrhunderte, herausgegeben 
von der Kirchenvater Commission der kénigl. preussischen 
Akademie der Wissenschaften.’ Leipsig: J. C. Hinrich’sche 
Buchlandlung, 1891. The edition of the De Principiis, by Dr. 
Paul Koetschau, is the fifth volume of this series. These texts 
of Origen supersede all previous ones. 

Prat, F. “Origen and Origenism,” In The Catholic Encyclopedia, 
vol. XI, 306 ff. 

Preuschen, E. “Origenes.” In Realencyclopddie fur protestantische 
Theologie und Kirche, by Johann Jakob Herzog and Albert 
Hauck. 

Radford, L. B. Three Teachers of Alexandria: Theognostus, Pierius 
and Peter; A study in the early history of Origenism and Anti- 
Origenism. Cambridge: University Press, 1908. 

Redepenning, E. R. Origenes. Eine Darstellung seines Lebens und 
seiner Lehre. Bonn, 1841. 


434 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Robinson, J. Armitage. The Philocalia of Origen. The Text ee 
with a critical Introduction and Indices. Cambridge, 1893. 

Schnitzer, Karl FE Origenes iiber die Grundlehren der 
Glaubenswissenschaft. Stuttgart, 1835. 

Thaumaturgus, Gregory. Panegyric on Origen. Translated by the 
Rev. S. D. E Salmond, in vol. XX of the Ante-Nicene Christian 
Library, Edinburgh 1871. 

Tollinton, R. B. Selections from the Commentaries and Homilies of 
Origen. Translated into English. S.PC_K., 1929. 

. Alexandrine Teaching on the Universe. George Allen and 
Unwin, 1932. 

Westcott, B. E “Origenes,” In Dictionary of Christian Biography, 
by William Smith and Henry Wace. 


Additional Bibliography by John C. Cavadini 


This addition to the original bibliography provides a starting point 
for those who would like further reading about Origen or On First 
Principles. A diversity of views is represented. Most of the works 
listed are relatively recent and will help the reader develop a more 
complete bibliography of earlier literature, although a few of the 
more standard earlier works are also listed. 


Ayres, L., and G. Jones, eds. Christian Origins: Theology, Rhetoric 
and Community. London, 1998. 

Balthasar, H.U. von. “Le mysterion d’Origéne,” Recherches de 
Science Religieuse 26 (1936): 513-26; 27 (1937): 38-64. 

. Origen: Spirit and Fire: A Thematic Anthology of His 
Writings, translated by R.J. Daly. Washington, DC, 1984. 
Clark, Elizabeth A. The Origenist Controversy: The Cultural 

Construction of an Early Christian Debate. Princeton, NJ, 
1992. 
Crouzel, Henri. Origen. Translated by A. S. Worrall. Edinburgh, 1989. 
Crouzel, Henri, and M. Simonetti, ed. and trans. Traité de Principes 
[On First Principles], Sources Chrétiennes vols. 252-53, 268-69, 
312. Paris, 1978-84. Contains many helpful explanatory notes. 


Additional Bibliography 435 


Balas, D.L., “The Idea of Participation in the Structure of Origen’s 
Thought: Christian Transposition of a Theme in the Platonic 
Tradition,” in Origeniana 1:257-75. 

Benjamins, H.S., Eingeordnete Freiheit: Freiheit und Vorsehung 
bei Origenes, Supplements to Vigiliae Christianae 28. Leiden, 
1994. 

Daley, B.E., The Hope of the Church: A Handbook of Patristic 
Eschatology. Cambridge, 1991. 

Daniélou, J., Origéne. Paris, 1948. 

DeLubac, H., Histoire et Esprit: intelligence de I’Ecriture d apres 
Origéne. Paris, 1950; Translated by Anne Englund Nash as 
History and Spirit. San Francisco, 2007. 

Dively Lauro, Elizabeth Ann. The Soul and Spirit of Scripture with- 
in Origens Exegesis. Atlanta, 2005. 

Edwards, M., “Origen No Gnostic; or, On the Corporeality of 
Man,” Journal of Theological Studies 43 (1992): 23-37. 

. “Gnostics, Greeks, and Origen: the Interpretation of 
Interpretation,” Journal of Theological Studies 44 (1993): 70-89. 

Hanson, R.PC., Allegory and Event. Richmond, 1959. 

Harl, M., Origéne et la fonction révélatrice de la Verbe Incarné, 
Patristica Sorbonensia 2. Paris, 1958. 

. “Structure et cohérence du Peri Archon,” in Origeniana 
1:11-32. 

Kannengieser C., and W.L. Peterson, eds., Origen of Alexandria: 
His World and His Legacy. Notre Dame: University of Notre 
Dame Press, 1988. 

King, J. C., Origen on the Song of Songs as the Spirit of Scripture. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005. 

Louth, A. The Origins of the Christian Mystical Tradition: From 
Plato to Denys. Oxford, 1981. 

Martens, Peter W. Origen and Scripture: The Contours of the 
Exegetical Life. Oxford, 2012. 

Nautin, P., Origéne: sa vie et son ceuvre., Paris, 1977. 

Origeniana, ed. H. Crouzel and A. Quacquarelli, Quaderni di 
‘Vetera Christianorum’ 12 (Bari, 1975). 

Origeniana Secunda: second colloque international des etudes origé- 
niennes. Edited by Henri Crouzel and Antonio Quacquarelli. 
Rome, 1980. 


436 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Origeniana Tertia: The Third International Colloquium for Origen 
Studies. Edited by R. P. C. Hanson and Henri Crouzel: Rome, 
1985. 

Origeniana Quarta: Die Referate des 4. Internationalen Origenes- 
kongresses. Edited by L. Lies. Innsbruck-Wien, 1987. 

Origeniana Quinta: Historica, Text and Method, Biblica, Philosophica, 
Theologica, Origenism and Later Developments. Edited by Robert 
J. Daly. Leuven, 1992. 

Origeniana Sexta: Origéne et la BiblelOrigen and the Bible. Edited 
by Gilles Dorival and Alain le Boulluec. Leuven, 1995. 

Origeniana Septima: Origenes in den Auseinanderserzungen des 
4, Jahrhunderts. Edited by W. A. Bienert and U. Kuhnweg. 
Leuven, 1999. 

Origeniana Octava: Origen and the Alexandrian Tradition, Volume 
II. Edited by L. Perrone. Leuven, 2003. 

Origeniana Nona: Origen and the Religious Practice of His Time: 
Papers of the 9th International Origen Congress, Pécs, Hungary, 
29 August—2 September 2005. Edited by G. Heidl and R. 
Somos. Walpole, MA, 2009. 

Scott, A. Origen and the Life of the Stars: A History of an Idea. 
Oxford, 1991. This book contains a handy summary of schol- 
arly debate, and consensus, on the reliability of Rufinus’s 
translation. 

Torjesen, KJ. Hermeneutical Procedure and Theological Method in 
Origen’s Exegesis, Patristische Texte und Studien 28. Berlin, 
1986. 

_ “Hermeneutics and Soteriology in Origen’s Peri Archon,” 
Studia Patristica 21 (1989): 333-48. 

Trigg, J.W., Origen: The Bible and Philosophy in the Third Century 

Church, Atlanta, 1983. 


NOTES 


Introduction by Henri de Lubac 
1. From Histoire et Esprit, Vintelligence de (Ecriture daprés Origene by Henri de 
Lubac, Paris, 1950, Chapters I and II. Selected and translated by William Babcock. 


Translator’s Introduction: Section I 

1. See Jerome, Praef. in Hom. Orig. in Ezech, (Lomm. XIV. 4). Rufinus, Apol 
II. 13 (Migne, PL 21, p. 596). 

2. Rufinus, Apol. Il. 16 (Migne, PL 21, p. 597). 

3, See Original Bibliography, p. 432. Most of our information comes from 
Eusebius, His. Eccl. Bk. V1. 

4, Jerome, Ep. XXXII. ad Paulam. The passage is rhetorical, but it suggests 
clearly enough that jealousy was the motive for Origen’s condemnation, and eccle- 
siastical irregularities the excuse. 

5. For the text see Koetschau, Das Gregorios Thaumaturgos Dankrede an 
Origenes, Leipzig 1894. Eng. trans. by W. Metcalfe, S.PC.K. 1920, and Ante- 
Nicene Christian Library, Vol. XX, p. 36. 

6. For Origen’s letter to Gregory see Koetschau’s edition of the Panegyric 
already referred to; also Robinson, Philocalia, Ch. XIII. (p. 64). Eng. Trans. in 
Metcalfe, $.PC.K. 1920, and Ante-Nicene Christian Library, Vol. X., p. 388. 

7. See p. xxxv. 

8. For the text see Migne, PG 11, p. 47ff. Eng. trans. Ante-Nicene Christian 
Library, Vol. X., p. 3694f. 


Translator’s Introduction: Section IT 

1. Comm. in Ioh.1. 2. 

2. Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. VI. 23. 

3, Eugene de Faye, Origéne, sa vie, son oeuvre, sa pensée. Paris, 1923. 

4, De Faye, Origene, I. 28. 

5. Clem. Alex., Strom. I. 13, 1 and 21, 2, and Quis Dives Salvetur 26, 8 
(Stahlin II. 201, 12 and 205, 11 and III. 177, 25, 26). 

6. Zahn, Supplementum Clementinum, p. 59. 


Translator’s Introduction: Section III 
1. See p. xxxv. 
2. Clem. Alex., Strom. I. 43, i; (Stihlin II. 28, 20). 
3. §. Pamphili Martyris, Apologia pro Origene (Migne, PG 17, p. 539). 
4. Photius, Bibl, Cod. 118. 
5. Liber de adulteratione librorum Origenis (Migne, PG 17, p. 615). 
6. Jerome, Apol. II. Chs. 18, 19. 
7. Denis, De la Philosophie d’Origéne, p. 375. 
8. Jerome, Ep. lxxxiv ad Pamm. et Ocean. 9. 


437 


438 Notes to Translator’s Introduction—Book I, Preface 


Translator’s Introduction: Section IV 
1. Le, Ep. bexxiv ad Pamm. et Ocean. | 
2. Rufinus, Apol. I. 3. 
3. Rufinus, Apol. I. 31 (a). 
4, Rufinus, Apol. II. 44. 
5. Rufinus, Apol. I. 39. 
G6. Rufinus, Apol. IT. 9. (2). 
7. Jerome, Apol. IIL. 9. 
8. Migne, PG'59, p. 173. 


Translator’s Introduction: Section V 

1. Gustave Bardy, Recherches sur histoire du texte et des versions latines du De 
Principtis d Origéne, p. 206, Paris, 1923. 

2. Eugéne de Faye, Origéne, |. p. 54. 

3. Die griechischen christlichen Schrifisteller der Ersten Drei Jahrhunderte. Ori- 
genes Werke, De Principiis, herausgegeben von Dr. Paul Koetschau. Leipzig 1913. 

4, The Philocalia of Origen, by J. Armitage Robinson. Cambridge, 1893. Eng, 
Trans. of the Philocalia, by the Rev. George Lewis, T. & T. Clark, 1911. 

5. The letter is printed in Mansi, Concilia, Vol. IX. pp. 524-33. 

6. For the text see Mansi, Concilia, Vol. IX., pp. 396-400. 

7. Bardy, Recherches, p. 205. 

8. See pp. 85-91. 

9. Jerome, Apol. II. 11b. 

10. Jerome, Apol. I. 7. 

11. Rufinus, Apol. I. 21. 

12. For the letter, see Jerome, Ep. exxiv. ad Avitum. 

13. Bardy, Recherches, p. 206. 

14. See pp. 195ff. and 333ff. 

15. See p. 199. 

16. See p. 249. 

17. See p. 387. 

18. See p. 390. 

19. See p. 395. 

20. See pp. 461 (n.10) and 462 (n. 12). 


Translator’s Introduction: Section VI 
1. See p. 7. 
2. Eugene de Faye, Origéne, I., p. 100f. 
3. See pp. 414 and 421. 
4. See pp. 331 {and n. 21). 
Preface of Rufinus 
1. See Plato, Symposium 177 D. 
2. See Introduction, p. xlviiff. 
Book I, Preface 
1. See Hermas, Mand. I. 1. 


Notes to Book I, Preface—Book I, Chapter I 439 


2, Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 2, says that in the beginning of the first book of the 
De Principiis Origen declared that “Christ was not begotten the Son of God, but 
made such.” (Lat. factum = Gr. yevrjtov). Rufinus has modified this statement. 
It is probable, however, that yevntov and yevyntov were not very clearly distin- 
guished in Origen’s time. Origen certainly taught that the Son and Holy Spirit 
were created, but he thought that the alternative to this was to assert that they 
were unbegorten, which was true of the Father alone. See the quotation from this 
same letter in n. 3, below, and p. xliv. 

3. Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 2, says: “As third in dignity and honor after the 
Father and the Son he (i.e., Origen) adds the Holy Spirit, of whom, though he 
professes to be ignorant whether he was created or uncreated, yet later on he has 
expressed his real opinion, when he insists that nothing is uncreated except God 
the Father alone.” Rufinus has modified Origen’s “created or uncreated” (yevytd¢ 
4 ayévvytoc) to “begotten or unbegotten” (Lat. natus aut innatus = Gr. yevytoc 
i &yévvytoc). Origen explains his doctrine in his Comm. in Joh. II. 10. “But we 
must inquire whether, if it be true that ‘all things were created through him,’ the 
Holy Spirit also was created through him. Now I think we are forced to admit to 
the man who says that he was created, and who quotes the text, ‘All things were 
created through him,’ that the Holy Spirit was created through the Word, since the 
Word is older than he. But the man who is unwilling to say that the Holy Spirit is 
created through Christ must assert that he is unbegotten.. .. We, however, believe 
that there are three hypostases, the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, and being 
of opinion that no one is unbegotten except the Father, maintain the pious and 
true belief to be that while all things were created through the Word the Holy Spirit 
is of more honor than all others and first in rank of all who have been created by 
the Father through Christ.” 

4. The extant fragments of “Zhe Teaching of Peter” are collected in Von Dob- 
schiitz, Das Kerygma Petri ( Texte und Unters. xi. 1), and in Hilgenfeld, N. 7’ extra 
canonem iv. 51ff. The fragment is found in Greek, 6t1 ox eipi datdviov dowpatov, 
in Ignatius, ad Smyrnaeos 3, where, however, its source is not mentioned. 


Book I, Chapter I 

1. Origen quotes the passage in this form in two other places, Con. Celsum 
viii. 18 and Hom. in Jerem. viii. 1. 

2. Rufinus has kept the Greek philosophical terms Monas (= Unit, Unity) 
and Henas (= Oneness) probably from the difficulty of finding Latin equivalents. 
Some of the later Pythagoreans seem to have distinguished, as Origen does here, 
between the Monad, the primal Unity which gives rise to multiplicity, and the bare 
One, a kind of Absolute which they tried to conceive as unrelated to anything. 
See Zeller, Pre-Socratic Philosophy, trans. S. F. Alleyne, Vol. I, p. 390ff. Clement of 
Alexandria, Origen’s predecessor and teacher, describes the Monad thus: “Abstract 
from body its physical qualities, taking away the dimension of depth, then that of 
breadth and then that of length. The point which remains is as it were a unit having 
position. Take away its position, and you get the conception of unity.” Stromata 


V. 71, 2 ff. (Stihlin ii. 374, 7f.). 


440 Notes to Book I, Chapter I-Book I, Chapter II 


3. Origen is hampered by an imperfect psychology, but his meaning is clear. 
‘The senses, which are regarded as bodily or material things, have their appropriate 
subject matter. Mind, which Origen contends is purely spiritual, must also have 
its appropriate “substance” to act on. Substance (Lat. substantia; Gr. indotaotc ) 
is here to be understood in a spiritual sense; the mind’s business is with God, truth 
and the reasons of things. Origen contradicts the view that mind is an epiphenom- 
enon, or by-product of matter. 

4. Koetschau inserts here this sentence taken from Jerome, Con. oh. Hieros, 
c. 7. Origen was frequently attacked for the opinion here expressed, which Rufinus 
has softened down considerably. Epiphanius (Haer. 64, 4) adds that Origen also 
asserted that “angels could not see the Spirit, nor could men see angels.” See also 
Justinian, Ep. ad Mennam (Mansi IX. 489 B) and Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 2. Arius 
used Origen’s language, cp. Athanasius, Con. Arian. i. 6. 

5. Origen’s reading, the Greek of which we have in Con. Celsum VII. 34, 
aiaOnot Oeiav evproete, is different from the Septuagint, which says, “Thou shalt 
find the knowledge of God.” 


Book I, Chapter II 

1. Origen, in his Hom. in Jerem. IX. 4 ad fin. lays stress on the present tense 
(Gr. yevv@: Lat. generat) as evidence of his doctrine of the Son’s eternal generation 
by the Father. 

2. Lat. aliquid insubstantivum. It almost means “something impersonal,” 
but Origen wishes to make it clear that personal existence does not involve the 
possession of a body. 

3. The Acts of Paul is mentioned by Eusebius (Hast. Eccl. IL. 3, 25) as a writ- 
ing used in some parts of the Church but not considered authoritative. Another 
quotation from it is to be found in Origen, Comm. in loh. XX. 12. In Hom. in 
Jerem. XX. 1, there is also a reference to the passage on page 23, the Word being 
called Céov ( = animal vivens). This appears to depend upon a misreading of 
Hebrews 4:12, Cv yap 6 Adyoc. The Acts of Paul is not extant, and must be 
distinguished from the Acts of Paul and Thecla. 

4. For “effluence” Rufinus retains the Greek dméppore translating it afterwards 
by manatio. 

5. Origen discusses the passage in his Hom. in Gen. I. 13. See Introduction, 
p. xl. 

6. According to Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 2, what Origen really said here was 
that “nothing is ucreated except God the Father only.” But see p. 438, n. 3 to 
Book I, Preface. 

7. These were the theories of the Gnostics. See Bk. 1V, Ch. iv. (p. 417). 

8. Rufinus has here altered his original. See the quotation made by Jerome, 
Ep. ad Avitum 2: “The Son, who is the image of the invisible Father, is not the truth 
when compared with the Father; but in relation to us, who are unable to receive 
the truth of God almighry, he is a shadow and semblance of the truth.” That this 
correctly represents what Origen wrote is shown by an anonymous defender of 
Origen whose book is described by Photius, B/6/ Cod. 117. According to this work 


Origen was accused of saying that “the image of God, considered in relation to 


Notes to Book I, Chapter Book I, Chapter IIT 44] 


God whose image he is, and in so far as he is image, is not truth.” In Theophilus 
Alex., Ep. Synod. 2 (the letter written after the Council at Alexandria in 400 AD, 
where Origenism was condemned: see Jerome, Ep. 92), the charge is made in the 
following exaggerated form; “The Son compared with us is truth, but compared 
with the Father he is falsehood.” See further the Greek fragment that follows. 

9. A Greek fragment from Justinian was inserted here in the original But- 
terworth cranslation. For further information on this attestation see Crouzel, SC 
253, pp. 44-45, n. 41. 

10. Koetschau suspects an omission by Rufinus at this point, where possibly 
the two following passages may originally have stood. Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 2, 
“God the Father is light incomprehensible. In comparison with the Father, Christ 
is a very small brightness, though to us by reason of our weakness he seems to be 
a great one.” Theophilus Alex., Ep. Synod, (in Jerome, Ep.92) : “Again, as much 
as Paul or Peter differ from the Savior, so much is the Savior less than the Father.” 

11. See Ch. II. 4 (p. 23). 

12. Jerome refers to this passage in his Ep. ad Avitum 2. “He gives an illus- 
tration of two statues, an immense one and a very small one; the former fills the 
world and is in a way invisible from its very size, the latter is perceptible to our 
sight. The former he compares to the Father, the latter to the Son.” 

13. See p. 27. 

14. See Ch. IV. 3-5, pp. 52-55. 

15. The Latin reads “that the Lord Jesus is in the glory of God the Father.” 
But we have Origen’s Greek in Comm. in lob. VL. 44; Con. Cels, VIII. 59; Hom., 
in ferem. XVIII. 3, and in each case it agrees with the text of the N.T. 

16. See Ch. I. 6, p. 3. 

17. See Ch. II. 9, p. 30. Rufinus uses the Greek word énergeiac and then 
translates it by inoperationis. 

18. See Origen, Comm. in Cant. iii. “Perhaps as God made man in his own 
image and likeness, he also created all other creatures in the likeness of other heav- 
enly forms.” It looks as if che opinion expressed in the text above belongs really to 
Origen, and Rufinus is rejecting it. 

19. Butcerworth inserts here a Greek fragment from Justinian. For further 
information on this attestation see Crouzel, SC 253, pp. 53-55, n. 75. 

20. See above, p. 36. 

21. See Ch. I. 6, p. 13. 

22. For “good angel” see Tb 5:21 and 2 Mc 15:23; “good man,” Mt 12:35; 
“good slave,” Mt 25:21; “good treasure,” Mt 12:35; “good heart,” Lk 8:15; “good 
tree,” Mt 7:17. 

23. Origen makes such a collection in his Comm. in Ioh. I. 21-24. 


Book I, Chapter III 

1. See Ch. I. 6, p. 26. 

2. The doctrine of the Logos, the Reason or Thought of God immanent in 
creation, was first expressed by Heracleitus (c. 500 BC). Plato, in the Timaeus, 34 
B, describes the World-soul which the Creator put within the body of the universe 
to be the source of life and reason. 


442 Notes to Book I, Chapter III 


3. This is a Gnostic doctrine, taught by Marcion among others. Tertullian, 
Adv. Mare. I. xv. “If, then, he constructed the world out of some underlying mate- 
rial that was unborn and uncreated and contemporaneous with God, as Marcion 
believes the Creator did....” 

4. See Origen, Con. Cels. IV. 30. “We shall not, however, imitate him (i-e., 
Celsus) nor speak after his style about the philosophers who declare that they know 
the nature of the universe and argue with one another whether. . . souls are unbe- 
gotten and not created by God but simply arranged in order by him and changed 
from one body to another, or whether they are originated at the same time as the 
body and then either endure forever or pass away.” Origen’s own opinion, according 
to Rufinus (Apol. ad Anastas, 6) was as follows: “Some maintain that souls were 
created long ago, when God made all things of nothing, and that now he simply 
arranges them in bodies according to his own judgment. ‘This is the opinion of 
Origen and certain other Greeks.” 

5. The second title occurs in Hermas, Vis. V. 8, and in Clem. Alex. Strom. 1. 
85, 4 (Stahlin ii. 55, 12f) 

6. Hermas, Mand. 1. 

7. Enoch, Ch. II. 5. 

8. Butterworth inserts here a Greelc fragment from Justinian. For further 
information on this attestation see Crouzel, SC 253, pp. 60-61, n. 20. 

9. Not extant. 

10. Or, “The Spirit (or wind) bloweth where it listeth.” 

11. Cp. Origen, Hom. In Num. X1. 8. “I think therefore that the Holy Spirit 
is holy without ever having been made holy. For there did not come to him from 
some external source a holiness which he did not previously possess, but he always 
was holy, and never experienced a beginning of holiness.” 

12. Butterworth inserts here a Greek fragment from Justinian. For a discus- 
sion of this attestation see Crouzel SC 253, p. 71, n. 29. 

13. In hominibus rationalibus. Semler suggests omnibus for hominibus. Koet- 
schau, however, thinks that the text needs further emendation and proposes the 
following: “the activity of the Father and the Son is to be, seen in all rational beings, 
both saints and sinners; that of the Father in dumb animals also, yes, and even. 
...” But Rufinus may well have written the text as it stands, in his keen desire to 
avoid anything like Origen’s subordination of the Son. 

14. Cp. Origen, Comm. in Cant. I, “Adam also is reckoned among the 
prophets, because he prophesied the ‘great mystery’ in regard to Christ and the 
Church.” See Eph 5:32. Also. Clem. Alex. Strom. I. 135, 3 (Stahlin II. 84. 5). 
“Before the law Adam uttered prophecies in regard to the woman and in regard 
to the naming of the animals.” 

15. Koetschau (following Schnitzer, who regarded the passage from “But 
more” to “spirit of his mouth” as interpolated by Rufinus) points out that this 
sentence contradicts the Greek fragment discussed in n. 12, above. The probabil- 
ity would seem to be that Rufinus has modified some such phrase as “there is no 
separation in the Trinity” (see p. 48) into what appears here. 

16. See n. 15 above. 


Notes to Book I, Chapter [V—Book I, Chapter VI 443 


Book I, Chapter IV 

1. It is evident that Rufinus has omitted a considerable section at this point, 
for in his text there is no discussion of “what is involved in the acquisition of this 
knowledge, and what in its loss.” 

2. Butterworth, following Koetschau, inserts a Latin excerpt from Jerome 
here. For a discussion of this excerpt see Crouzel, SC 253, pp. 78-79, n. 4. 

See Jerome, Con. Joh. Hieros. 16, “We wish to know . . . whether the doctrine 
of Origen is true, who said that all rational creatures. . . ” 

3. This doctrine of the descent of the soul is found in Plato, Phaedrus 246 
B-D, a passage clearly referred to by Origen in Con. Cels. IV. 40. Jerome says 
(Con. Joh. Hieros. 19), in connection with this doctrine: “What you admire so 
much we long ago despised when we found it in Plato.” Koetschau refers also to 
the doctrine of Carpocrates, the Gnostic, as set forth in Irenaeus Adv. Haer. 1, 
XXV. 4. But there is no resemblance between the ethical system of Origen and 
the antinomian theories of Carpocrates beyond the fact that both are based on 
the idea of transmigration. 

4. See Jerome, Hp ad. Avitum 3, “When he comes to deal with rational crea- 
tures and says that they have descended into earthly bodies through negligence, 
he adds the following: It is a mark of extreme negligence. . . .” Jerome says also 
in Con, Joh. Hieros. 19, that “Origen used Jacob’s ladder to teach that rational 
creatures descend gradually to the lowest step, namely, to flesh and blood.” This 
may also belong here. 

5. We return to Rufinus at this point. 

6. Le., in Ch. V. (p. 57ff.). 

7. This section, to the end of Ch. IV., is found in one MS only and has been 
obliterated from another. See Koetschau’s ed., p. 65, note on I. 8. 

8. Latin text in Lactantius, /yst. Div. IV. 6. 


Book I, Chapter V 

1. See Ch. I. 13 (p. 36f.). 

2. Rufinus transliterates the Greek dmootdéty¢ and then gives the Latin equiv- 
alent refuga, runaway, fugitive, or exile. 

3, Jerome’s version of this passage should be compared with the above, which 
Koetschau regards as unfaithful to the original. See Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 3. 
“Moved by these considerations we believe that as a result of their own free will 
some are included in the number of the saints and those who serve God, while 
others of their own fault have departed from holiness and descended to such a 
pitch of negligence as to be changed into opposing powers.” 


Book I, Chapter VI 

1. See Preface 3-10 (pp. 2-7). 

2, Again Rufinus has altered Origen, considerably weakening his precise 
statements. See Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 3. “Once again a beginning arises from the 
end and an end from the beginning, and all things are so changed that one who is 
now a man may in another world become a daemon, while a daemon, if he lives 
negligently, may be bound to a grosser body, that is, may become a man. Thus,” 


444 Notes to Book I, Chapter VI-Book I, Chapter VII 


continues Jerome, “he mixes up everything, so that one may be changed from 
an archangel into a devil, and on the other hand a devil may turn into an angel.” 

3. Butterworth inserts here a parallel Greek fragment from Justinian. For a 
discussion of this fragment see Crouzel, SC 253, pp. 93-95, n. 13. 

4. Cp. Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 3. “Those, however, who have descended, but 
whose movement has not involved them in utter ruin, will be made subject to the 
care and rule and governance of the principalities, powers, thrones and dominions; 
and perhaps out of these the human race will one day be constituted in one of the 
worlds that will be made when, as Isaiah says, there shall be a ‘new heaven and a 
new earth.” 

5. See Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 3. “Those, however, who do not deserve to 
return to their former state by passing through a human life, will become the ‘devil 
and his angels’ and the worst kind of daemons, and will be appointed to different 
tasks in one of the many worlds according to their varying degrees of merit.” 

6. See p. 58ff. 

7. Here Butterworth inserts a parallel fragment in Greek from Justinian. For 
a discussion of this fragment see Crouzel, SC 253, pp. 97-99, n. 24. 

8. Rufinus leaves the salvation of the devil and his angels an open question, 
though Origen had asserted it as a fact. See Jerome, Ep. Ad Pamm. et Ocean. 7 
(Origen teaches that) “after many ages and the one restoration of all things Gabriel 
will be in the same state as the devil, Paul as Caiaphas and virgins as prostitutes.” 

9. See p. 74. 

10. Jerome's version of this is as follows (Ep. ad Avitum 4). “Bodily substances 
will utterly disappear, or at any rate in the end of all things bodies will be similar 
to our air and sky or to any clearer and purer body that can be conceived.” 


Book I, Chapter VII 

1. Origen refers to Chs. V. and VI. 

2. This was a Gnostic doctrine. Some men are by nature “spiritual,” possess- 
ing a spark of the divine life. Others, at any rate according to the earlier Gnostic 
teaching, are earthly and incapable of salvation. See Hastings, Encyclopaedia of 
Religion and Ethics, Art. Gnosticism (E. FE Scott), Vol. VI, p. 235. 

3. It was a widespread opinion that the stars were living beings. Plato regarded 
them as divine (Timaeus 40 B). The Stoics held the same view (Cicero, De Natura 
Deorum IU. 15, 39). Philo (De Mundi Opif. 24) says that they are pure and divine 
beings, but susceptible only of virtue, and not of evil. Origen probably introduced 
a new idea in regard to the stars when, in order to fit them into his theory of the 
continual progress or relapse of all rational creatures, he argued that they were 
capable of sin. 

4. Origen quotes this passage again in his Comm. in Joh. 1. 35, but there he 
more wisely adds: “unless indeed this statement is hyperbolical.” 

5. Origen in Con. Celsum V. II expresses his belief that the “sun, moon and 
stars pray to God who is over all through his Only-begotten.” 

G. Koetschau concludes that there is an omission in the text at this point, 
relying on Rufin. Palaest. De Fide 19, where it is stated that Origen quotes “the 
prophet David,” i-e., Ps 103:18, as well as Is 45:12. 


Notes to Book I, Chapter VII-Book II, Chapter I 445 


7. See p. 5. 

8. eee inserts in the text this passage from Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 4. He 
follows Schnitzer in placing it here because Jerome definitely associates it with the 
quotation from Rom 8:20, 21, which occurs at the beginning of paragraph 5. The 
passage is clearly meant to give a true representation of the original, though not 
perhaps in a strict translation. In the quotation which follows it Jerome claims to 
give Origen’s own words. In another passage (Jerome, Con. loh. Hieros. 17) he gives 
Origen’s doctrine as follows: “the sun itself and the moon and the whole host of the 
stars are souls of creatures once rational and incorporeal, but now subject to vanity, 
that is to fiery bodies, which we in our ignorance and simplicity call the lights of 
the world.” Justinian (Ep. ad Mennam—Mansi IX. 513) charges Origen with saying 
that “the sky and the sun and moon and stars and the waters above the heavens 
are living and rational powers.” Rufinus has apparently toned down the original 
and changed its order, but he does not seem to have omitted much at this point. 

9. Here Butterworth includes a parallel Greek fragment from Justinian. For 
a discussion of this fragment see Crouzel, SC 253, pp. 109-10, n. 28. 

10. The passage in brackets is inserted here by Koetschau, following Schnitzer, 
from Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 4. Jerome prefaces this passage with the statement: “lest 
anyone should suppose that what we say is our own, let us quote his very words.” 


Book I, Chapter VIII 

1. For the names of the archangels and their tasks, see Enoch Ch. XL. 

2. Here Butterworth inserts an extensive Greek fragment from a composite of 
sources. For a discussion of this fragment see Crouzel, SC 253, pp. 114-15, n. 5. 

3. In some MSS this title has been incorporated into the text. It is at this 
point that we return to Rufinus. 

4, Words such as these appear to be missing from the text. 

5. See p. 59ff, 

6. Here Butterworth includes a parallel Greek fragment from Antipater of 
Bostra. For a discussion of the fragment see Crouzel SC 253, p. 117, n. 14. 

7. Here Butterworth inserts an extensive Greek fragment from Gregory of 
Nyssa and Justinian. For a discussion of this fragment see Crouzel SC 253, pp. 
119-25, n. 28. 

8. Rufinus’s text here is precisely the opposite of what Origen wrote. 


Book II, Chapter I 

1. See Bk. I, Ch. VI. 2 (p. 70). 

2. The theory of the World-soul comes from Plato, Timaeus 30 AB. See Zeller, 
Plato and the Older Academy, Ch. VII. 3 (Eng. Trans. 1876, p. 341). 

3, See p. 70. 

4, See Zeller, Aristotle and the Earlier Peripatetics, Ch. IX. B. (Eng. trans. 
1897, pp. 482-5). 

5. See Plato, Timaeus 51 A. “The mother and receptive basis of the visible and 
sensible world is neither earth, nor air, nor fire, nor water, nor anything derived 
from these nor anything from which they are derived, but an invisible and formless 
substance, capable of receiving all.” 


446 Notes to Book II, Chapter I-Book IH, Chapter III 


G. See Zeller, Plato and the Older Academy, Ch. VMI. 1. (Eng. trans. 1876, 
p. 293ff,). 
7. Hermas, Mand. 1. 1. See p. 41. 


Book II, Chapter II 

1. See Bk. 1. Ch. II. 2 (p. 21). In Bk. I. Ch. VIL. 1, (p. 77) Origen says that 
all rational beings are, so far as their essential nature goes, incorporeal. It is their 
fall which causes them to assume bodies; see Ch. IV. 1 (pp. 51-52). Rufinus has 
probably modified this passage. 


Book II, Chapter HI 


1. With this paragraph compare Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 5. “In the second book 
he (i.e., Origen) asserts that there are innumerable worlds, not, in the manner of 
Epicurus, many similar worlds existing at one time, but that after the end of one 
world comes the beginning of another. A world existed before this world of ours, 
and another in turn will exist after it, and another after that, and others in constant 
succession. But he is in doubt whether there will ever be a world similar in every 
respect to another world, so that the two would appear to differ in no particular, 
or whether it is certain that there will never be one world quite like another and 
totally indistinguishable from it.” 

In Theophilus of Alexandria's Paschal letter, translated by Jerome in his Ep. 96, 
we also find the following: “Nor does any man die over and over again, as Origen 
dared to write, in his desire to establish that most impious doctrine of the Stoics 
by the authority of the divine scriptures.” 

Rufinus has carefully avoided giving the views that Origen really expressed. 

2. Photius (Bibl Cod. 109) says that Clement, Origen’s predecessor at Alex- 
andria, “talked marvels about transmigrations of souls and about many worlds 
having existed before Adam.” 

3. See Bk. I. Ch. I. 2. (p. 102). 

4. See Jerome, Ed. ad Avitum 5. “If,” he says (i-e., Origen), “as the course 
of the argument forces us to admit, all things have lived without bodies, then al! 
bodily existence will be swallowed up, and that which was once created out of 
nothing will be resolved into nothing. And a time will come when its use will once 
again be necessary.” So Theophilus Alex. in Jerome, Ep. 96: “For if, according to the 
error of Origen, bodily nature is empty and transient. . . .” and the same author in 
Jerome, Ep. 92: “What shall 1 say about the resurrection of the dead, in regard to 
which he (i.e., Origen) most clearly blasphemes, declaring that after a succession of 
many ages our bodies will gradually be resolved into nothing and vanish into thin 
air; and, lest we should think this a trifle, he adds that the resurrection body will be 
not only corruptible but mortal.” Other similar passages occur in these two letters. 
Rufinus has again modified the outspoken views of Origen and omitted much. 

5. Le., Origen: see quotation from Jerome in the note that follows. 

6. See Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 5. “And in the words that follow (Origen 
says); if, as has been proved by reason and by the authority of the scriptures, this 
corruptible shall put on incorruption and this mortal shall put on immortality, 
and death shal! be swallowed up in victory and corruption in incorruption, then 


———$<$——S IO SSeS 


Notes to Book II, Chapter II 447 


perhaps also the whole of bodily nature will be destroyed, for on this alone can 
death have its effect.” 

7. For the passage beginning here see Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 5: “And a little 
further on (Origen says); if these opinions are not contrary to the faith, perhaps 
we shall one day live without bodies. And if he who is perfectly subjected to Christ 
must be understood to be without a body, and all are to be subjected to Christ, 
then we too shall exist without bodies, when we have become perfectly subjected 
to him.” 

8. Butterworth includes here a Greek fragment from Justinian. For a discus- 
sion of this fragment see Crouzel SC 253, pp. 145-47, n. 16. 

9. See Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 5 (following the passage last quoted): “Tf all 
shall be subjected to God, then all will lay aside their bodies; and then the entire 
universe of bodily things will be dissolved into non-existence; but, if necessity 
should demand it a second time, it would come into existence again in the event of 
the fall of rational creatures. For God has given souls over to struggle and conflict, 
in order that they may understand that their complete and final victory has been 
attained not by their own strength but by the grace of God. I think, therefore, 
that on account of the variety of causes worlds become diverse, and that the errors 
of those who maintain their similarity are hereby shattered.” The words “If all... 
rational creatures” agree with Frag, 19. 

10. Cp. Origen Con. Celsum IV. 67, 68: V. 20, 21. The identical recurrence 
of things in cycles was a Stoic doctrine. See Hicks, Stoic and Epicurean, p. 33ff., 
and Arnold, Roman Stoicism, p. 193. 

11. Jerome, in his Apology I. 20, says that “your Origen allows himself to 
assert that Christ has often suffered and will often suffer, on the ground that what 
was beneficial once will be beneficial always.” Compare Book IV. Ch. III. 14 (26), 
on p. 414. 

12. This is a misinterpretation of “from this time forth and forevermore,” Ps 
115:18; 121:8; 125:2. 

13. The “people of the opposite earth” are the Greek antichthones. See Clem. 
Ad Cor. XX. 5, 8. “The unsearchable places of the abysses and the unfathomable 
realms of the lower world are controlled by the same ordinances.. . . The ocean, 
which men cannot pass, and the worlds beyond it, are ruled by the same injunc- 
tions of the Master.” (Kirsopp Lake’s translation, Loeb Classical Library, Apastolic 
Fathers, Vol. 1. p. 45). 

14. I Clem. Ad Cor. XX. 8. 

15. The Greek Apocalypse of Baruch is an account of the journey of Baruch 
through five heavens. But both M. R. James (Texts and Studies, Vol. V., p. li, 1897) 
and R. H. Charles (Apoc. and Pseudep. of O. T. Vol. IL., p. 527) regard the work as 
being incomplete in the form in which we have it; so that probably when Origen 
read it there were seven heavens described. It is called 4 Baruch by James and 3 
Baruch by Charles, and is probably a Christian redaction of a Jewish work dating 
from early in the second century. 

16. Koetschau quotes the following parallels. Cicero, De Repub. V1. 17 (Somn. 
Scip. 4). “All things are bound together by nine circles or spheres, one of which, 


448 Notes to Book IJ, Chapter I1]-Book II, Chapter IV 


the outside one, is the heavenly sphere, which embraces all the rest.” Gregor. Nyss. 
In Hexaém. (Migne, PG 44, p. 117). “On account of the limitless extent of the 
sphere of the fixed stars the great wisdom of God established in the middle of the 
entire span the nature of the sun, to be the basis of earthly things.” 

17. See also Origen, Hom. In Psalm. 11. 4. “There is also that other earth, of 
which the scripture speaks, the one that flows with milk and honey, which the 
Savior in the Gospels promises to the meck, when he says: ‘Blessed are the meek, 
for they shall possess the earth.’ This earch which we inhabit is in its true designa- 
tion called the ‘dry land,’ just as the heaven which we behold is properly called the 
firmament. But the firmament takes the name of heaven from the appellation of 
that other heaven, as the scripture teaches in Genesis.” 

18. This is not found in Origen, Hom. in Gen. I. 1, 2. See the previous note. 

19. The reading is that of VIIL 4 in Vg. and LXX. 

20. See Book I, Preface 8 (p. 6). 

21, Compare Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 5, 6. “Three notions of the end are 
suggested to us, from which the reader is invited to discover the truest and best. 
Either we shall live without a body, when by being subjected to Christ we shall be 
subjected to God, and God shall be all in all; or else, just as what is subjected to 
Christ will with Christ himself be subjected to God and joined into one compact 
union, so every substance will be resolved into its highest condition and changed 
into ether, which is of a purer and simpler nature; or else, that thar sphere which 
we have above called the ‘fixed’ sphere, and all chat is comprised within its span, 
shall be dissolved into nothing, but that the further sphere, by which the lower zone 
is itself contained and bounded, will be called the ‘good land,’ while yet another 
sphere, which revolves around this same land and is called heaven, will serve as 
a dwelling-place for the saints. In talking like this (Jerome adds), is he not most 
plainly following the errors of the nations and foisting the ravings of philosophers 
on the simplicity of the Christian faith?” 


Book II, Chapter IV 

1. This was the doctrine held by Marcion, a heretical Christian teacher of the 
earlier half of the second century. He was puzzled by the character attributed to 
God in the Old Testament and declared that, although that God might be just, he 
could not be regarded as good or as the Father whom Jesus revealed. See Eusebius, 
Hist. Eccl. 1V.11 and Tertullian, Con. Marc, passim. Many of the Gnostics adopted 
the same doctrine, as a means of overcoming the difficulties of the Old Testament 
and fitting it into their systems. 

2. Basileides (see Hippolytus, Philosophum, VII. 23) and Valentinus (ébid. 
VI. 33). The Valentinians maintained that the Creator of the world made the 
statement (Is 46:9) in ignorance: see Irenaeus, in Epiphanius; Oehler, Corpus 
haeres. Il. i., p. 348. 

3. Koetschau refers to Origen, Hom. In Jerem. X11. 5. “The heretics say: “You 
see what the Creator is like. He is the God of the prophets, who says, I will not 
spare nor have compassion to save them from destruction. How can this God be 


good’?” See Jer 13:14. 


Notes to Book II, Chapter [V—Book I, Chapter VI 449 


4, Compare this with 1 Pref, 9 (p. 7). [This refers to Origen’s preface at the 
start of Book I] 

5. Compare this with Bk. IL, I. 4 (p. 96). 

6. See Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 6. “In the same book he ({i.e., Origen) says: 
Grant that God is invisible. If then he is invisible by nature, he will not be visible 
even to the Savior.” 

7. We do not possess the explanation to which Origen here refers. In his Hom. 
in Jerem. XVIIL 6 he says: “If you hear of the anger of God and the wrath of God, 


. aa 
do not suppose that this anger and wrath are passions of God. 


Book II, Chapter V 

1. The protagonist of this view was Marcion, whose teaching is described and 
combated in Tertullian, Adv. Marcionem. 

2. See Plato Repub. 331 E-336 A. 

3. Origen is fully alive to the problem of undeserved suffering. 

4. See Hippolytus’ Epitome of the teaching of Marcion and Cerdo in Phi- 
losophum. X. 19, where the above saying is quoted. For the saying itself see Mt 
7:18, 12:33. 

5. For the use made of this text see Hippolytus, Philosophum. VII. 31. Pre- 
pon, a disciple of Marcion, said that “the just” was a third principle, intermediate 
between good and evil. Marcion himself, according to Hippolytus, said that Christ, 
in order to be a mediator, had to be free from all connection not only with evil but 
even with good, and adduced this text in support of his doctrine. The Naassenes 
(ibid. V. 7) used the same text to support their doctrine that the primal seed, the 
generative cause of all existence, was alone good. 


Book II, Chapter VI 

1. Le., as the various docetic heresies asserted. 

2. See Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 6. “And lower down he (i-e., Origen) says, No 
other soul, which has descended into a human body, has revealed in itself'so pure 
and genuine a likeness to its former condition as that of which the Savior says, No 
man taketh my soul from me, but I lay it down of myself.” 

3. This is an example of the principle called the Communicatio idiomatum, 
by which qualities that are in strictness only applicable to the divine nature are 
sometimes predicated of the human, and vice versa. 

4. Butterworth includes here a parallel Greek fragment from Justinian. For a 
discussion of the fragment see Crouzel SC 253, pp. 178-79, n. 25. 

5. See Bk. I. Ch. III. 3 (p. 87). 


Book II, Chapter VII 

1. In the Apostolic Canons (49) it is enacted that anyone who baptizes into 
“three unoriginated beings, or three sons, or three paracletes” shall be deprived of 
his office. Origen, too, in another place mentions some who affirmed the existence 
of two Holy Spirits: see Comm. In Ep. ad Titum (Lomm. V. 287f.) “Moreover if 
there are any who say that it was one Holy Spirit who was in the prophets, but 
another who was in the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, they commit one and the 


450 Notes to Book II, Chapter VII-Book II, Chapter VII 


same offense of impiety as those who, so far as in them lies, cut and rend the nature 
of the deity, by saying that there is one God of the law and another of the gospels.” 

2. See Bk. I. Ch. III. 5 (p. 43), where the Spirit’s operation is said to extend 
to the saints alone. The Spirit is given potentially to all, but his effective working 
is confined to the saints, of Old and New Testament times alike. 

3. The basis of this “spiritual” interpretation of the Old Testament is given 
in Con. Celsum VII. 34. “Walking” with God, having “ears to hear,” or having our 
“eyes” opened, are clearly metaphorical expressions, which make nonsense when 
interpreted literally. Origen, however, with other writers of the school of Alexan- 
dria, uses this poetical phraseology to justify an arbitrary treatment of passages 
where a literal interpretation is demanded. A merely literal interpretation, even of 
a plain historical narrative, was despised on the ground that it indicated inferiority 
of spiricual capacity in the commentator. See Origen, Comm. In Matt. ser. 27, “for 
the spiritual and prophetic meaning of scripture is veiled beneath the outward 
narrative, so that all scripture may be understood literally by inferior readers, but 
in a mystical way by the spiritual and the perfect.” 

4. Origen appears to have overlooked Rom 8:26, 27. 


Book II, Chapter VII 

1. See Aristotle, De anima 3, 9, 1. “The soul of living creatures is defined by 
its two powers, that of discernment, which is a function of thought and perception, 
and that of movement in space.” Philo, Legis. alleg. 1.7 (71) “Soul is a nature that 
possesses imagination and desire.” See also Tertullian, De anima 14-16. 

2. The word translated “natural” is in Greek psychikos, from psyche, soul. 

3. Butterworth includes here a parallel Greek fragment from Justinian. For a 
discussion of the fragment see Crouzel, SC 253, pp. 201-2, n. 16. 

4, Origen calls Ben Sira’s book by the name of Wisdom in Comm. in Ioh. 
Frag. 74 and 136 (Koetschau). 

5. Aristotle (De anima I. 2, 405b) mentions this etymological explanation of 
the word: “others say that the soul is the cold element, so called from breathing 
and cooling (katapsyxis).” See also Plato, Cratylus 399 D-E and Tertullian, De 
anima 25 and 27. 

Directly following this paragraph, Butterworth inserts a Greek fragment 
from Epiphanius. For a discussion of this fragment see Crouzel, SC 253, pp. 
204-6, n. 24. 

6. See p. 156. 

7. Also cp. p. 157, above. 

8. Here Butterworth inserts a Latin excerpt from Jerome. For a discussion of 
this passage see Crouzel, SC 253, p. 208, n. 27. 

9. See p. 152. 

10. See Origen, Comm. in loh. XIU. 22, “When we find eyes, eyelids and 
ears, hands, arms and feet ascribed to God, yes and even wings, we allegorize these 
terms, despising those who invest God with a form like that of man.” 

11. In his De Oratione XXIII. 3, Origen shows that he is alluding to such 
passages as Gn 3:8 and Ps 11:4. 

12. See Book H. Ch. VIL 1. (p. 151). 


Notes to Book II, Chapter IX—Book II, Chapter X 451 


Book II, Chapter IX 

1. Butterworth includes a Greek fragment parallel to this paragraph, from 
Justinian. For a discussion of the fragment see Crouzel, SC 253, pp. 211-13, n. 2. 

2. See Bk. UH. Ch. IIT. 6 (p. 110f.); also Con. Celsum VI. 59. 

3. See Bk. I. Ch. VIII. 3f. (p. 87). 

4, With this paragraph cp. Origen, Comm. In Ioh. Il. 13. “The evil or the 
wicked is opposite to the good, and not-being is opposite to being; from which it 
follows that the wicked and the evil are not-being.” 

Also Con. Celsum IV. 70. “For admitted that God, while preserving each 
individual’s free will, makes use of the evil of wicked men in the administration of 
the world, so disposing them as to conduce to the benefit of the whole, nevertheless 
such men are deserving of blame.” 

See also Origen, Hom. In Num. XIV. 2 (Lomm. X. 162). Theophilus Alex., 
Ep. pasch. Il. 10 (in Jerome, Ep. 98) says that Origen affirmed that “it was through 
the negligence and movement and descent of the higher rational creatures that 
God was led to create this world of diversity.” 

5. See Con. Celsum Il. 42, 80: V. 4: VI. 59. 

6. See p. 126 and n. 3. 

7. The inhabitants, presumably, of the “lower parts of the earth.” (Eph 4:9). 

8. See Bk. I. Ch. V. 3 and VIII. 2, pp. 59f. and 86f. 

9. Cp. Origen Con. Celsum V. 27, 34, 

10. See Bk. II. Chs. IV. and V. (p. 117ff.). 

11. See Bk. I. Ch. V. 3, VI. 3, VIIL 3 (pp. 59f, 73, and 87£) and Bk. III. 
(p. 195ff.). 

12. See p. 162. 

13. This sentence, though contrary to Origen’s system considered in a strictly 
logical way, shows that he was not unmindful of the nobility and necessity of 
sacrifice. 

14. See the next chapter. 


Book II, Chapter X 

1. See p. 4. 

2. Only small fragments of these works are extant. See Lomm. XVII. 55-64. 
Origen’s views on the Resurrection are clearly set forth in the Con. Celsum V. 
17-19, VII. 32 and VIII. 49-50. His endeavor to uphold a spiritual doctrine of 
the resurrection body was misinterpreted by Methodius, Jerome, and others as an 
attack upon the Church’s faith. 

3. Rufinus, (Apol. in Hieron. II. 4) claims that in his translation of the First 
Principles he had adhered to the teaching of the Church in the passages dealing 
with the “resurrection of the flesh.” 

4. See Methodius, De Resurr. 25, 2. According to Methodius, Origen taught 
that in the resurrection men would have the same form as previously, but not a 
form of flesh. 

5. According to Photius, Zp. I. 8, 15 (Migne, PG 102, p. 645), Origen and 
his followers expressed themselves more clearly than Rufinus will allow on the 
spiritual nature of the Resurrection. “They will have it that our bodies do not rise 


452 Notes to Book II, Chapter X 


with our souls, but that the latter rise without bodies, thus giving the name resur- 
rection to I do not know what. For it should be a resurrection of that which has 
fallen and died, and not of something which exists and remains in incorruption 
forever, such as the soul is.” 

6. See p. 174. 

7. See Origen, Con. Celsum V. 23. “We do not, therefore, maintain that the 
body which has undergone corruption returns to its original nature, any more than 
the grain of wheat which has undergone corruption returns to the condition of a 
grain of wheat. What we say is that, just as over the grain of wheat there arises a 
stalk, so there is implanted in the body a certain life-principle, from which, not 
being corruptible, the body arises in incorruption.” See also Con. Celsum V. 18, 
19 and VII. 32. 

8. Koetschau assumes a gap here to allow for certain statements made by 
Origen which Rufinus does not give. See Anathema X of the Second Council of 
Constantinople: “[Jf anyone shall say that} the Lord’s body after the resurrection 
was ethereal and spherical in shape, and that after the resurrection all other men’s 
bodies will be the same, and that when the Lord has put away his own body and 
all men have done likewise, then the nature of bodies will disappear into nonex- 
istence, [/et him be anathema.” 

Also Justinian, Ep. ad Mennam. Mansi IX 516 D. “He (i-e., Origen) says that 
in the resurrection the bodies of men will rise spherical.” 

9. Origen’s doctrine of the purifying nature of “eternal fire,” stated in this and 
the succeeding paragraphs, is also described in Con. Celsum V. 16 and VI. 25, 26. 

Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 7, says: “As for the fire of Gehenna and the torments, 
with which holy scripture threatens sinners, Origen does not make them consist in 
punishments, but in the conscience of sinners, when by the goodness and power of 
God the whole memory of our offenses is placed before our eyes. The entire crop of 
our sins springs up as it were from seeds which have remained hidden in the soul, 
and every shameful and impious act that we have done is represented in an image 
before our eyes, so that the mind, beholding its former acts of self-indulgence is 
punished by a burning conscience and stung by the pricks of remorse.” 

So also Comm. in Ep. ad Ephes. Wl. 5 and Apol. adv. Rufin. IL. 7. Cp. Clem. 
Alex., Strom. VII. 6, 34 (Stahlin III. 27, 5-8). “We, however, maintain that the 
fire purifies not flesh, but sinful souls; for we call it not the all-devouring and 
tormenting, but the discerning fire.” 

10. And see p. 130. 

11. This passage, taken from Jerome, Ep ad Avitum 7, has been omitted by 
Rufinus. Jerome adds: “In so speaking he clearly supports the doctrine of trans- 
migration taught by Pythagoras and Plato.” 

12. See also p. 174. This sentence belongs to Rufinus. 

13. Directly following this paragraph, Butterworth inserts a Greek fragment 
from Leontius of Byzantium and Justinian. For a discussion of this fragment see 
Crouzel, SC 253, pp. 241-42, n. 43. 


14. ‘This concluding sentence is from Rufinus. 


Notes to Book I, Chapter XI~Book II, Chapter I 453 


Book II, Chapter XI 

1. For the title see Acts 26:6 and Heb 6:12. 

2. See Virgil, Georgics II. 490. 

3. These simple folk (Lat. simpliciores), who took the Scriptures literally. are 
further described in Origen, Comm. In Matt. XVII. 35 (Lomm. IV. 167ff.) and Jn 
Cant. Proleg. (Lomm. XIV. 295). 

4. The sentence is not complete in Latin, and Koetschau suggests inserting 
the words /ucri habent et, which are translated above. 

5. See Bk. IE. Ch. VIII. 3, 4 (p. 154ff.). 

6. These titles are probably suggested by passages such as Eph 2:2; I Cor 
12:6, 11; Rom 8:2. 

7. See Bk. I. Ch. V. (p. 57). 

8. See Bk. IL Ch. VIII. (p. 151ff). 

9. The Greek idea of the heavens was that of a series of revolving spheres, 
beginning with that of the moon and ending with the sphere of the fixed stars (see 
par. 191). Philo says (De somniis I. 22) that the lower air nearest the earth is the 
home of disembodied souls. 

10. See Bk. I. Ch. VIL. 3 (p. 79ff.) 

11. Jerome's paraphrase of this passage is as follows (Ep. ad Avitum 7): “And 
at the end of the second book, in the course of his argument about our final 
perfection, he says: When we have progressed so far that we are no longer flesh 
and bodies, and possibly not even souls, but mind and understanding come to 
perfection and not blinded by any cloud of disturbing passions, we shall see rational 
and spiritual beings ‘face to face.” 
12. See p. 183. 


Book III, Preface of Rufinus 
1. See Preface, Bk. L. p. lxxix. 
2. See Preface, Bk. I. p. lxxviii. 


Book III, Chapter I 

1. This chapter, marked as Frag. 26, Koetschau, is preserved in Ch. XXI of 
the Philocalia, a collection of extracts from Origen’s works made by Gregory and 
Basil. See the Edition of J. A. Robinson, Cambridge 1893, p. 152ff. 

2. A similar passage is found in Origen, De Oratione V1. 1. “Of things that 
move some derive their movement from without, such as non-living things and 
things that are held together simply by their own constitution, as well as things that 
are moved by nature and soul when occasionally these move not as such but in a 
manner similar to that of things held together simply by their own constitution, 
For instance, stones hewn from the quarry and logs which have lost their power of 
growth, are held together simply by their own constitution and derive their move- 
ment from without; and so also do the bodies of animals and the portable fruits 
of plants which, when changed in position by anyone, change not like animals or 
plants but like stones or logs which have lost the power of growth. And even if these 
latter move in virtue of the fact that all bodies are in a state of flux as they decay, 
nevertheless this movement in the process of decay is inseparably connected with 


454 Notes to Book III, Chapter I 


the former kind. A second class of things comprises those that are moved by their 
inherent nature or soul, which are said, by those who use words in a very precise 
manner, to be moved out of themselves. A third kind of movement is that observed 
in animals, which is called movement from within themselves. And I think that 
the movement of rational creatures is movement through themselves.” The Greek 
prepositions used are é& (out of), a6 (from within) and d:é (through). For the 
sources of this fragment of Origen’s teaching on Physics see Clem. Alex. Strom. I. 
20, 110 (Stahlin I. 173, 17ff.) and Von Arnim, Chrysippi Frag. Phys. 714. 

3. Rufinus’s qualification of Origen’s bold statement will be noticed. 

4. The end of the quotation may have dropped out of the Latin text by 
accident. 

5. A characteristic addition of Rufinus. Cp. Bk. IIL. Ch. V. 3 (p. 313). 

6. This quotation is missing, probably by accident, from the text of Rufinus. 

7. The heretics are the followers of Marcion, Valentinus and Basileides. Cp. 
Bk. II. Ch. IX. 5 (p. 165). 

8. Le., the Marcionites and other Gnostics. See Bk. II. Ch. EX. 5 (p. 165). 

9. Lit. “with uncovered head,” a phrase taken from Plato, Phaedrus p. 243 B. 

10. See Book HL. Ch. I. 16 (p. 241). 

1]. This word is missing, probably by accident, from the Greek text. See 
Latin text on p. 218. 

12. This sentence is not in the Greek text as we have it in the Philocalia. 
Robinson (ed. Philocalia, Int., p. xxxiii) regards it as a summary of the preceding 
argument, due to Rufinus alone. Koetschau (see note ad. /oc.) thinks it is not an 
addition by Rufinus. 

13. Origen deals again with the subject of the “hardening of Pharaoh's heart” 
in his Comm. in Exod. Ch. X. 27. This is preserved in the Philocalia, Ch. XXVII. 
(ed. Robinson, p. 242). The passage, Origen says, presented great difficulty to 
many readers. Some thought that God had mercy on some and hardened others 
purely at random. Others felt that here was one of the mysteries which no ingenuity 
could penetrate, but which must be accepted by faith. Others went further and 
supposed two Gods, a just one and a good one. Origen’s own solution lies in the 
thought that God, like a good physician, works for the salvation of all, though 
sometimes by painful remedies. 

14. This argument is repeated in the Comm. in Exod. (see Philocalia, Ch. 
XXVIL., ed. Robinson, p. 252, 18ff). 

15. The illustrations of the horse and the lad are apparently added by Rufinus. 

16. ‘This quotation and the one that follows are added by Rufinus. 

17. See Bk. L. Ch. VII. 1 (p. 85). 

18, See Origen, Philocalia, Ch. XXVIIL. (ed. Robinson, p. 246, 24ff. and 
251, 22ff.), and p. 223. 

19. See Bk. I. Ch. VI. 3 (p. 73). 

20. Rufinus has misunderstood the Greek. 

21. See Book I. Chs. IV. and V. (p. 117f ). 

22. See p. 230. 

23. See also p. 227. 


Notes to Book II, Chapter I] 455 


24. The difference between Rufinus and Origen is well illustrared at this 
point. Origen is anxious to prove the absolute goodness of God; Rufinus to keep 
the reader in touch with the faith of the Church. See Bk. I. Ch. V. 4 (p. 61) and 
Bk. IIL. Ch. I. 7 (p. 209). 

25. The Psalms of Ascents were sung by pilgrims as they went up to the feasts 
at Jerusalem. See Ex 34:24; 1 Kgs 12:27; Is. 30:29. 

26. This paragraph is quoted by Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 8. “In the third book 
also the following errors are found: If we once admit that it is from previous causes 
that one vessel was created for honor and another for dishonor, why should we not 
recur to the secret history of the soul and conclude that it is loved in one man and 
hated in another by reason of deeds long past, in Jacob’s case before he became a 
supplanter and in Esau’s case before his heel was grasped by his brother?” 

27. Jerome translates the foregoing lines as follows. Ep. ad Avitum 8. “And 
in another place: But according to us a vessel which has by reason of pre-existing 
merits been fashioned for honor may, if it fails to do work worthy of its title, 
become in another age a vessel of dishonor; and on the other hand a vessel which 
as a result of former sin has received a name of dishonor may, if in the present life 
it has willed to receive correction, become in the new creation a vessel sanctified 
and useful to the Lord, prepared unto every good work.” 

28. The thought of connecting Egyptians with Idumaeans is suggested by I 
Kgs 11:14 and Dt 23:7, 8. See Philocalia Ch. XII. 3. 

29. {The following] paragraph was omitted, for obvious reasons, by the com- 
pilers of the Philocalia. It adds nothing new, and yet was likely to cause unnecessary 
offense by its detailed inferences from the preceding argument. 

Jerome has quoted it for the purposes of condemnation in his Ep. ad Avitum 
8. “And he (i-e., Origen) immediately adds: I think it possible for some men who 
have begun with small faults to reach such a degree of wickedness, if they refuse 
to change for the better and to amend their sinful life by penitence, that they even 
become opposing powers; and on the other hand for some so to apply a remedy 
to their wounds over long spaces of time and to check the offenses that formerly 
flowed on that they pass to the condition of the best. We have frequently said that 
in the infinite and unceasing ages during which the soul remains in existence some 
are so carried downwards towards what is worse that they come to the last degree 
of evil, while others make such progress that from the last degree of evil they reach 
the perfection and consummation of virtue. In these words,” Jerome adds, “he 
tries to prove that men, that is, souls, can become daemons, and that on the other 
hand daemons may be restored to the dignity of angels.” 

30. See p. 249. 

31. See p. 260. 


Book III, Chapter II 

1. The Epistle of Jude (Ver. 9) alludes to the Assumption (Gr. Analepsis or 
Anabasis) of Moses, but does not mention its title. See Charles, Assumption of Moses; 
and the same author's Apoc. and Pseudep. of O. T: V1. 421 ff. 

2. The true meaning of the Hebrew Azazel is unknown. He was an evil spirit 
dwelling in the wilderness, who was supposed to receive the sins of the people 


456 Notes to Book III, Chapter IBook III, Chapter III 


transmitted through the scapegoat on the day of Atonement. The Septuagint 
renders it Apopompeus, the Vulgate simply tribes the goat, caper emissarius, and 
Rufinus translates Origen’s Apopompeus by the neutral transmissor. For want of a 
more suitable term I have used Gesenius’ suggestion Averter (see Hastings Dic. of 
the Bible, Art. Azazel, §. R. Driver, Vol. I, p. 208a), which probably indicates the 
true function of Azazel. 

3. As this verse is not in the LXX it is impossible to say what word of Origen’s 
it is that Rufinus translates by offocare (v. 1. effocare, suffocare). The Vulgate has 
invasit. 

4, The passage has been confused with J Kgs 11:14, where “Satan” means 
simply an adversary. This was probably Origen’s meaning here, misunderstood 
by Rufinus. 

5. Rufinus’s sanitas answers to the Greek lax healing. The meaning is prob- 
ably, a healing spirit, as opposed to a spirit of provocation. 

6. See also Bk. J. Ch. V, 4 (p. 61). 

7. See note p. 5, above. 

8. See Hermas, Mand. VI. 2. 

9. See Ep. Barnabas, 18. 

10. See par. 4 (p. 282). 

11. A fragment of Origen (/n Eph. VI. 12; see Cramer, Catenae Graec. Patr. 
in N.T. VI. 215) preserves a similar statement in Greek. “I consider that the 
temptations against flesh and blood are the temptations which are said by him 
to be human.” 

12. Koetschau refers to Origen, Sel. in Gen. (Lomm. VIII. 82ff.): “Who else 
is he who is called both a man and a god, who wrestles and struggles with Jacob, 
but he who by diverse portions and in diverse manners spoke to the fathers, the 
holy Word of God?” 

13. Rufinus has media, which may be a translation of either wéoa or 
&Siépopa. The reference is to the Stoic doctrine thar all external things and events 
were indifferent, virtue alone being a good and vice alone an evil Cp. Zeno’s saying, 
preserved in Stobaeus, II. 7, 5a (quoted by Arnold, Roman Stoicism p. 289). “Some 
things are good, some are evil, some indifferent. Good are wisdom, temperance, 
justice, fortitude, everything that is virtue or an aspect of virtue; evil are folly, 
intemperance, injustice, cowardice, everything that is vice or an aspect of vice. 
Indifferent are life and death, glory and disgrace, pain and pleasure, riches and 
wealth, disease, health and so forth.” 


Book III, Chapter III 

1. See below Bk. IV. Ch. III. 14 (p. 412). 

2. See Ch. II. (p. 275ff.). 

3. See preceding paragraph. 

4, See also Bk. I. Ch. V. 4. (p. 61). 

5. Part of the quotation appears to be missing. 

6. The interpretation of this passage and of Ps 2:2 as referring to the spiricual 
powers is found also in Origen’s comment on Lam 4:12. See Klostermann’s edition, 


p. 273 Frag. CVII. 


Notes to Book III, Chapter II 457 


7. See Bk. J. Ch. VII. 1, 2 (p. 85ff.). 

8. Koetschau quotes here, as a possible extract from the original work at this 
point, the passage from Theophilus Alex. Ep. Synod, c. 2. “And the foreknowl- 
edge of events, which belongs to the Lord alone, he (i.e., Origen) attributes to 
the motions of the stars, namely, that from their courses and the variety of their 
forms daemons can tell the fucure and either bring things to pass or else require 
them to be brought to pass by the stars. It is quite clear from this that he approves 
of idolatry and astrology and of the various deceits of the fraudulent divination 
practiced by the Gentiles.” 

With this Koetschau compares the extract from an anonymous writer quoted 
in Photius. Bibl Cod. 117, stating the charges which were made (according to 
this writer falsely) against Origen: “And (Origen teaches) that the doctrines of the 
Magi are not evil, and that astronomy is able to bring events to pass.” It is probable 
that Rufinus has omitted some things here, but it is not likely that Theophilus has 
reproduced them fairly. 

9. See Plato, Jo 533 E-534 D; Phaedrus 245 A. 

10. The best known instance is that of the priestess of the Delphic oracle. See 
Origen, Con. Celsum III. 25, VII. 3. 

11. This epithet is doubtless due to Rufinus, not to Origen. 

12. See p. 284. 

13. Cp. the parallel passage in Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 8, “And in the same 
book he says: Moreover we must also inquire why the soul of man is influenced 
in different directions now by one group of powers and now by another. And he 
supposes that the souls of some people have previously acquired merit before they 
came into bodies, as was the case with John, who leaped for joy in his mother’s 
womb when at the voice of Mary’s salutation Elizabeth confessed herself to be 
unworthy of conversing with her.” See Luke 1:41-44. 

14, This passage also has a parallel in Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 8. “And imme- 
diately following this he adds: On the other hand little boys and almost infants 
are sometimes possessed by evil spirits, and diviners and soothsayers are inspired 
to such a degree that some are possessed by a daemon python right from their 
earliest years. That these should be abandoned by the providence of God, when 
they have done nothing to warrant this kind of madness, cannot be maintained 
by him who believes that nothing happens apart from God and that all things are 
governed by his justice.” 

15. On this pointe Clement of Alexandria (Stromata III. 3, 20; Stahlin II. 204, 
27ff.) quotes Plato, Politicus 273 B C and (Stromata IV. 12, 83; Stahlin IT. 285, 
3ff.) Basileides, of whom he says: “She hypothesis of Basileides is that the soul 
undergoes punishment here for sins committed in another life.” 

See Jerome, Fp. ad Hedibiam, 10: “We must not say, as do Pythagoras and 
Plato and their disciples, who under the name of Christians introduce the doc- 
trines of the gentiles, that souls have fallen from heaven and in accordance with 
the diversity of their merits pay the penalties for ancient sins in bodies of one sort 
or another.” 


458 Notes to Book III, Chapter ITV 


Book III, Chapter IV 

1. For the deadness of the body apart from the soul see Justin, De Resterr. X. 
2: “The soul is in the body; but the body without the soul is not alive, and when 
the soul leaves it, it no longer exists.” 

See also Plato, Cratylus 399 D E. Marcion and Basileides taught that the soul 
alone was saved, not the body (Irenaeus, Adv. baer. I. xxv. 2 and I. xix. 3). Origen’s 
remark on the hostility of body and spirit to each other alludes to such scriptural 
passages as Rom 8:6, 10; Gal 5:17; Jn 6:63, but the term “flesh” in St. Paul’s 
writings is quite different in meaning from the term “body” as used. See p. 303f. 

2. This is Plato’s division of the soul. See Plato Repub. IV. 436 A-441C; 
Timaeus 42 A, 

3. See also pp. 266 and 297. 

4, See p. 301. 

5. Sce Clem. Alex., Excerpta ex Theedoto 50, 1 (Stalin IIT. 123, Off.). “Tak- 
ing dust from the earth, not from the dry earth, but a portion of the diverse and 
manifold matter, God created an earthly and material soul, irrational and similar 
to that of the beasts. This is the man formed ‘according to the image.’ But the man 
formed ‘according to the likeness’ of the Creator himself is he whom the Creator 
breathed into and implanted in the first man.” 

The “irrational spirit” or “bodily spirit” is also mentioned by Clement in 
Stromata VI. 136, 1 and VII. 79, 6. 

Cp. also the Valentinian doctrine in Irenaeus (Adv. haer. |. v. 5). For the 
scriptural reference see Rom 8:7. 

6. See pp. 5 and 302. 

7. Cp. Origen Comm. in Ioh. XXXII. 18, “T observe in the whole of scripture 
a distinction made between the soul and the spirit, the soul being indifferent in 
character and receptive of either virtue or vice.” So, too, Comm. In Ep. ad Rom. I. 
18, “When it is said that the flesh lusteth against the spirit and the spirit against 
the flesh, the middle position is undoubtedly occupied by the soul, which either 
acquiesces in the longings of the spirit or else inclines to the lusts of the flesh. If it 
joins itself to the flesh, the body becomes one with it in impurity and lust, but if 
it associates with the spirit, the spirit will become one with it.” 

8. This is a bold piece of ethical reasoning. It should be compared with the 
account of the soul in the Greek fragment, not necessarily a literal one, taken 
from Gregory of Nyssa, which is discussed in n. 7. to Bk. [. Ch. VIII, on p. 445. 


Notes to Book JI, Chapter V 459 


Book III, Chapter V 

1. See Bk. I. Ch. VI. (p. 69) 

2. Le., Genesis. 

3. See Bk. I. Ch. IV. 3 (p. 52f-) 

4. The passage beginning with the sentence and ending at “will exist in its 
turn” has a parallel in Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 9. “And again in regard to the world 
(Origen says): Our opinion is that before this world there existed another and that 
another will exist after it. Would you learn that after the dissolution of this world 
another will come into existence? Hear the words of the prophet Isaiah: “There 
shall be a new heaven and a new earth, which I will cause to endure in my sight.’ 
Would you know that before the construction of this world other worlds existed 
in the past? Listen to Ecclesiastes: “What is it that hath been? Even that which shall 
be. And what is it that hath been made? The very thing that shall be. And there is 
nothing new under the sun, nothing which can speak and say, Behold this is new. 
For it hath been already, in the ages of old which were before us.’ This testimony 
proves the existence not only of past but also of future worlds, not all existing side 
by side at the same time, but one after another.” 

5. See Bk. I. Ch. III. 1-5 (pp. 103-10). 

6. Origen used the word katabole as proof of his belief that the present world 
isa descent from a more perfect condition which preceded it, and that the souls of 
most men were enclosed in bodies and sent here as a punishment for former sins, 
a few great ones like St. Paul being allowed to come as guides and teachers of the 
rest. See Origen’s comment on Jn 17:24 in his Comm. in Job. XTX. 22, where he 
maintains that this meaning must be attached to fatabole, otherwise ktisis would 
have been used. 

Jerome, in his Commentary on Ephesians, in which, as the preface admits, 
he relied largely on Origen, gives the same interpretation of Eph 1:4 (“before the 
foundation of the world”). This furnishes a handle to Rufinus, when in his Apology 
(see Bk. I. Chs. 25-27) he attacks Jerome for his Origenistic teaching, 

7. The illustration is probably an addition by Rufinus. It is from St. Matthew, 
not St. John, and it does not contain the word katabole, but arche (beginning). 
Katabole occurs in Mt 25:34. 

8. With the passage beginning here and ending at “the present visible world 
was instituted” compare the parallel in Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 9. Jerome’s version 
is nearer the original than that of Rufinus. “And immediately after this he (i.e., 
Origen) adds: I think we must believe that there is in the regions above a more 
divine dwelling-place and a true rest, where rational creatures used to live before 
they descended to these lower regions and traveled from invisible to visible sur- 
roundings, and where, before they were cast down to the earth and forced to wear 
gross bodies, they enjoyed a primeval blessedness. And, so, God the Creator made 
for them bodies appropriate to their lowly stations, and fashioned this visible world, 
and sent into it ministers to work for the correction and salvation of those who had 
fallen. Of these ministers some obtained fixed positions and became obedient to 
the necessities of the world, while others zealously performed the duties laid upon 
them at the various times which are known to God the Artificer. To the former 


460 Notes to Book II, Chapter V-Book III, Chapter VI 


class belong the sun, moon and stars, which are called by the apostle ‘the creation,’ 
and these have been given their place in the higher regions of the universe. This 
‘creation’ has been subjected to vanity by being clothed in gross bodies and made 
visible to sight. Nevertheless it was subjected to vanity not of its own will, but by 
the will of him who subjected it ‘in hope.” 

9. See pp. 70, 936, 96. 

10. See Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 9 (following the last passage quoted). “And 
again: Others, however, in their various places and times, which the Artificer alone 
knows, undertake the governance of the world. These we believe to be the angels.” 

11. See Vergil, Aeneid VI. 7396. 

12. For the first part of this paragraph see Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 9. “And a 
little way further on: This system of things, the universe in its entirety, is ruled by 
the providence of God, in such a way that some powers fall suddenly from the 
higher spheres, while others glide gradually to the earth, some descend of their own 
free will, while others are hurled down against their will, some freely undertake 
the duty of stretching out a hand to those who are falling, while others are forced 
without their own consent to continue to perform an allotted task for a certain 
definite period. And again: From which it follows that these different movements 
result in the creation of different worlds, and after this world in which we live there 
will arise another world quite unlike it. And no one can estimate the precise worth 
of those who in different degrees fall or rise, or the rewards due for virtue or the 
punishments for sin, either in the present or the future or in any time whatever 

either past or to come, nor can anyone bring the universe once again to a single 
end, except God alone the Creator of all, who knows the reasons why he allows 
some to perform their own will and to sink gradually from the higher spheres to 
the lowest, while others he begins to visit and gives them a helping hand in order 
to lead them slowly back to their original condition and to set them once again 
on high.” Rufinus has greatly abbreviated this. 

13. Origen has in mind such an incident as Lk 18:41f. 


Book III, Chapter VI 

1. See Bk. II. Chs. X. and XI. (pp. 173-92). 

2. Plato, Theaetetus 176 B. This was a favorite passage of Clement of Alexan- 
dria: see Protreplicus XII. 122, 4; Stromata 1.97, 1; 100, 3. 

3. For the distinction drawn between the “image” and the “likeness” see 
Origen Con. Celsum IV. 30, Comm. In Ep. ad Rom. W. 5; Irenaeus Adv, Haer, V. 
6; Clem. Alex. Stromata II. 38, 5. 

4, For this paragraph, which has been toned down by Rufinus, see the parallel 
in Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 9a. “And when he enters upon a discussion of the end, 
he speaks as follows: Because, as we have frequently said before, a fresh beginning 
arises out of the end, we must inquire whether there will then be bodies, or whether 
we are to live without bodies since these will have been reduced to nothing; and 
whether we must believe that the life of incorporeal beings is incorporeal, such as 
we know the life of God to be. Now there can be no doubr that, if all bodies belong 
to this sensible world which is called by the apostle the world of ‘things visible’ the 
life of incorporeal beings will be an incorporeal one.” This statement formed one of 


Notes to Book HI, Chapter VI 461 


the grounds of Origen’s condemnation. See Anathema XI. of the Second Council 
of Constantinople, 553: “[IFanyone shall say] that the judgment to come signifies 
the complete destruction of bodies and that the end of the story is an immaterial 
essence, and that nothing material will thereafter exist, but only mind [let him be 
anathema].” See Theophilus Alex. Ep. Synod. 2; and cp. Bk. II. Ch. IIT. 2 (p. 104). 

5. Koetschau regards this sentence as being added by Rufinus. 

6. Koetschau inserts here these two paragraphs from Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 
9a. Following Schnitzer, he thinks that they fill up gaps left by Rufinus at this 
point. The reader will have very little doubt that this is so. 

7. The quotation from Jerome ends here. Origen’s doctrine was condemned 
its Platonism, in denying the resurrection of the body. Cp. Plato, Phaedo 114 C. 
“Those who are thoroughly purified by philosophy live entirely without bodies in 
the age to come.” 

8. Butterworth here includes a parallel Greek fragment from Justinian. For a 
discussion of this fragment see Crouzel SC 269, p. 131, n. 13. 

9. Here again Rufinus has greatly abbreviated the original, as will be seen from 
a comparison with Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 10. “And again, when he is arguing for a 
variety of worlds and maintaining that angels may become daemons and daemons 
angels or men, or that on the contrary men may become daemons and any being 
may become any other, he confirms his opinion by concluding in the following 
way: Nor can we doubt that after certain periods of time matter will exist again 
and bodies will be created and a world of diversity constructed in conformity with 
the varying wills of rational creatures, who after becoming perfect in blessedness at 
the end of all things have gradually fallen to lower levels and have admitted evil to 
so great an extent as to be turned into the opposite of what they were, by reason 
of their unwillingness to preserve their first estate and to retain their blessedness 
uncorrupted. And this, too, we must know, that many rational creatures preserve 
their first estate to the second or third or fourth world, giving no occasion for a 
change in their condition; others will fall so little from their original state that they 
appear to have lost scarcely anything; while some have to be hurled in complete 
ruin into the lowest pit. And God the dispenser of all things alone knows how 
to make use each class in the creation of new worlds, in conformity with merit 
and opportunity and motives, so that they may be the means, of initiating and 
sustaining the course of the world; and one who has surpassed all others in wick- 
edness and has completely lowered himself to the level of the earth may in another 
world, afterwards to be constructed, become a devil, ‘the beginning of the creation 
of God, to be a laughing-stock to the angels who have lost their primeval virtue.” 
For the last sentence see Jb 40:14 (LXX). 

10. See Bk. II]. Ch, HI. 2, 3 (p. 104 ff). 

11. Rufinus has apparently omitted some of Origen’s statements about the 
final unity of all spiritual beings. See the four last Anathemas of the Second Council 
of Constantinople, which condemn all who assert the following doctrines. XII: 
“That the heavenly powers and all men and the devil and the spiritual hosts of 
wickedness are as unchangeably united to the Word of God as the Mind itself 
which is by them called Christ and which was in the form of Ged and, as they 


~~ 


em 


462 Notes to Book III, Chapter VI 


assert, emptied itself; and that there will be an end to the kingdom of Christ.” XIII 
is similar. XIV runs as follows: “Thar all rational creatures will form one unity, 
hypostases and numbers alike being destroyed when bodies are destroyed; and that 
the knowledge of purely rational creatures will be accompanied by a dissolution of 
the worlds, an abandonment of bodies and an abolition of names; and that there 
will be an identity between knowledge and hypostases; and that in what they call 
the restoration only the bare spirits will exist.” XV: “That the life of spirits will be 
the same as it formerly was, when they had not yet descended or fallen, so that the 
beginning is the same as the end, and the end is the measure of the beginning.” 

12. Origen’s reference here is to the devil, though this is concealed by Rufinus. 
See Theophilus Alex., Ep. pasch. Gr. Frag. 16 (in Doctrina patrum ed. Diekamp, 
p. 180, 12): “He has dared to pay great honor to the devil, saying that when he 
is freed from all sin he will be restored to his ancient rank, and that the kingdom 
of Christ will come to an end and that Jesus will then together with the devil be 
reigned over by God.” 

See also Theophilus Alex. Ep. pasch. I. 8 (Migne, PL 22, p. 779); Ep Synod. 
2, in Jerome, Ep. 92 (Migne, PL 22, p. 762); Jerome, In Dan. proph. c. 3 (Migne, 
PL 25, p. 521); and Bk. I. Ch. VI. 3 (p. 734). 

13. For Origen’s doctrine of the Resurrection see Bk. II. Ch. X. {p. 173ff. ) 
and Con. Celsum V. 18-23. 

14, See also pp. 326-27. 

15. Le., Aristotle’s aether. See Zeller, Aristotle and the earlier Peripatetics, (Eng. 
trans. Costelloe and Muirhead 1897), pp. 475-77. 

See also Cicero, Academica |. 7, 26: “There is also a fifth element, out of 
which the stars and minds are constituted, which Aristotle maintained to have a 
nature of its own and to be something quite different from the four which 1 have 
mentioned above.” 

Origen again states his objection to the hypothesis of this “fifth body,” in 
Con. Celsum \V. 60. 

16. See pp. 96f,, 101, 108. 

17. See Plato, Phaedo 79 A. 

18. See p. 70. 

19. See also Bk. IL. Ch. IIL. 7 (p. 11 4ff). 

20. Origen's inference from 1 Cor 15:28, that Christ’s kingdom would one 
day come to an end, was one of the many charges made against him. See ‘Theoph- 
ilus Alex., Ep pasch. (Jerome, Ep. 96) and Ep. synod. (Jerome, Ep. 92); and also 
p. 459, n. 11, 

21. With this sentence cp. Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 30 “And after a very long 
discussion, in which he asserts that all bodily nature must be changed into spiritual 
bodies of extreme fineness and that the whole of matter must be transformed into 
a single body of the utmost purity, clearer than all brightness and of such a quality 

as the human mind cannot conceive, at the close he states: And God shall be all in 
all, so that the whole of bodily nature may be resolved into that substance which 
is superior to all others, namely, into the divine nature, than which nothing can 


be better.” 


Notes to Book IV, Chapter I-Book IV, Chapter III 463 


Book IV, Chapter I 

1. Chs. I and II, with part of Ch. IL, marked as Frag. 28, Koetschau, are 
preserved in Ch. I of the Philocalia. See the edition of J, A. Robinson, p. 7ff. The 
titles of the chapters, which form together a single title to Ch. | of the Philocatia, 
are here separated to agree with the chapter division found in Rufinus. 

2. See also Origen, Con. Celsum 1. 26, 27. 

3. Mt 24:14. The quotation is omitted in the Greek, no doubt by mistake. 

4. The Christian argument from Gn 49:10 is given also by Justin Martyr, I 
Apol. XXXII; Dial. cum Tryph. LII. 

5. In Origen’s Ep. ad Africanum 14 (Migne, PG 11, p. 82f) he states that 
the Ethnarch has almost the powers of a king granted to him by the Romans. The 
Jewish contention, therefore, was not utterly without force. 

G. For the two forms of the quotation see Justin Martyr, Dial, cum Tryph. 
CXX. 

7. For the title see LXX, Ps 44, 

8. See Origen, Hom. In Luc. 32 (Lomm. V. 208). The “one year” is based upon 
Lk 4:19. In another passage, Comm. In Matt. ser. 40 (Lomm. IV. 276), Origen 
gives the time as three years. 

9, Rufinus seems to have misunderstood the original. 


Book IV, Chapter II 

1. See Bk. II. Ch. V. 1 (p. 125ff). 

2. See also Origen, Con. Celsum III. 45; VII. 10. 

3. Books, that is, such as the Gnostics claimed to possess. 

4. Hermas, Vis. Il. 4, 3. Irenaeus and Clement of Alexandria both treated 
Hermas as an inspired writer, as Origen does here. His book was read in the Church 
for several centuries, but had fallen into disuse in the West by the time of Jerome 
(De vir. illus. X.). 

5. Why the number six is perfect is explained by Philo, de opificio mundi 3. 
A perfect number is equal to the sum of its factors; i.e., 6=1 X 2 X 3.The number 
six is also the product of the first male number, 3, and the first female number, 2. 
The six days, Philo tells us, do not represent length of time, but order in thought. 
Neither he nor Origen would have regarded the days as literal periods. 

6. For the same quotation in a slightly different form see p. 120f. 

7. A few words appear to be missing from the Latin at this point, and Koet- 
schau replaces them thus. 


Book IV, Chapter III 

1. This sentence (to “moon and stars”) is found in Justinian Ep. ad Mennam 
(Mansi IX. 533). Koetschau marks it Frag. 29. 

2. See also cp. Philo, Legis alleg. I. 14. “Let not our reasoning admit such gross 
impiety as to suppose that God works as a farmer and plants gardens.” 

3. See also Philo, De poster. Cain 1.1. 

4. Rufinus has omitted this example. 


464 Notes to Book IV, Chapter II 


5. The word only occurs in two MSS of the LXX, Dt 14:5. The tragelaphos was 
a fantastic animal mentioned by many Greek writers, but the creature of Dt 14:5 is 
really elaphos, the hart or perhaps roebuck (see Hastings, D. B., art. Hart, G.E. Post). 

G. Gr. gryps, a variety of eagle. Lv 11:13; Dt 14:12. 

7. The founder of an ascetic sect in Samaria, which maintained an existence 
for several centuries at least, although Origen says (Con. Celsum V1. M1) that he did 
not suppose the whole number of the Dositheans in his day amounted to thirty. 
See Dic. of Christ. Biog. s.v. 

8. Omitted in Rufinus’s text. 

9. Koetschau regards this as an addition by Rufinus. 

10. Rufinus has here omitted a passage, probably because he could not under- 
stand it. Origen is certainly not clear, but his meaning seems to be as follows. ‘The 
scriptures contain many composite narratives, one part being historically true and 
the other false. In the story of the Fall, for instance, he would have regarded Adam 
and Eve as being historically true and God walking in the garden as historically 
false. He would then interpret the whole story allegorically, feeling that the literal, 
or “bodily,” meaning was valueless. In other instances the literal meaning has a 
value of its own: e.g. the Commandments. But even here the deeper meanings, 
when discovered, are the more important. 

11. Not in Rufinus. 

12. Rufinus has omitted a long passage at this point. As the passage contains 
no unorthodox doctrines the reason for its omission may be simply that Rufinus 
did not understand all the allusions in it, which are certainly far from clear. 

For a discussion of this passage see Crouzel SC 269, pp. 207-8, n. 36—36a. 

13. It is possible that this phrase alludes to the baptismal formula. 

14, In this passage Origen has in mind the two genealogies of our Lord, found 
respectively in St. Matthew and St. Luke. It is clear that these genealogies, with 
their manifest differences, would have set him a task in spiritual interpretation. He 
appears to have solved the problem by taking the Matthaean genealogy to indicate 
the Israelites in a literal sense, and the I.ucan the spiritual Israelites. The former 
is traced through the kings of Judah, whom Origen calls the demarchs (“rulers of 
the people”), and ends with Abraham. The latter, which descends through private 
persons, goes back through Jacob (whose divinely ordered birth—Gn 25:21-23—is 
here emphasized) to Adam, who is interpreted as Christ, in accordance with St. 
Paul’s parallel in 1 Cor 15:45. So the Church, the bride of Christ (Eph 5:31-32) 
is seen in Eve; and even Cain, too, is a figure of the Church. Rufinus could have 
had no reason to object to these interpretations. The reason he omitted the passage 
was because he did not understand it. 

15. The Ebionites were a sect of Jewish Christians, who kept the Law. Their 
name indicates that they practiced, at least originally, a voluntary poverty and 
simplicity of life, such as that described in Acts 2:44—45. It has, of course, no 
reference whatever to poverty of mind, as Origen declares. For a full account of 
them see Smith’s Dictionary of Christian Biography s. v. Ebionism and Ebionites. 

16. (Omitted from Rufinus). 

17. A sentence appears to be missing from the Greek at this point. 


Notes to Book IV, Chapter HI 465 


18, Reading, with Koetschau, HavAov for the manifestly corrupt @eod of 
the text. 

19. The text of Rufinus continues at this point from p. 398. 

20. See Origen, Hom. In Num. XI. 4. “The name Israel is found even among 
the orders of angels; nay, they are more truly to be called Israel, for they are more 
truly the ‘mind seeing God’; for this is the meaning of the word Israel.” 

21. This paragraph was omitted by the compilers of the Philocalia. 

22. See Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 11. “Also in the fourth book, which is the last 
book of this work, he (i-e., Origen) inserts the following statements which must 
be condemned by the churches of Christ: ‘And perhaps, just as those who die in 
this world by the separation of body and soul obtain different positions in the 
world below in accordance with the differences of their deeds, so those who die, 
so to speak, in the realm of the heavenly Jerusalem, descend to the lower regions 
of our world, in such a way as to occupy different positions on earth in proportion 
to their merits.” 

23. Lat. inferus, translating the Gr. &64¢ Hades. [p 303] 

24. Lat. mansiones: Gr. wovai. See Jn 14:2. [303] 

25. This sentence is omitted from the Philocalia, but both Koetschau and 
Robinson (ed. Philocalia Int., p. xxxvii) regard it as part of Origen’s text. The LXX 
reading is literally, “the lowest Hades,” but Rufinus reads “the lower Hades” (de 
infero inferior), which was no doubt Origen’s reading. 

26. This paragraph is also missing from the Philocalia. 

27. See Origen, Hom. In Num. XXVII. 2, where he says that Nm 33:1—2 must 
refer to the spiritual journey from this world to the heavenly abodes. 

28. Butterworth, following Koetschau, places an extract from Jerome in the 
text at this point. For a discussion of this extract see Crouzel SC 269, pp. 218-20, 
n. 62c. 

29. For the whole passage see Gn 10, 11, 25, 36, 46; and for the quotations 
Dt 10:22 (Gn 46:27, Ex 1:5, Gn 22:17). 

30. The extract from the Philocalia ends here. 

31. See p. 400. 

32. The following extract from Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 11, appears to belong 
here, “Not content with this, he (i-e., Origen) says that in the end of all things, 
when we return to the heavenly Jerusalem, wars of hostile powers will arise against 
the people of God, in order that their valor may not be idle, but that they may 
display it in battles and so gain strength, which would be impossible unless like 
brave men they had first resisted adversaries. And we read in the book of Num- 
bers that these have conquered by the exercise of reason and order, and by skill in 
fighting” (cf. Nm 31). 

Cp. too, Origen, Hom. In Num. VIL. 5: “It is necessary, therefore, that the 
spiritual hosts of wickedness, who are said to be in the heavenly places, should be 
conquered by you, in order that you may speedily pass over to the heavenly realms 
and dwell there instead of them.” 

33. Origen apparently made much more of the “eternal gospel” than Rufinus 
allows us to see. Cp. Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 12. “And when he (i.e., Origen) has 


eee 


eee, Ae 


466 Notes to Book IV, Chapter I1I—Book IV, Chapter IV 


said that the ‘eternal gospel’ of the Apocalypse of John, that is, the gospel which is 
to exist in the heavens, is as far superior or to our gospel as the preaching of Christ 
is to the rites of the old law, he goes to the extreme length of inferring (what it is 
impious even to have thought of) that Christ will also suffer in the air and in the 
realms above for the salvation of the daemons. And although he does not actually 
say so, yet it must be understood as a logical consequence, that as God was made 
man for the sake of men, to set them free, so also for the salvation of the daemons 
he will be made what they are, for whose liberation he is then to come. And in 
case it should be supposed that we are putting our own interpretation upon his 
statements, we will give his very words: ‘For just as he fulfilled the shadow of the 
law through the shadow of the gospel, so because all law is a copy and shadow of 
the heavenly rites, we must carefully inquire whether we ought not to regard even 
the heavenly law and the rites of the higher worship not as possessing completeness, 
but as standing in need of the truth of that gospel which in the Apocalypse of John 
is called the ‘eternal gospel,’ in comparison, that is, with this gospel of ours, which 
is temporal and was preached in a world and an age that are destined to pass away.” 

34. Directly following this passage Butterworth includes a Greek fragment 
from Justinian. For a discussion of the fragment see Crouzel, SC 269, pp. 228-30, 
n. 80. 

35. For the reference to the Hebrew teacher see the Greek fragment in Bk. 
I., Ch. II. 4. (p. 42 ). 

36. See pp. 7 and 114. 

37. See also p. 14. 


Book IV, Chapter IV 

1. Here Butterworth inserts a parallel Greek fragment from Marcellus. See 
Crouzel, SC 269, pp. 238-39, n. 1. 

2. See Jerome, Apol. adv. Rufin. II. 19. “There exists in Greek a dialogue 
between Origen and Candidus, the defender of the heresy of Valentinus. . . . Can- 
didus admits that the Son is of the substance of the Father, but errs in asserting a 
probole, that is, an act of separation. On the other side Origen, in the manner of 
Arius and Eunomius, controverts the assertion that the Son was produced or born, 
for fear of dividing God the Father into parts; but he asserts that he is a sublime 
and pre-eminent creature who came into existence by the will of the Father like 
all other creatures.” 

3. See p. 26. 

4. Butterworth here includes two Greek fragments, from Justinian and then 
Athanasius. For a discussion of these fragments see Crouzel, SC 269, pp. 242-46, 
179) 

5. This was what Arius afterwards did say. 

6. Butterworth includes a Greek fragment from Athanasius directly following 
this passage. For a discussion of the fragment see Crouzel, SC 269, p. 247, n. 13. 

7. See Bk. II. Ch. VI. 1, 2. (p. 135ff.). 

8. See also Origen, Comm. in Toh. VI. 39, where Heracleon’s interpretation 


of the passage is given. 


Notes to Book IV, Chapter IV 467 


9, See Bk. II. Ch. VII. 2, 4 (pp. 153 and 157). Koetschau suspects an omis- 
sion at this point, containing Frag. 35 from Justinian, Ep. ad Mennam (Mansi IX. 
506); “that the soul of the Lord pre-existed, and that God the Word was united to 
it before he took flesh of the Virgin.” 

For more on this Greek fragment see Crouzel SC 269, pp. 250-251, n. 30. 

10. Here Butterworth inserts a parallel Greek fragment from Theophilus 
of Alexandria. See Crouzel, SC 269, pp. 251-52, n. 31, for a discussion of this 
fragment. 

11. See p. 419. 

12. See also p. 354. 

13. Butterworth includes a parallel Greek fragment from Theophilus of Alex- 
andria. For a discussion of the fragment see Crouzel, SC 269, pp. 253-54, n. 34. 

14. This paragraph, in which Origen asserted the pre-existence of the soul of 
Christ, and his various manifestations to the angelic orders, has been considerably 
modified and abbreviated by Rufinus. The following quotations give some idea 
of the original text. 

Anathema VII, Second Council of Constantinople: “If anyone shall say that 
Christ, who is said to have been ‘in the form of God’ and to have been united with 
God the Word before all ages and in the last days to have emptied himself to the 
level of man, because he pitied (as they say) the various falls that had happened 
to those who originally belonged to the same unity, and wished to restore them, 
went through all modes of being and was invested with different kinds of bodies 
and took different names, becoming all things to all, being changed into an angel 
among the angels, into a power among the powers, and into other ranks or species 
of rational beings according to the necessities of each particular case, and then at 
last shared in flesh and blood like us and became a man among men,. . . let him 
be anathema.” 

‘This is equivalent to the Fourth Anathema of the Emperor Justinian against 
Origen, which runs as follows: “If anyone shall say or think that the Word of God 
has become like all the heavenly orders, having become a cherub for the cherubim, 
a seraph for the seraphim and something equivalent to every single one of the 
powers let him be anathema.” 

See also Jerome, Apol, II. 12, where he asserts the following to be one of the 
distinctly heretical statements of the First Principles: “that the soul of the Savior 
existed before it was born of Mary, and that it was this soul which was in the form 
of God, and thought it not robbery to be equal with God, but emptied itself, 
taking the form of a servant.” 

Also, Theophilus Alex., Ep. synod. 4 Jerome, Ep. 92): “besides in the books 
on ‘First Principles, he even endeavors to persuade us that... the living Word of 
God did not assume a human body; for he writes, contrary to the statement of the 
apostle (i.e., in Phil 2:7), that he who being in the form of God was equal with 
God was not the Word of God, but a soul that descended from the heavenly region 
and emptying itself of the form of its eternal majesty assumed a human body. In 
saying this he most clearly contradicts John who writes: ‘And the Word was made 


em 


468 Notes to Book IV, Chapter IV 


flesh” Nor is it credible that it was the soul of the Savior and not the Word of God 
which possessed the form of and equality with the Father's majesty.” 

Also, Ep. pasch. IL 14 Jerome, Ep. 98) and Bk. II. Ch. VI. 3 (p. 138). 

15. See Bk. II. Chs. I. and III. (pp. 93ff. and 103if,). 

16. Elsewhere Origen speaks of Wisdom as an inspired book: cp. Con. Celsum 
Ill. 72. 

17. See Bk. II. Ch. 1. 4 (p. 96ff.) 

18. See p. 97. 

19. Enoch, Ch. XXI. I. In Con. Celsum V. 54, Origen says thar the book of 
Enoch was not received everywhere in the Church as inspired. 

20. Slav. Enoch Ch. XL. 1, 12. The Greek text is found in Clem. Alex. Eclog. 
prophet. 2, 1. 

21. Butterworth inserts a Greek fragment from Justinian directly following 
this paragraph. Fora discussion of the fragment see Crouzel, SC 269, pp. 262-63, 
n. 63. 

22. See Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 13. “And again he (i.e., Origen) blasphemes 
against the Son by speaking in the following manner: For if the Son knows the 
Father, it would seem that by virtue of this knowledge he can comprehend the 
Father, as if we were to say that the mind of the craftsman knows the measure of his 
craft. Nor can we doubt that if the Father is in the Son, he is also comprehended 
by him in whom he is. If, however, we mean that kind of comprehension in which 
one comprehends another not only by understanding and wisdom but in the sense 
of holding the object of his knowledge under his authority and power, then we 
cannot say that the Son comprehends the Father.” Rufinus has compressed this 
into one short sentence and has evaded all the points raised by Origen. 

Directly following this passage, Butterworth inserts a Greek fragment from 
Justinian. See Crouzel, SC 269, pp. 263-66, n. 64., fora discussion of the fragment. 

23. This sentence is Rufinus’s substitute for a longer and more categorical 
statement, which is preserved by Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 14. “The following passage, 
too, convicts him (i.e., Origen) of believing in the transmigration of souls and the 
annihilation of bodies: If anyone can show that incorporeal and rational nature, 
when deprived of a body, can live by itself, and that it is in a worse condition when 
clothed with a body and in a better when it lays the body aside, then no one can 
doubt that bodies did not exist in the beginning, but are now created at intervals 
on account of the different movements of rational creatures, in order to supply 
a covering to such as need it; and that on the other hand, when these creatures 
have risen out of the degradation of their falls to a better condition, the bodies 
are dissolved into nothing; and that these changes go on happening forever.” The 
later half of this quotation is the equivalent of Frag. 40, inserted in the text a few 
lines further on. 

For more on this passage from Jerome see Crouzel, SC 269, pp. 267-70, 
n. 66. 

24. See p. 101. 

Directly following this passage, Butterworth inserts a Greek fragment from 
Justinian. For a discussion of the fragment see Crouzel, SC 269, pp. 268-70, n. 66. 


Notes to Book IV, Chapter IV 469 


25. Origen went farther than this, and asserted a kinship between man and 
God. See Jerome, Ep. ad Avitum 14, “And in case we should suppose that the 
impiety of these previous quotations was too little, at the end of the same volume 
he adds the following: That all rational natures, that is, the Father, the Son and 
the Holy Spirit, all angels, authorities, dominions and other powers, and even 
man himself in virtue of his soul’s dignity, are of one substance. For he says, God 
and his only begotten Son and the Holy Spirit are conscious of an intellectual and 
rational nature: so are the angels and authorities and the other powers; so, too is 
the “inner man,” who was made in the image and likeness of God. From which 
the conclusion is drawn that God and all these creatures are in some way of one 
substance. He adds this phrase, “in some way,” in order to escape the charge of 
gross impiety; and the man who in another place is unwilling to admit that the 
Son and the Holy Spirit are of the Father’s substance, lest he should seem to be 
dividing the divine essence into parts (see p. 27), is here distributing the essence 
of Almighty God to angels and men.” 

Cp. Origen, Exhort. in Martyr. 47. “Man earnestly desires life, deriving con- 
fidence from the rational nature of his soul, as being in some way akin to God.” 


INDEX OF NAMES 
AND SUBJECTS 


Adam, a type of Christ, 399 

Aether, Greek doctrine of a fifth 
element, 93 

Africanus, correspondent of 
Origen, xxxvii 

Alexander, Bishop of Jerusalem, 
XXXIV, XXXViii 

Alexander Severus, Emperor, xl, xli 

Alexandria, xxxiii—xxxvi, 
xxxix—xliii 

Ambrose, Friend of Origen, xv, 
xxxiv, xxxvi, xli, xlii, lv 

Anastasius, Bishop of Rome, 
condemns Origen, xlvi 

Angels, Instinct near to reason, 
Ixvi, xxiii, 79, 84, 85-91, 439, 
443, 458 

Antipater of Bostra, lxv, 445 (n. 6) 

Apostles, 2-4, 39, 40, 46-47, 66, 
121, 136, 142, 145, 147, 159, 259, 
297, 344, 381 

Apostolic Succession, xxi, 2, 358 

Arian heresy, xliv, 44, 439 (n. 4), 
464 (n. 5) 

Asomaton, or Incorporeal 
Substance, 6, 7, 415 

Astrology, of Chaldaeans and 
Indians, xxv, 293. Doctrines of, 
attributed to Origen, 457 (n. 4) 

Athanasius, xi, xliv (and n. 8), 439 
(n. 4), 464 (nn. 4 and 6) 

Atoms, Theory of, 425 

Avitus, Friend of Jerome, xlvi. 
See under Jerome 

Baptism, In the Name of the 
Trinity, 40 

.. Barnabas, Epistle of, 283 (and 

n. 9) 

Basil the Great, Bishop of 


Caesarea, xliv, lxiv 


Basileides, 166, 447 (n. 2), 452 
(n. 7), 456 (nn. 15 and 1) 

Beryllus, Bishop of Bostra, xxxviii 
Body, ‘The, Can spirits live apart 
from bodies? 102. Spiritual body, 102, 
153, 174 ff, 184, 325ff. Murky bodies 

for the wicked, 182. Lifeless, apart 
from soul, 196, 302, 303. Obstacle to 
union with God, 322. To be discarded 
at last, Ixxiii. To be resolved into the 
divine nature, 104f. (and n. 4). God 
alone is without body, 102 

Caesarea, visited by Origen, xxxiv— 
xxxvili, xlii 

Captivity of Israel, refers to fall of 
nations of spirits to lower places, 404 

Catechetical School, at Alexandria, 
xxxiv, xiii, li 

Christ, a created being, Ixxii. Born 
of virgin, 4. Eternally begotten, xxi, 
22, 25, 54, 101ff. Incarnation of, 
xlviii, 135ff., 420. Image of God’s 
goodness, 36. Represented by the 
seraphim, 42, 415. All things to be 
subject to him, 34, 70f. Mediator, 
135, 448 (n. 5). All things created 
through him, 3, 77£, 135, 164, 
422. The God-man, 139. Called 
a paraclete, 147, Wisdom of God, 
21, 24, 32, 33. To be subjected to 
the Father, 317f. Meaning of his 
subjection, 317f. Degrees of his 
omnipresence, 419ff. Does not 
comprehend the Father, 465 (n. 22) 

Chromatius, Bishop of 
Aquileia, Ixi 

Circumcision, accounted a 


disgrace, 391 


472 


Clement of Alexandria, leaves 
Alexandria during persecution of 
Severus, xxxiii 

- Clement, Bishop of Rome, 110 f 

Communicatio idiomatum, 448 (n. 
3) 

Creation, of souls, Ixxii, 161. Of 
matter, 161ff. Of the world, 161ff., 311 

Damasus, Bishop of Rome, xxvii 

Death, to be destroyed, 104 f, 325 

Decius, persecution of, xxxvili 

Demetrius, Bishop of Alexandria, 
XXXIV, xxxv, xliii, liv 

Design, argument from, 186 f. 

Didymus, disciple of Origen, 
xxxiii, lii, lviii 

Dositheus, founder of an ascetic 
Jewish sect, 388 

Earth, place of birth for fallen 
souls, [xxiii 

Ebionites, 400 

Education, its effect on men, 
203, 239 fF. 

Elagabalus, Emperor, xl 

Elements, 15, 302, 329, 425 

Emanations, doctrine of, 
rejected, 27 

End of the world, Ix, 69 f., 96, 114 
f£, 182, 312 fF, 321 fF. 

Enoch, book of, 41, 427 

Epiphanius, Bishop of Salamis 
in Cyprus, xliv. Preaches against 
Origenism, xii, xlv 

Eternal Fire, means remorse for 
sins, 173, 177 f. 

Eternal Generation of the 
Son, lxxii 

Eternal Gospel, The, 331, 413 
(and n. 33) 

Ethnarch, Jewish Ruler, 339 
(and n. 5) 

Eusebius, Bishop of Caesarea, 

xi, xvi, xxxvii ff, lii, lviii, 440 (n. 3). 
Collaborates with Pamphilus in 
defending Origen, xlvii f. (and n. 3) 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Eve, a type of the Church, 399 

External things, not in our own 
power, 202. Used by God for our 
good, 232 

Fabian, Bishop of Rome, lv 

Fall, Origen’s doctrine of the, xlix, 
lviii, lxxii, 375, 446 (n. 9), 461 (n. 
10) 

Free Will, Ixx ff., 73 f., 83 ff., 138, 
162, 167, 181, 284, 298, 319, 450 
(n. 4). Essential to rational beings, 4 f, 
Discussion of, 195-274 

Gelasius, Bishop of Rome, Ixii 

Gnosticism, xii, lxxi, 27 (and n. 
7), 447 (n. 1), 461 (n. 3). Knowledge 
falsely so called, xxvi 

God, unity of, 43. Brings world 
to harmony, 94 f., 168. Controls 
Universe, lx, 30. Invisible, 25 f., 

121, 135, 138, 416. His impartiality, 
89, 171. His providential care, 53, 
97, 233, 237, 348. Comprehends 
Universe, 313. To be all in all, xxxix, 
liii fF., xxiii, 317, 322 ff. 328 fF., 447 
(n. 21). 460 (n. 21). His ways past 
finding out, 414 f. 

Gregory, Bishop of Nazianzus, Ixiv 

Gregory, Bishop of Nyssa, Ixv, 445 
(n. 7), 456 (n. 8) 

Gregory Thaumaturgus, xxxvii. 
His Panegyric on Origen, xxxv 

Hades, this world a Hades for 
fallen souls, 405 

Hardening of Pharaoh's heart, 209 
ff. God’s kindly purpose in, 218 ff. 

Heavenly bodies, see Sun, Moon, 
and Stars 

Heavens, the Seven, 112 
(and n. 15) 

Hebrew teacher, of Origen, 

42, 414 

Heracleon, Author of a Gnostic 
commentary on St. John, xlii 

Heracles, shares Origen’s work at 
Alexandria, xlii 


bt 


Index of Names and Subjects 


Heresies, due to ignorance, 294 
- Hermas, quoted, 41,365) « ™~ 

Highest Good, to become like 
God, 321 

Holy Spirit, a created being, lii. 
Consubstantial with Father and Son, 
lii, xxii. Not a mere attribute of God, 
lxxii. Inspirer of Scripture, 334, 381. 
Represented by the seraphim, 42, 
414, Less than the Son, xlix. Called 
the Paraclete, 145-49. Inspired 
both prophets and apostles, 4, 39. 
Withdrawn from sinners, 181. 

Ideas, Greek doctrine of, 111 

Image and Likeness of God, 26 f., 
181, 186, 233, 321, 430, 441 (n. 18), 
466 (n. 25) 

Immortality, 104 ff., 230 f., 429 

Incarnation of Christ, xlviii, 135 
f., 420 

Insects, impulses of, 197 f. 

Israelites, may lose their privileges, 
270, The divine race, 374. Spiritual 
Israel, 398 f., 403. Meaning of name, 
408 

Jerome, praises Origen, xxxiii. 
His monastery at Bethlehem, xly, 3. 
Controversy with Rufinus, xiii, xlvi 
ff. Translates the First Principles into 
Latin, lvii. Loss of his translation, lxvi 
ff. Letter to Avitus, Ixvi ff. Translates 
Origen’s Homilies on the Song of Songs, 
xlv f. Letters cited: Ad Paulam, 437 
(n. 4). Ad Pamm. et Ocean, 437 (nn. 
8 and 1), 443 (n. 8). Ad Avitum, 438 
(nn. 12, 2, and 3), 439 (n. 4), 443 
(nn. 3, 2, 4, 5, and 10), 444 (nn. 8 
and 10), 445 (nn. 1 and 4), 446 (nn. 
6, 7, and 9), 447 (n. 27), 448 (nn. 6 
and 2), 451 (nn. 9 and 11), 452 (n. 
11), 453 (nn. 26 and 27), 454 (n. 29), 
455 (nn. 13 and 14), 457 (nn. 4 and 
8), 458 (nn. 10, 12, and 4), 459 (n. 6 
and 9), 460 (n. 21), 462 (n. 22), 463 
(nn. 32 and 33), 465 (nn. 22 and 23), 


473 


466 (n. 25). Con. loh. Hieros, 439 (n. 
4), 442 (nn. 2, 3, and 4), 444 (n. 8. 
Ad Hedibiam, 456 (n. 15) 

Jerusalem, earthly, 184, 393, 397, 
406. Heavenly, 184 ff, 400 ff. 

Jesus, born of a virgin, 343. 
Crucified, xxx. Prefigured by Joshua, 
412. His humility, 412. See also 
under Christ 

John, Bishop of Jerusalem, xlv 

John Malalas, fragment of his 
works, xliii 

Jordan, the heavenly, 411 

Joshua, type of Jesus, 412 

Justinian, Emperor, xii, li, lxiv, 
Ixv. Letter to Mennas, Patriarch of 
Constantinople, cited: 439 (n. 4), 
440 (n. 9), 441 (nn. 19 and 8), 442 
(n. 12), 443 (nn. 3 and 7), 444 (nn. 8 
and 9), 445 (n. 7), 446 (n. 8), 448 (n. 
4), 449 (nn. 3 and 1), 451 (nn. 8 and 
13), 459 (n. 8), 461 (n. 1), 463 (n. 
34), 464 (nn. 4, 9, and 14), 465 (nn. 
21 and 22), 466 (n. 24) 

Lawgivers, Greek and barbarian, 
contrasted with Moses, 334 

Lawyers, held the truth before the 
coming of Christ, 362 
Macarius, friend of Jerome, xlvii, 
lxxviii 
Macrinas, Emperor, xl 
Magi, 295, 455 (n. 8) 


Mammsza, mother of Emperor 


PA 


Severus, xl 
Marcella, friend of Jerome, lvii 
Marcion, xix, 146, 441 (n. 3), 447 
(n. 1), 448 (nn. 1, 4, and 5), 452 (nn. 
7 and 8), 456 (n. 1) 

Matter, created by God, Ixxiii, 
96 f., 162, 326, 426 ff. Will it be 
destroyed? 101, 106. Qualities 
added to, 97, 428. Corruptible, 
104. Formless, 424 ff. Never found 
without qualities, 97, 427. Capable of 
transformation, 428 


\ 


474 


Maximin, Emperor, Persecution 
of, xxxvi 

Mennas, Patriarch of 
Constantinople, see under Justinian 

Methodius, Bishop of Patara, 
attacks Origen, xliv 

Mind, nature of, 13 ff., 22, 40, 94, 
101, 111, 122, 154, 157, 165, 186 ff, 
292, 303, 307, 324, 414, 426, 429 ff. 
Its food the contemplation of God, 
192. Limitations of the, 143, 236, 
349, 427 

Miracles, worked by the 
Apostles, 345 

Nicaea, council of, xliv 

Numbers, meaning of Book 
of, 370 

Oceanus, friend of Jerome, lvii 

Opposing powers, lviii, 4, 61, 
66 ff. (and n. 3), 73, 90, 152, 271, 
275-89, 292, 294 f., 443 (n. 3), 
454 (n. 29) 

Pammachius, friend of Jerome, 
lviif., Ixvi 

Pamphilus the Martyr, defends 
Origen, xvii ff., lviii, xxviii 

Pantaenus, |xxi 

Paradise, a place of 
instruction, 190 

Paulinian, brother of Jerome, lxi 

Philocalia, extracts from Origen’s 
writings made by Basil and Gregory of 
Nazianzus, lxiv f., Ixvii Philosophers, 
xvi 

Philosophy, of Egyptians and 
Greeks, 293 

Photius, Patriarch of 
Constantinople, author of the 
Bibliotheca, xlvii 

Poetry, attributed to madness, 295 

Pre-existence of Souls, xliv, lvii, 
Ix, Ixxiv f. 

Presbyters, 366 

Principalities and Powers, Ixx, 


57 ff., 72, 78, 86, 89 £, 135, 164, 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


186, 277, 285 ff., 301, 414, 420, 443 
(n. 4). The prince of Tyre, 62 ff., 276, 
293, 403. Lucifer, 65 

Prophecy, Ixxv, 63 f., 75, 354 £ 
Divinely inspired, 345. Fulfillment of, 
339, 344. Gift of, 295, 297. Spiritual 
meaning of Egyptians and other; 
peoples in, 402 f. 

Prophets, Heralds of Christ, 136. 
Divinely inspired, 39 

Protoctetus, A presbyter of 
Caesarea, xxxvi 

Punishment, xlix, |, 74, 115, 126, 
130, 173, 177 ff., 218, 226, 243, 252, 
271, 277, 386, 424, 451 (n. 9), 456 
(n. 15), 457 (n. 6), 458 (n. 12). Not 
everlasting, Ix 

Rational creatures, see under Souls 

Reason, a faculty of 
judgment, 198 ff. 

Reincarnation, lxxiv 

Resurrection, Origen’s doctrine of, 
24, 173-82, 450 (nn. 2, 3, 4 and 5), 
451 (n. 8), 459 (n. 7), 460, (n. 13). 
Of the dead, Ixxix, 4, 104, 153, 184, 
327, 446 (n. 4). Of Christ, 4, 24, 28, 
40, 46, 120. Origen’s treatise on, xxxvi 

Restoration of all things, 318 

Rufinus of Aquileia, translator 
of the First Principles, xii £., xlvii. 
Controversy with Jerome, 451 (n. 
11), 457 (n. 6), 458 (nn. 12 and 4), 
459 (n. 9), 463 (n. 33), 465 (nn. 22 
and 23). Preface of, to Books I and 
I, Ixxvii-Ixxx. To books II] and IV, 
193-94 

Rule of Faith, xx 

Sabbath, Jewish method of 
keeping, 387 ff. 

Satan, Salvation of, liii f., Enemy 
of God, 58. His fall, 66. Allusions to 
him in Scripture, 66, 277. Instigated 
Pilate and Judas, 284. Obtained 
power over Job, 277. Called evil, 131. 
His angels, 283 


Index of Names and Subjects 


Scriptures, Divine inspiration 
of, 333-51. Interpreted by the 
Holy Spirit, xxii. Literal interpreters 
of, lxix, 389. Need for spiritual 
interpretation, 146, 353-81, 449 
(n. 3). Both Testaments from one 
God, 3. Superhuman element not 
always obvious, 348 f. Difficulties 
of interpretation of, Ixxv, 122, 390, 
447 (n. 1). Historical records conceal 
spiritual truths, 146 f, 311, 380, 
408. Value of literal meaning of, 
394 ff., 407 f., 461 (n. 10). Absurd 
and impossible passages, 391 f. 
Mosaic laws sometimes impossible or 
irrational, 387 ff. 

Second coming of Christ, 412 

Seraphim, representing Christ and 
the Holy Spirit, 42, 414 

Severus, Emperor, Persecution of, 
Xxxili 

Simpliciores, or simple believers, 
xxxviii, xliv, 451 (n. 3) 

Sin, sometimes arises from bodily 
necessities, 278 ff. 

Son, the Only-begotten. See under 
Christ 

Souls, False doctrine of unbegotten 
souls, 41. Rational nature of, 59 ff., 
91, 233, 428, 465 (n. 23), 466 (n. 
25). Capable of good and evil, 140 f. 
(and n. 5). Pre-existence of, xliv, lvii, 
Ix, Ixxiv f. The soul of God, 153, 158. 
Derivation of the word soul, 155 f. 
Medium between flesh and spirit, 138 
f., 158. Heretical doctrine of souls 
diverse by nature, 168. Created equal 
and alike, 167. Rank of, 71, 95, 166 
ff., 316. Are there two souls in man? 
301-10. Lower soul transmitted with 
bodily seed, 302. Soul of the flesh, 
152 f£., 302 ff. Resides in the blood, 
151 £, 303. Like an animal, 306. 

Soul of Jesus, Ixxiv, 421 ff. Its pre- 
existence, Ixxiv. 


475 


Stoicism, 444 (n. 3), 445 (n. 1) 
Subordination of the Son, 
xliv, 317 f. 

Suffering, human, Ix, 180, 288, 
298. Undeserved, Ixx f., 448 (n. 3). 
Allowed by God, 232. 

Sun, Moon and Stars, 78. These 
are living beings, 79 ff. Their souls 
older than their bodies, 79 ff. Purpose 
of their bodies, 83 f. Their nature, 
79 FF. 

Teaching of Peter, The 6 
(and n. 4) 

Temptation, such as is human, 
280 ff. (and n. 11), 301 

Theoctistus, Bishop of Caesarea, 
xxxiv f 

Theophilus of Alexandria, lxv, Ep. 
pasch., cited, 450 (n. 4), 459 (n. 12), 
460 (12), 465 (14). Ep. Synod, cited, 
440 (nn. 8 and 10), 455 (n. 8), 458 
(n. 4), 460 (n. 20), 465 (n. 14) 

Transmigration of Souls, | f., 442 
(n. 3), 445 (n. 2), 451 (n. 11), 465 
(n. 23) 

Trinity, The Holy, lx, Ixx, 40, 

43 ff, 52 f., 61, 69 fF, 102, 123, 147, 
415 ff, 423 f 

Unity, of God, 43 

Universal Salvation, Origen’s 
doctrine of, 70 ff., 94 

Universe, Its end like its 
beginning, 70 ff. Like an immense 
animal, 95. A succession of worlds, 
lxxiv. Meaning of “world,” 110. The 
other world, 111. The seven heavens, 
112 (and n. 15). The supercelestial 
sphere, 112, 163. End of world, 
69-75. Meaning of katabole, or 
foundation, 314. Present world 
created for fallen souls, Ixxiii 


Valentinus and Valentinians, 146, - ~- 


166, 447 (n. 2), 452 (n. 7), 463 (n. 2) 
Virgin Birth, Ixxiv, 4, 343 


Se i: a HT! 


476 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


Wisdom; book of Not INDEX OF SCRIPTURAL 
authoritative, 424 (and n. 16) H 
eee Seeds QUOTATIONS AND ALLUSIONS | 

rist 

Wisdom, the threefold, 291-99 Genesis 

Wisdom of this world, xxv, 291 vee Xxxviii, 162, 167, 330, 424 
ff., 350. Of the rulers of this world, 
xxv, 291 


S013 veces | 


Exodus 
TiS en ccpeee  deieesaapanedege eet 463 
155 


F:14-12:36. 
BED7E xesansiee, 


267 
127, 255 


23:2,9,19.... 
DOL sdee 
25:21-23 ... 


ws Leviticus 
25:25F. cass O66. Wills eden wteages eat 4\1 


11:13... 
14:14... 
12-15... 
16:8. 
17:10... 


478 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


V7 ek ties antic ahnateatick adhe 151, 303 DEN DH D Bias shaved Saetes ence reese ecl ares ie ienas 276 


11, 14, 16, 21, 25... 
14:11-24 


Deuteronomy 


Psalms 


DED ia ianie Mc Riatadiieliavnessl sesvascdh teeters 293, 455 
wn 24 


28:22, 28f. ... ...180 
30:15,19 0... 
BITE 


32:8 .. 
BD Oi cee: 
S222 less 
32:22... 
Joshua 

13-21. 
24:32... 

1 Samuel 
S:11.. 2356 
18:10... .. 276, 356 

1 Kings 
11:14f.. . 453, 454 
12:26. ... 397 
12:27... 453 
19:18... 372 


Index of Scriptural Quotations and Allusions 479 
84:5 wn 7G 140, 422 
84:6... ee 8:4 eee 

BG Biase cevielscanias ee eet ananeenienene 405 8:8F. ..... 

8951 Fs 10:17 

102:266... 


wl 55 
vee 32, 54, 164 


139116... 
14235... 3 
T4825 2 hicces oiattea naar eee ae 98 


Proverbs 


Ecclesiastes 


Song of Songs 
Li 8 os Svea anita eae Ra tases 142 


Isaiah 


408 
eevivetslang 356 
. 80, 412 
.. 119, 447 


Jeremiah 


135 free ete nesianteart eae 81, 297, 302 


25:15f,27... 


DSI BE avacsdehesilr admis naeialn ecient lath 180 


480 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES Index of Scriptural Quotations and Allusions 481 
MONT Os i cath le a ee SS BO's OSA att nnnted tata cre tinaandy. a: 276 Be Ae hie De tect ud a 66,408,409 24:21... i 
AAD5 io dadescsstcsibilicodisscdiseneeenteneetolgcttandl BO) § 90 sicseacteensuaimaceornaamGnnndGo4 5:22... 24:27. 66 
5:28. Subeit; 20653908304 DAB 5 xls grinding tedisiea tee aden 312, 406 
Lamentations Malachi 12.95, 118,394 25:21 441 
BeOS sei cisycaseucd Rise Sshatas sds eeatattes shes ote heh a 133 ND Eee traat Cad Gata ind ser ayte eleyitenseasbeesa? 266 206, 389, 390 


- 142, 412 


Ezekiel 5 AS Sta sanintidihintisdeiaraadddhauiatens 283 
S2VOEIS7 | SeD A alec cnt eal at ait toon eee 44] 


137, 157 


30:7,10-12.. 
BD Dewsdaritve 
32:5f, 126,15... 
4B: 15 fF ee 


serene BD 
189, 411 


Daniel 


SAN Coal oo ga dos cd eo ct gulahs DG 339 2 Maccabees 


Matthew 


21:33-41 .... 


Habakkuk os on W113, 

DED asseaseiesasebesdeastessestateseacatves iseias Bacaeaeasoenaieass 42 PUNY a te eee ee etal 
Zechariah 5:8... 18, 190, 192 a 

1a. See eR ree AR EO ee 283 nay, 


482 ON FIRST PRINCIPLES Index of Scriptural Quotations and Allusions 483 


ES eas ens rien dea Reals Sin lean SAM tar las 132 BEA sacs os af hcp Peeler sean foveal 367 Acts ROBE sec andor aude ame wenlieeds: 286 
Re . 398, 408, 409 
.. 398, 400 


Sees 81, 169, 170 

211, 252, 254, 255, 256, 258 
fi8l 

236 
DI 212,.237: 
we 261, 262 


. 138, 157, 421, 422 
.. 30, 323, 326 


Romans 
.277, 284, 296 
. 190, 191, 462 
w 1, 23, 24, 27 
27, 30, 122, 123 
.. 145, 147 : Ss 24... we 21, 31, 309 
304 
342 
229, 230 


+350 
. 58, 350, 364 
ms we 277, 291, 294 
364 
-» 303, 309 


8:5... 369 

24:25-27 .... :6f. .. 307, 456 
: 8:76... ..301, 303, 308, 309, 456 

John 17:21 110, 322, 323, 326 1.305 

Lf ae 23, 136, 164, 373,419 5.996 Bp 50 


1:1-3... 


sya 
.. 82, 270 
82, 83, 113, 170, 312, 315, 444 
sersseesenss 83, 84, 315, 323, 325 


17:24. see 110, 111, 191, 322 
133, 428 


.90, 114, 138, 139, 181, 329 
390, 391 
..74, 111, 114, 312 


370, 372 
.. 280, 281, 282, 285, 301 
pibdanetnavta asa asBevelne 342, 398 


40, 47, 148 


5:26... .. 326, 328 
S227 Fe os cesccacttsscessstttatardeisnees 70, 114, 317, 410 
5:28 .....84, 110, 317, 318, 322, 323, 324, 328, 
330, 460 
15:33... 2.204 
1537s: 
15:39-42 
15:40... 102, 163 
15:41... 163, 166 
15:42f..... 4, 176, 329 
15:44. .. 102, 153, 174, 184, 325, 327, 328 
L545 sided. cede eaecstasities deecAesnuendadie 399, 462 


TSt550 atiwinantweonecnieaexode 107, 325 


2 Corinthians 
TD. srarrreenniei ten. tina tn nagn tao 


ON FIRST PRINCIPLES 


. 350, 412 
.73, 113, 114, 191, 315, 326 
. 113, 325, 326, 329 


Galatians 


Ephesians 
TAs anetiasiuisietc aia ean eee 314, 457 
1:20, 22. 410 
Vid eessissess 
122k... 
2:22) 
DET weasie 
2:10... 
3 as ee 
3:9 
4:12... 


Index of Scriptural Quotations and Allusions 485 


ANG coh ouahem okie WA eden Ceatias 72 1 Timothy 


seveveeee FAD 
w 121, 394 


58, 59, 90, 277, 280, 285, 288, 301 


285,410 3 
1:4... 


110i. .335 
1:16-18 


Hebrews 
25, 27, 28, 29, 418 


1 Thessalonians 


2 Thessalonians 


hrese 2egueer Bole. rant yoo ug 


Ls a Ee ES, OS ‘ s % ¢ r — ¥ i f «4 < y ~~ 
73, Fen nt oe een | , a 
2 ey a ed 
Cy OG | AE SE eee 130 
BAD ct cosacsasssarataanstestaonteres LP Sr AED 
Sf A RRS Re 


DS) peters I, bt | 2 OF [7 2) 4 
$2 hi 2 
1 John vie MSE £52 1SS 15%, 
a 920,353,418. 7 18, (TS, IYO fad see p22 oye 
3 1% sar 40 | oA 
sed eS BENE asscns nats ener sro ISD) EN gs Gh og mg tr raz (Fer ysel- 2 
P 26 hing, 334, 55, 181 wee igre Uke, VEY 
A ee or Eee pre Feo flortart - os) £ 46 
Porte ect =¥ 
fT te a 44 
spss A 10 


5:19 
% 2654400 Jade 


Ut — 


5 = 


patueg (42% 522 4? 
taRe et dixien Rretustt 23 14% 


Te he 


men 2 4h My Ni 


Lit 165 
fpboikvay 266 rau SOL) i. [66 <= on Prayir Op igen eng. treat p24; aD 


469 
frayatuledgé 22 


“Thalty 34 707,925 » SID beex 


pery CVPeY\an = G4 GF 40 
A 
fy tj) r2 r 
fred wlll: ¥¥, 52/53 5%, 64 
feeb S3¥,9¢ pat, 149, 49 


| is: ‘sz! 6 
; ‘ast Zor, 206, 292.7 0 103) 249 bc ‘s Les, oxy 70, Fa 
vr of > f A, <2 Cis a 
J ape by By Spielt: $Q "SO eaY aH tay ap peo 2 
\% atélee o 2 } a hieay os 


De we f f iH) Sj 
Pets POX Bely [hinity 


Dertawe : 4 ; 
x of Chelg es 442 52% 


GU yes 


Prars ey God over 
Cree urs sve ttttled f oS 


BU ret. bry 


> 


Ceri Nenct : S4-SY oz 
tH Sov! 429 
ton :f9 


ed 2435 


’ ‘pen = {. 
iser7 whe at, s™ 


322,92 HOF, Y20 GID 


thy da 7 orf Orlacs > 67 34 
.e 
Fait 
Wl. I hi 
Mult by unde CL62) Ze 
ft, 


rs ty 
iheeit : 64 73 @)xs y 5,95, 1 43% 154 
¥ #3 nn Tad 


AP 


54 , 66 bs 4 vise) Ver 


16¥ 299 75,362) 


255 £77, $21,420 > 
belvorett ou: 37 2 79 


ne Porte P94, 137.5 4. = = a=" 


humen me geteds Fe, ~ 
Jot emint F720) 32), 208 ZhY Ga 


Tim | un{ ‘ty , 73 NS 


beaond forth: 7y 


punts! 
i 


nents Gye F7d 8 


t 
trent 


ony? ¥ x 


PLATO UHL AAs 74 ais 7M 4 
i gee) 7 yal ree 


, , SS Sy 
7 
212,129 944 2% 252, 265 


Y ‘ 
Sars Fe 2, 2 3-35 
7 


64 (64) 1% 702 104, IS? 69 |G Lire 
4". 


4 
belo Quel) }x, oong 0} NIE 102 9% 
\ 


h : 
funy % hee 


Org cos 
whalo, $4. 


> {~ J? #77 


! S59 206 200 » 
SE Bo sy 395 oy ON 


otf te & 3 
btton Crealry of Yor fol - VE "tet 1 
984 344) j 
pi ae 
f joe a 93 Yo 2 7 Mu 4 
Dek froma Arf 3 ¥ KE LE SAGLE er a 230 Gey 
pyar LL et #2 
{ 
hy pretty Ge 72% (6% rc > h~ nf 
Mersin 98188 165,16 51 RelA) 826, og 


a ae iJ 
uy et rae tald : I, 193, 


{owerdd on end tou 


scores’: 40 41 Oe aon) 9 


pry tes 


~ 
we 


t ; 
/ 
A ror 
= gat & J ‘ f) 
_f 
pot Ser , Cantey 9 oie 469 
rn : J ? 
wer #nONUFS-F Ot 4b 
, // 
5 al Bee diee’ FL 
yd ae ee 
jf j & 
j a) try 
j —— r 
*~'s 4 3 = 
ra A A i 
+ 20 = 
ee rey CVAg 4ar 
= ~ 
22 
Ae ¢ ‘c we = 
——_———— 20 
, 25 
Cetntion 2 7 G\ 2% 
rr 4 . “a 
Ke pow lee rf Da ‘90 hz 
Mine + 


Lie ’ it 


as 
Chvict Sed y o 


..9 
/ 
. 


Origen (ca. 184~-ca. 253) is considered the most important 


biblical scholar and theologian of the early Greek Church, 
and some have even called him the finest scholar of the first 
millennium of Christianity. He fits into a legacy of prominent 
figures from the Alexandrian Church, which was under perse- 
cution during his time. His father was martyred when he was 
seventeen, and several of the students whom he converted to 
Christianity also went on to martyrdom. 

On First Principles was one of Origen’s earliest and most 
significant writings. Another was his Hexap/a, an enormous 
edition of the Old Testament arranged in six columns of 
Hebrew and Greek text. It is known as a colossal landmark 
in the study of scripture. Many of his homilies were also 
recorded, and are widely read today. 

Around 250 AD, Origen was tortured by civil authori- 
ties in an effort to make him apostatize. While they did not 
succeed, Origen died a confessor from related causes a few 
years later. 


© iL pe peed 


Gao 


| 
| 
| 
; 


Founded in 1865, Ave Maria Press, 

a ministry of the Congregation of 
Holy Cross, is a Catholic publishing 
company that serves the spiritual and 
formative needs of the Church and its 

schools, institutions, and ministers; 
Christian individuals and families; and 


others seeking spiritual nourishment. 


sf U 


, 
¥ 


For a complete listing of titles from 
Ave Maria Press 
Sorin Books 


¥2) Forest of Peace 


Christian Classics 


ff 


‘ 


+ $3 


visit www.avemariapress.com 


yor G? 7 iv 


ave maria press* / Notre Dame, IN 46556 
A Ministry of the United States Province of Holy Cross 


presenvé 


wor lel 


mater 


oe 7 
i 


Chae 


opeadid > 425 


| 


{X\ 


“% 


