This Is That

Personal Experiences
Sermons and Writings
OF
AIMEE SEMPLE MCPHERSON
EVANGELIST
The Bridal Call Publishing House
125-125 MJ South Spring St., Los Angeles, Cal.

PJC#

THIS IS THAT
Acts 2:16-18.

THIS IS THAT which was spoken by the Prophet
Joel: "And it shall come to pass in
the last days, saith God, I will pour out of my Spirit
upon all flesh; and your sons and daughters shall
prophesy . . . and upon my servants and my
handmaidens I will pour out, in those days, of My
Spirit; and they shall prophesy."

,-1 A f> /i

COPIES OF THIS BOOK
MAY BE OBTAINED FROM
AIMEE SEMPLE McPHBESON
125^ So. Spring St.,.
Los ANGELES, CAL.

COPYRIGHTED JUNE, 1919.
AIMEE SEMPLE McPHERSON.

Illustrations

Facing
Page
AIMEE SEMPLE MCPHERSON Frontispiece
MY BIRTHPLACE, AND "CHILDHOOD'S HAPPY HOME" 26
AN AFTERNOON MEETING IN SISTER MC-PHERSON'S GOSPEL
TENT 131

THE NEW TABERNACLE 145
COAST TO COAST IN GOSPEL CAR 209
(a) THE GREAT TEMPLE AUDITORIUM (b) TEMPLE AUDITORIUM ROSTRUM, Los ANGELES, CAL 220
VICTORIA HALL, Los ANGELES (WHERE THE POWER FELL)... 231
THE HOUSE THAT GOD BUILT. 239
MY CHILDREN (Roberta and Rolf with Their Mamma) 250
GLAD TIDINGS ASSEMBLY AUDITORIUM, SAN FRANCISCO 275
WHICH ROAD WHICH WILL You CHOOSE ? 293
A CERTAIN MAN WENT DOWN HAVE You TAKEN THIS
JOURNEY ? 324
THE Two HOUSES WHERE ARE You BUILDING? 368
DISPENSATION OF THE HOLY GHOST (As I SAW IT IN MY
VISION) 380
THE Two PASTURES 450
THE PLAN OF REDEMPTION.. ..525

Contents

PREFACE 7

PART I.

PERSONAL TESTIMONY
Chapter Page
I. MY MOTHER 11
The word of the Lord came unto me saying . . .
I sanctified thee and I ordained thee a prophet
unto the nations. Jer. 1:4-9.
H. THE BABY 16
"For this child I prayed" I Sam. 1:27-28.
III. CHILDHOOD DAYS 20
Train up a child in the way it should go.
Prov. 22:6.
IV. GIRLHOOD 27
Foolishness is found in the heart of a child.
Prov. 22:15.
V. SALVATION AND BAPTISM OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 36
"And it came to pass, that before they call . . .
I will hear." Isa. 65:24.
VI. CALLING INTO THE VINEYARD AND MARRIAGE 59
Come my beloved, and let us go forth into the
field, let us lodge in the villages. S. of S. 7:11.
VII. EARLY MINISTRY MY BROKEN ANKLE HEALED 67
Let us get up early to the vineyard and let us
see if the vines flourish. S. of S. 7:12.
VIII. CALL TO FOREIGN FIELDS 77
"And He said unto me, Go ye into all the world,
and preach the gospel to every creature." Mk.
16:15.

IX. DEATH OF MY HUSBAND 83
"When thou passeth through the waters . . .
they shall not overflow thee." Isa. 13:2.
X. NINEVEH TO TARSHISH AND RETURN 93
And the Word of the Lord came unto Jonah . . .
Arise, go to Nineveh and preach. Jonah 2:1-10.
XI. GETTING BACK 107
"For ye were the sheep going astray." I. Pet.
XII. REVIVAL FIRES FALL ....117
. . . The fires of the Lord fell and consumed
sacrifice. I Kings. 18:30-39.
XIII. CALLED TO DWELL IN TENTS FLORIDA CAMPAIGN 131
"For I have not dwelt in an house but have
gone from one tent to another." I Chron. 17:5.

CONTENTS Continued
Chapter Page
XIV. THE BRIDAL CALL 141
"Write the vision and make it plain that he
may run that readeth it." Hab. 2:2.
XV. EASTERN SUMMER TENT CAMPAIGN 1917 145
To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord and
the day of vengeance of the Lord; to comfort
all who mourn." Isa. 61:1-2-3.
XVI. SECOND SOUTHERN CAMPAIGN AND GOSPEL AUTO

WORK 155
XVII. MEETINGS IN VIRGINIA AND GOSPEL AUTO NEWS VGV
"So she gleaned in the field until even and beat
out that she had gleaned." Ruth 2:15, 17.
XVIII. NATION WIDE CAMP. PHILADELPHIA 183
"And then the House was filled with a cloud
even the House of the Lord 1 ." II Chron. 5:14.
XIX. CHAIN OF MEETINGS FROM MONTWAIT. MASS.. T>
NEW YORK CITY 199
In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening
withhold not thy hand. Ecc. 11:6; Matt. 10:23.
XX. TRANSCONTINENTAL GOSPEL AUTO TRIP AND REVIVAL AT TULSA, OKLA 209
And the Lord said unto the servant, Go out into
the highways and hedges and compel them to
come in, that My house may be filled. Lv. 14:23.
XXI. CALIFORNIA REVIVAL MEETINGS 231
"S'hout, for the Lord hath given you the city."
Jas. 6:16.
XXII. "THE HOUSE THAT GOD BUILT" 239
"Yea the sparrow hath found an house." Ps.
84:2.
XXIII. OTHER CALIFORNIA MEETINGS... 243
"And the plowman shall overtake the reaper."
Amos. 9:13.

PART II.

TESTIMONY OF THOSE TOUCHED BY GOD IN
OUR MEETINGS
Page
THE MIGHTY POWER OF GOD MANIFESTED MRS. E, SHARP.. .253
TESTIMONY OF WILLIAM K. BOUTON 261
MEMORIES OF THE PHILADELPHIA CAMP MEETING, BY ELDER
GEORGE LLOYD 267
A MONDAY NIGHT MEETING, PHOEBE C. BENT. 269
SOME THINGS WHICH I SAW ELIZABETH SISSON 273
WONDERFUL DOWNPOUR AT VICTORIA HALL PASTOR W. W.
FISHER , 274
SAN FRANCISCO REVIVAL PASTOR ROBERT CRAIG.. .......275

CONTENTS Continued

PART III.
SOME SERMONS AND 'WRITINGS OF AIM'EE
. SEMPLE McPHERSON
Page
COME IF BUT 281
WHAT SHALL I Do WITH JKSUS? - 286
WHICH ROAD? .293
BEHOLD THE MAN 304
"... and Pilate said Behold the Man." John 15:5.

BARABBAS 310
And they all cried . . . and release us Barabbas.
Luke 23:8-9; John 18:40.
A CERTAIN MAN WENT DOWN (Luke 10:30-35) 322
HAVE I BEEN so LONG TIME WITH You. AND YET HAST
THOU NOT KNOWN ME? ..339
LIBERTY BON.DS "OVER THERE" .344
(Inspired by Our Country's Call for the Third Liberty
.. . Loan, April, 1918)
MODERN WARFARE "OvER THE TOP" 353
THE RED CROSS 359
THE Two HOUSES 368
The House on the sand and the House on the Rock.
CONCERNING THE HOLY SPIRIT
Page
LOST AND RESTORED 380
THE THREE DISPENSATIONS. 383
You NEED THE HOLY SPIRIT .407
TARRY UNTIL .412
THE BAPTISM OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 418
WORK OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 425
A PLAIN TALK TO SEEKERS 431
"... I will feed my flock and I will cause them to

lie down saith the Lord. Ezekiel 34:14-15.
THE LATTER RAIN 444
SHEPHERDS "FALSE AND TRUE". 448
SAUL OF TARSUS AND PRESENT DAY SAULS 457
WHAT ABOUT THOSE MANIFESTATIONS? 465
RECEIVE YE THE HOLY GHOST 478
ACCORDING TO THE WORD .481
"... Be it unto me according to Thy Word."
Luke 1:38.
TWENTY-FOUR QUESTIONS A YOUNG WORKER is APT- TO
MEET AND ANSWERS FROM THE WORD HE SHOULD BE
ABLE TO GIVE 485
THE COMING OF THE CHRIST .499
THE INQUIRER AND THE WORD TALK TOGETHER OF His
COMING 503
SIGNS OF THE TIMES 509
What shall be the sign of My coming. Matt 24:3.
THE MARRIAGE OF THE LAMB (A Vision) ....... . . .513
THAT WONDERFUL DAY 518
TOWARD MORNING . ..520

CONTENTS Concluded
TEACHING OF DEEPER TRUTHS

Page
PLAN OF REDEMPTION . . 525
THE BRIDE IN THE VEIL OF TYPES AND SHADOWS 532
(Come hither, I will shew you the Bride, the Lamb's
wife. Rev. 21:9.)
ISAAC AND REBECCA 547
(From a sermon, Bethel Temple, Chicago.)
THE LIFE AND GROWTH OF PETER 556
THE TEMPLE . . ^65
"Ye also are lively stones, are built upon a spiritual House." I Pet. 2:5.
GETTING DOWN 574
COVET EARNESTLY SPIRITUAL GIFTS 578
THE VALLEY OF DRY BONES 585
DEATH IN THE POT 596
REJOICE IN THE LORD 615
"Rejoice in the Lord alway, and again I say, Rejoice." Phil. 4:4.
PRAISING THE LORD 621
THE FOUR FOLD MESSAGE OF THE HOUR (For Fishers of Men) .629

PART IV.
VISIONS, PROPHECIES, MESSAGES IN
TONGUES AND INTERPRETATION

Page
RHAPSODY OF PRAISE 638
MEETING IN THE AIR 639
SONG OF PRAISE AND WORSHIP .639
AWAKE O EARTH ! JESUS is COMING SOON 640
THE VOICE OF THE LORD TO THE NATIONS AND TO THE SAINTS. .644
PRESS ON TO PERFECTION (Prophecy and Vision) 648
PERFECT FRUIT 650
JESUS is COMING SOON GET READY (Vision and Prophecy) . .653
THE SIEVE OF THE LORD (Prophecy) 657
WILT THOU WATCH WITH ME ONE LITTLE HOUR (Prophetic
Song) 661
THIS is THE WAY; WALK YE IN IT (Prophecy) 663
THE VINEYARD OF THE LORD (Tongues and Interpretations) .669
THE STORM AND THE WHITE LAMBS (Tongues and Interpretation) 671
MESSAGE GIVEN IN THE SPIRIT 673
REIGN, SILENCE, REIGN ( Prophecy) 675
LOVE'S PINIONS AND THE CHURCH TRIUMPHANT PROPHETIC SONG PLAYED AND SUNG AT THE PIANO IN
TONGUES AND INTERPRETATIONS 678
THE BRIDEGROOM AND THE BRIDE ( Prophecy) 679

Preface

The realization that Jesus is coming soon and
that whatever is done must be done quickly, has put
a "hurry-up" in my soul to get the message to the
greatest number of people in the shortest possible
time by every available means.
Sometimes when laboring in certain portions of
the Master's vineyard, we have felt that we were
reaching many, but when, under the burden of
prayer, the Lord catches us up in the Spirit, and
with clarified vision and broadened horizon we see
earth's millions who are yet unconscious of the
signs of the times and know not that the coming of
the Lord is nigh at hand, we are overwhelmed with
the desire to speed through the lands, and ring the
message forth "Jesus is coming soon prepare to
meet him I" Oh, that we might write it in flaming
letters upon the sky! It is to this end, therefore,
that this book is sent forth.
Part I Personal Testimony simply written
and solely for the encouragement of others, knowing that Avhat the Lord has so graciously done for
one so unworthy, He is abundantly able and willing to do for all.
Part II "In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established."
Part III Sermons and Writings contains a
message to the sinner ; to the born-again soul who
has not yet received the baptism with the Holy
Spirit, and to the baptized believer who is pressing
on to perfection.

Part IV Visions, Prophecies, and interpretations of messages which the Lord has given me in
the Spirit and which have been of such value and
blessing to ourselves and others; we realize them
too precious to be lost.

He bade me go forth taking no thought what I
should eat or drink or wherewith I should be
clothed, assured that He who had commissioned
me to go into all the world and preach the Gospel
knew, and would supply every need according to
His riches.
We have never known what it was to have any
earthly board behind us or any one person to whom
we could look for support, yet God has inarvelously supplied our every need.
Will the reader pardon mistakes and look more
at the spirit in which the book is written than at
errors in composition? It is doubtful whether any
other book has been written under similar circumstances. I have had no quiet study into which to
retire and close the door to the world and countless
interruptions. Each page has been written in spare
moments, amidst the stress of meetings, playing,
singing, preaching, and working at the altar, besides traveling far and wide with the Gospel car.
The opening chapters were written in Florida, and
the work has been continued en route from there
to New York, the New England states, and thence
across the continent to California.
Though the reader and the writer may never
meet in this present life," this book goes from my
hand and heart with the earnest prayer and hope
that we shall rise together to meet the Lord in the
clouds of glory, when Jesus shall appear.

Parti
Personal Testimony

CHAPTER I.
MY MOTHER.

"The word of the Lord came unto me, saying,
Before I formed thee ... I knew thee; and before
thou earnest forth ... I sanctified thee and I ordained
thee a prophet unto the nations. Then said I, Ah! Lord
God! behold, I cannot speak; for I am a child. But the Lord
said unto me, Say not, I am a child; for thou shalt go to all
that I shall send thee, and whatsoever I command thee thou
shalt speak. Be not afraid of their faces; for I am with
thee to deliver thee. Then the Lord put forth His hand, and
touched my mouth, and said unto me, Behold, I have put My
Words in thy mouth." Jer. l:(4-9).
WHEN I was a little girl seventeen years
of age, the Lord spoke these words
plainly into my startled ears, as I was
alone in my bedroom praying one day.
It was a solemn time when He ordained me there
to preach the Gospel. At first it seemed too
astounding and impossible to be true that the
Lord would ever call such a simple, unworthy
little country girl as I to go out and preach
the Gospel but the call and ordination were so real
that, although later set apart and ordained by the
saints of God, the memory of my little bedroom,
flooded with the glory of God as He spoke those
words, has always been to me my real ordination.
It is because the words, "Before I formed thee I
knew thee, and before thou earnest forth I sanctified thee/' are so true in my life that I must
begin my testimony by taking you. back some twenty
years before I was born. Our lives are like a great
loom, weaving many threads together, and the first
threads of my life are inseparably woven about my
dear Mother; it is with her, therefore, that the
story of my life really begins.
11

THIS IS THAT
Keturning from school at the age of twelve, she
read excitedly of a strange "Army" who were an-

nounced to bombard the to\vn and take prisoners
for the King. Prevailing upon her mother to risk
the danger, they stood in a downpour of rain, awaiting the advent of the army. Presently the word
was passed
"Here they come!"
But where were they? Could this be all? Three
strangers, cloaked in quiet blue, stepped forth into
the square, and knelt in silent prayer.
The humility, seriousness and sweetness of it
swept over her heart. She realized the tender drawing of the Holy Spirit, and before a word had been
spoken she knew that these were God's people and
her people. As they sang
"We are bound for the land of the pure and the holy,
The home of the happy, the kingdom of love.
Ye wanderers from God, in the broad road of folly,
O ! say will you go to the Eden above?"
Her heart, melting in love and adoration, answered
-"I will go."
Her mother had talked much of the mighty power
of God manifested in the early Methodist church,
and here in the Army she found it again, and it was
nothing uncommon to see men and women slain as
in the church of John Wesley's day. Her heart was
filled with a desire to win other souls for Jesus;
the love of Christ constrained her to His glad service, and the all-absorbing purpose of her soul was to
prepare in obedience to the divine call.
#**
Soon came the illness and death of her mother,
who had talked to her solemnly of the time soon
coming Avhen the little girl should be left alone in
the world, telling her that she would commend her
to the tender care of God and the Captain's wife,

who had been her spiritual mother. She did not
waver for an instant in answering the call to th
12

MY MOTHER
ranks of the Army and after quickly packing her
simple belongings, my mother left all, friends and
home, and native land, to follow Jesus.
The period of service which followed her arrival
at the Army quarters in the distant town, brought
blessed help and inspiration. The godly life of her
leaders, and the prayers of the Captain, who frequently spent whole nights on his face before God
in intercession for precious souls, the hours spent
in visiting the sick and sinful the trudging five
miles to assist in "Outpost" duties, the "War Cry"
selling, and meetings, all helped comprise the routine of life.
But again fell the shadows this time an illness
which necessitated an extended change of scene and f
work ; this meant a painful goodby to her comrades,
and a visit to a country farm.
Then it was, while weak in body, depressed in
spirit, and mourning over the loss of a mother's
sympathetic hand, that she married, hoping to be
able to continue her work for God, but amidst the
strenuous and unaccustomed duties of heavy farm
work, she was compelled to acknowledge that she
was caught in the devil's net, and helpless as far as.
active service was concerned, and must largely devote herself to the manifold cares of life and home.
Even so environed, she stood true to her Lord,
setting up a family altar, and helping with meetjings in the homes of the neighborhood, often driving
or walking the six miles to the nearest corps, and
counted it the one bright hour of her day, even when
weary and worn with heavy toil and care. Yet,

realizing ever that she had failed the Lord, who had
redeemed and set her apart for His glorious purpose, life grew more and more dreary; her spirit
grieved sore, with no ray of hope to rectify herself
toward God, and the souls she had been called
to win.
Ah ! Many who read this experience will know
13

THIS IS THAT
how to enter into her feelings, for alas, many grow
faint and falter by the wayside, or seek to find an
easier pathway, only to discover themselves outside
the paths of obedience and blessing.
My Mother's pathway, in these days, was hedged
about with difficulties. Shorn of her usefulness,
fettered by circumstances, she truly did grind in
the prison house; but, strange as it may seem, during all the time that her body was fettered, her
soul was turning Heavenward. Each hour the longing became more intense to go on with the work
for which God had ordained her, and for which purpose she had left home and friends and separated
herself unto the Lord. Finally it absorbed her every
thought in waking, and became her one dream in
repose she must make good her belated pledge.
She must "come back" to the glorious calling of
the Cross.
HOPE'S ONE RAY.
One day, after reading over and over the story of
Hannah, she went to her room, and closing the
door, kneeled by her bed, and prayed unto the Lord,
and vowed a vow, saying
"Oh Lord, You called me to preach the Gospel,
but somehow I have failed You and cannot go, but

if You will only hear my prayer, as You heard
Hannah's prayer of old, and give me a little baby
girl, I will give her unreservedly into your service,
that she may preach the word I should have
preached, fill the place I should have filled, and live
the life I should have lived in Thy service. O Lord,
hear and answer me ; give me the witness that Thou
hast heard me, O Lord, for Thine own Name's saEe.
Amen."
Turning to the window, she swept back the curtains and gazed wistfully up at the dark clouds
shrouding the face of the sky and shutting out the
sunshine beyond.
Suddenly there came a rift in the clouds, and a
14

MY MOTHER
ray of sunlight illumined yonder hilltop, moved
quickly down the slope of the hill, reached the valley, the orchard, the house itself, and fell full upon
the white, anxious face with its tear-reddened eyes,
framed in the window, lighting it with divine radiance, hope and courage, and swept on into the room,
flooding it with golden glory.
To the longing little heart of my Mother, as she
kneeled at the window, it seemed that surely here
was the divine witness from above the sealing of
her vow unto God.
Again she read and reread the story of Hannah,
and the child she had dedicated unto the Lord. She
sat on, gazing far away dreaming of the future
years. Over the distant hills the sun was fast sink'
ing, transforming the sombre sky into a glorious
mirage of hope, flaming with crimson, purple and
gold.

O Hope ! dazzling, radiant Hope ! What a change
thou bringest to the hopeless, brightening the darkened paths, and cheering the lonely way.

15

THIS IS THAT

CHAPTEE II.
THE BABY.

"For this child I prayed; and the Lord gave me my
petition, which I asked of Him. Therefore also I have lent
him unto the Lord; as long as he liveth he shall be lent
unto the Lord." I Sam. 1:27, 28.

"Hush, my babe,
Lie still and slumber,
Holy angels guard thy bed.
Heavenly blessings without number,
Gently falling on thy head."
THERE was a B-A-B-Y in the house! a
tiny, insignificant little thing; not good
for much of anything but sleeping, and
crying, and sucking a soft little pink
thumb, and it seems that I was that baby.
Mother was rocking the warm little bundle, so
carefully wrapped in the big embroidered shawl,
and singing softly the childtime lullaby

"Hush, my babe "
The little head was nodding, nodding, n-o-d-d-i-n-g ,
"Lie still and si "
Tired eyes were drooping, d-r-o-o-p-i-n-g .
"Holy angels guard thy b "
the tiny fingers were slowly relaxing their clasp,
"Heavenly blessings, without num "
another final little pat and the baby was asleep.
Outside the dining-room windows the autumn
leaves were again drifting lightly to the earth. The
late October sunshine was again slanting through
the gorgeous foliage of the big maple and locusts
that stood as sentries by our door. Fall breezes,
16

THE BABY
rustling through the leaves, shook the branches and
sent a veritable shower of gay colored leaves cascading through the air and tapping lightly at the window-pane, as though inviting memory to soar as
lightly as they back to the fall, when last these same
trees had shaken oif their coat of many colors
back to the day in her rooom, when she had
prayed for the little daughter that should take her
place and preach the good tidings of great joy.
Never, for a moment, in the days that followed,
had she doubted God was He not faithful who
had promised? Piece by piece the wardrobe had
been finished and hidden away cautiously under
lock and key. Sitting there, folding the baby in her
arms, in memory she again tip-toed lightly up the
stairs, and after locking her door, with greatest
delight unfolded and lovingly fingered, garment by
garment, the wardrobe that was to be for the little
girl. Had she not asked God for a "daughter" that

would fill her place in His service? Even the morning the little pink-faced, brown-eyed stranger had
announced its arrival with no uncertain tones, making the quiet old farmhouse ring and echo, my little
Mother had not doubted, but asked confidently
"Where is she? Bring her here."
Then her thoughts swept beyond the past and the
present, and soared far away into the future
dreaming of the years that were to come, when this
wee creature with the turned-up nose, and the "ten
tiny fingers and toes," would be preaching the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God.
Caressing the little fingers, she dreamed of the
day when these same little hands, grown stronger,
would hold a Bible, and wield the sword of the
Word, when these little feet would follow the Lamb
"whithersoever He leadeth" when these little lips
would preach the Word. Ah
"Faith, mighty faith, the promise sees,
And looks to that alone.
17

THIS IS THAT
Laughs at impossibilities,
And cries 'It shall be done'."
The great torrent of love and desire for personal
service, which had hitherto flooded my Mother's
soul, was now turned into a new channel the one
absorbing, all-important business of her life became
the bringing up of the baby in the way she should
go. This training, Mother felt, could not begin too
early in life, and therefore, when I arrived at the
age of three weeks, she announced to the horrified
nurse, and the astonished household-in-general, her

firm determination to take the baby to a "Jubilee"
at the five-mile distant corps.
Much well-meant advice to
"Keep that child at home by the fire," followed
my Mother to the door. Some declared that the
baby would surely have pneumonia. Aunt Maria,
who "knew all about babies," shook her head, and
told how they managed their baby at her house,
protesting to the last
"You'll kill that Baby ! You don't know anything
about a baby. Anyone who does not know how to
take better care of a baby than that shouldn't
have one." (But alas! Aunt Maria's baby, whose
natural body they nurtured so carefully, and kept
cuddled by the fire, soon took the much-feared cold
and died.)
Mother tells me that from the very first meeting
I was warmly welcomed occupied the front seat
and contributed, without request, my full share to
the music and interest of the evening.
At six weeks of age I was promoted to the platform. It was my solemn dedication service in the
Salvation Army the hour for which my Mother
had longed and prayed the hour of her dreams and
hopes the hour wherein she publicly consecrated
this visible answer to prayer her little daughter
to the service of the Lord.
Thus in my infancy, my precious Mother fulfilled
18

THE BABY
her vow unto the Lord, who had looked upon the
affliction of His handmaid, remembered her, and
given unto her the child for which she prayed.'

"On Him who watches over all,
I cast my weight of care,
Assured He hears me when I pray,
And always answers prayer.
Sometimes I wait full many a year
Sometimes 'tis then and there,
His answering message I can hear;
God always answers prayer.
Sometimes afar He bids me 'go'
But He'll go with me there;
If He says 'stay', I'm glad 'tis so;
Love always answers prayer.
Tomorrow, perhaps it may be today,
But whether 'tis 'Yea',
Or whether 'tis 'Nay',
God always answers prayer."

19

THIS IS THAT

CHAPTER III.
CHILDHOOD DAYS.
(A chapter written for the children big folks and wise
folks should not read, but pass on to Chapter IV.)

*##
"Train up a child in the way he should go; and when he
is old, he will not depart from it." Prov. 22:6.
***
"Gentle Jesus, meek and mild,
Look upon this little child ;
Pity my simplicity,
Suffer me to come to Thee.
Fain I would to Thee be brought,
Gracious Lord, forbid it not.
Find a little child a place.''
GOD bless Papa, God bless Mamma, God
bless everybody, all over the world, and
make little 4<iuiee a good girl, for Jesus'
sake, Amen?'So ended each happy, childhood day, with prayers
and kisses, and Bible stories. My own childhood
days being so blessed with Christian influence and
Bible teaching, it has always seemed to me, that the
home without a godly praying Mother had been
deprived of the greatest of all earthly blessings;
that home has been robbed of the greatest of all
earthly jewels. The child of that home has suffered
an irreparable loss, never to be regained.
On the other hand, the poorest home the humblest cottage in the dell, that contains a godly
Mother who day by day dispenses her prayers,
tears and smiles, her words of reproof and encouragement, her patience and love, her sunshine, and
the lilt of a song that home, though poor
20

CHILDHOOD DAYS

as this world counts poverty, is as a casket that
contains a priceless jewel.
If anyone should ask me which of my childhood
memories I hold most dear, I should skip over the
beloved wee lambies, the big Newfoundland dog,
the bossies, the colts, the downy little goslings and
chickens, my white doves, and numerous other
childish treasures of my heart, and should tell
of that hallowed twilight hour when, clasped
tightly in my Mother's arms, we rocked to
and fro in the big old comfy rocker, as she told me
the most wonderful Bible stories and sang hymns
of the Saviour's love.
There was the story of Daniel in the lion's den,
ever dear to the heart of a child the three Hebrew
children in the fiery furnace Joseph with his coat
of many colors Moses and Aaron with the children
of Israel the life and sacrifice of Jesus, the beauty
of that wonderful place called heaven, which He
had gone to prepare. All these and many others
were as bright, golden threads woven through my
childish training. At the age of five there were
very few stories in the Bible I could not rise and
tell when asked to do so. So much for an early
Christian training.
Did any of you little children ever see the picture
of the guardian angel watching over and protecting
the tiny boy and girl that ran along plucking flowers
at the edge of a great precipice? In the same miraculous way our dear Jesus watched over and protected me that happened again and again.
There was the time I climbed into the big old
bucket that hung over the deep, black well with its
rows and rows of moss-covered stones that formed
its wall down, down, down as far as my inquisitive eyes could see, as I peered over the square,
boarded enclosure which stood just on a level with
my chin when I stood on tip-top-toe. Sometimes,
when the sun was just right, and the bucket was

21

THIS IS THAT
resting on its little shelf just inside the well, I could
see another little girl down there, and when I called
a friendly little
"Hello!" to her, she would always echo back
" 'Lo !" Reaching across the board enclosure that
guarded the mouth of the well was the windlass
with the crank that turned the roller and let down
such yards and yards of big rope, and then drew up
the great bucket brimming full of icy water.
The big handle had given me many hard, warningwhacks when I was experimenting with it, and
Mother had warned me again and again not to go
near the well; but one day when she was having
company, I slipped down out of my chair at the
table, away from her protecting care, and watchful
eyes, and toddled straight to the well which held
such mystery and interest.
What fun it would be to get hold of the swinging
rope, get into the bucket and go down to visit the
little girl I had seen reflected in the water ! I had
just climbed up on a box, leaned over, and was
scrambling into the bucket, when Mother missed
me. The silence pervading the air arousing her
apprehensions, she flew to the door just in time to
see the skirt of a pink dress and a little pair of feet
disappearing as I crept over. The handle jarred
loose from its holder and was beginning to turn
when she caught it and snatched me from the mouth
of the well into her arms.
The well was boarded up higher after that, and
soon a windmill was put in. There was no more
chance to play with the bucket, but surely the
Father who watches over all had protected and
spared my life. Bless His name.

When you read the next chapter you will see
how I slipped from my heavenly Father's table in
just the same way, and leaned far out over the
yawning black well of sin, and was just being
allured into its depths, and the handle was begin22

CHILDHOOD DAYS
n ing to turn, when Jesus rescued me and snatched
me up into His arms and safety.
Then there was the time Mother had sent me out
behind the barn to gather a pail of chips for the
kitchen fire. This was one of my daily chores. My
Father was a bridge contractor and builder, and
there were always such piles of chips where he had
been hewing the great timbers.
This particular evening I had on a little white
dress with red moons in it, of which I was very
proud. The bull, who, with the other cattle, was
returning from the fields and gathering about the
watering trough, evidently did not like those fine
red moons in my dress. He had always been so
gentle and harmless that danger from that source
was never expected.
I was just at the corner of the barn, opposite a
big pile of lumber, and had my bucket almost filled
with chips. Frightened at the menacing way in
which he advanced, I threw a chip at him and told
him to "Go away." Without halting, however, he
came on in a business-like, determined way I did
not like.
Towering over me, he hit me with his forehead,
and every time that I would get up he would bunt
me so hard that I would fall down again in the
muddy barnyard. Fortunately my Father had

sawed his horns off sometime previous, but it was
only the mercy of God that kept him from pawing
me under his great, angry feet, and that gave me
the presence of mind to crawl into and through the
hollow place that ran under the pile of lumber, clear
to the other end, thus escaping as he waited my
reappearance.
I seemed perfectly numb; my mouth was filled
with dirt and blood but tightly in my hands I
clasped that bucket of chips. Mamma had sent me
after chips, and chips I was going to take to
Mamma.
23

THIS IS THAT
Mother heard the sound of my crying but thought
I was singing. (This did not speak very well for
my singing.) However, she caught a sight of me
through the window, and in a moment was by my
side, .and when she gathered me up in her arms I
was still clinging to the pail of chips, and it was
not until she got me to the Avell and began to bathe
me with cold water that I fainted away in her arms,
releasing my hold upon them.
Being called upon to endure hardness as a good
soldier, and to bring back precious souls for Jesus,
no matter how hard the conflict, the Lord has put
that within me which causes me to go through,
refusing defeat, refusing even to be discouraged,
and I often think of the little girl in the bedraggled,
red-mooned dress, who brought home the bucket of
chips; and someway I know that just as my Mother
gathered me Avith the marks of combat, chips and
all. into her arms, He will meet me at the end of
life's little day and gather me with my tight-clasped,
precious burden, into His arms.
Biding the horses on my Father's farm was one

of my greatest delights. Here again the Lord
watched over me. One time when I was riding a
high-mettled horse whom even the men-folks hardly
risked themselves with, but who had succumbed
condescendingly to my coaxings of sugar and pettings, he became frightened at the rattling of the
wire fence, from which I sprang to his back, and
began a mad gallop across the fields before I had
well gotten my equilibrium.
He was running toward a barbed-wire fence. I
knew that if he reached this fence it would ruin the
horse, one which my Father valued highly, and
decided to cling to his long, flowing mane and
spring as he sprang, alighting on my feet, believing
that he would slow down immediately. This I had
done at other times, but now, unfortunately, I
landed on an anthill, which turned my ankle and
24

CHILDHOOD DAYS
sprained it badly, severing some of the cords. But
my life was spared, praise God, and in spite of
crutches and pain I passed the examinations at the
head of my class, and came in second for the scholarship, offered the one making the highest grades
in the collegiate entrance examination.
During the early years of my life my Mother was
Junior Sergeant-Major in the Salvation Army (in
other words Superintendent of the Sunday School),
and had a great flock of young people under her
care. It was often a great effort for her to go to the
five-mile distant corps where her work lay. When
roads were poor or horse and carriage was not to
be had, she would walk ; and when roads were good,
many's the time (when I was the age of five and six
and seven), she carried me on the handle-bars of
her bicycle, over hills and dust to the meeting, and
kept up her Christian work.

These meetings were to me a great delight. It
was a special joy to bring other little children to
the penitent form to be prayed for. Very proud was
I also of my Mother's imposing title. It seemed
very grand and important to me, and not satisfied
to await the next meeting at the barracks, I would
often convert the big bedroom upstairs into a meeting house. Carrying chairs from other parts of the
house thither and lining them up in rows I would
conduct a meeting myself, and Mother, listening
outside the door, would hear me solemnly announce
"Now, Sergeant-Major will lead in prayer." With
this I would kneel and pray.
"Now, the Sergeant-Major will sing a solo."
Here followed the best imitation I knew how to
produce of one of her sweet songs.
"Now, the Sergeant-Major will lead the testimony
meeting" "Bead the Word," and finally all the
chairs were solemnly requested to bow their heads
while the Sergeant-Major closed in prayer.
25

THIS IS THAT
And so you see God had His liaiid upon me, and
the desires of my heart, .and the aspirations of my
mind in these early days. It seemed indeed true
that as a child of prayer He had in loving compassion known me, and in tender mercy called me for
a purpose. Oh, Hallelujah!
At the Young People's rallies it was customary
for the children to wear white sashes with colored
mottoes embroidered upon them, and whilst upon
the other children's sashes would be such words as
" Jesus Saves" or "God Is Love/' etc., the one my

Mother had worked for me read "God's Little
Child." And so did she hold me, for the fulfillment
of her prayer, through tempest and trial, sorrow
and discouragement, that she might claim the promise and bring up the child in the way it should go,
that when it was old it should not depart from it.
Tell me, little girls and boys who read this chapter, does your Mamma know Jesus? Does she pray
for you that you may be a worker for Him some
day, and have you given Him your heart while it is
tender and you are in the beginning of Life?

26

SCENfe OF CHAPTERS II AND III.
"There was a B-a-b-y in the quiet old farm house"
See page 16.
HOME OF MY EARLY PENTECOSTAL EXPERIENCES
AND WEDDING.

CHAPTER IV.
GIRLHOOD.
"Foolishness is bound in the heart of a child." Prov.
22:15.
THEN came the days of study in the little
white school-house that stood on the corner a mile from our home. I was the only
Salvationist child there, the other scholars
being church members. At first they teased me
about the Army with their shouting, their marching and their drum, for they were still a despised
people in those days. I finally won over the

hearts of the children, however, when I invented
a drum from a round cheese box and with a ruler
for a drum-stick and a "Blood and Fire" banner
made from a red tablecloth we marched round the
school and played "Army".
Everything went well until it was learned that I
had some little talent for elocution. The distance
to the barracks being great, and the churches seeming much more popular, I began going to the Methodist church where my father had formerly been a
choir leader. Once invited to take part in their entertainments I was soon received in other churches
and appearing on the programs the country round.
We received great help and teaching along the lines
of elocution, dialogues and plays by the church instructors in this art. After competing with others
in the W. C. T. U. work, a silver and later a gold
medal was awarded me.
Except for the temperance work, however, very
few of the selections or plays were anything but
comic. Upon asking preachers whether they would
27

THIS IS THAT
prefer something sacred they would invariably
answer :
"Oh, give us something humorous; something
comical to make the people laugh. That last Irish
recitation was grand. Give us something like,
that."
As I recited, the audience would laugh and clap
and laugh again until the tears came to their eyes,
and I was very popular indeed with the churches in
those days, a great deal more so than I am now,
mayhap.

As years went by I passed from grammar school
to high, and became still more interested in the entertainments of the church. There were the oyster
suppers, the strawberry festivals, the Christmas
trees, and always the concerts to follow, for which
tickets were sold "to help God pay His debts and
help support the church," I supposed then. But I
have learned now that our God is so richly able to
supply the funds for His work that He need not
resort to any such methods.
The praise and applause of the people was very
alluring to some of us younger ones, and we often
talked together of going on the stage, arguing that
the church was giving us a good training on this
line and that anyway there was not much difference whether a play or a concert was given in the
church or at the theatre.
My next step on the downward path was when I
began reading novels from the Sunday School
library (for a novel is a novel whether in a paper
or a cloth-bound cover). And when I had devoured
them I learned where more could be obtained.
The next luring of the tempter came when I was
asked by a member of the choir as to whether I
had been to the moving-picture theatre that week.
I told her:
"No," that I had never seen any motion pictures
outside of the church. She looked at me in such a
28

GIRLHOOD
condescending, pitying way that my pride was
stung and I decided to go. I did not tell my Mother,
however, ,and felt very guilty in entering until I
saw several church members and a Sunday School
teacher there; then I felt better (it surely must be

all right if they were there), and settled down to
enjoy the pictures.
Athletic, and fond of out-door sports, next in line
came costume skating carnivals and then my first
college ball' 7 I was now well advanced in the
high school. When I brought home the engraved
invitation card, Mother flatly refused her permission for me to go and it took a great deal of pleading and coaxing to gain an unwilling consent. My
dress and slippers were purchased and I went to
my first dance radiantly happy on the exterior, but
a little heavy and conscience-stricken on the interior, for I knew that Mother was sad and praying
alone at home.
It seemed to be a very proper affair, however.
My first dancing partner was the Presbyterian
preacher. Other good ( ? ) church members were
there surely Mother must be mistaken or a little
old-fashioned in her ideas. How lovely it all seemed,
the orchestra, the flowers, the attention paid me,
the fine clothes, and the well-appointed luncheon!
Ah, sin, with what dazzling beauty, with what
refinement and velvet dost thou cover thy claws!
How .alluring are the fair promises Avith which
thou enticest the feet of youth ! How cunning are
the devices of the enemy! How smoothly and
craftily he lays his plans and Aveaves the net
which he draws ever tighter and tighter, ilium fng
the future and its prospects with rose colors and
fair painted promises, the fruit of Avhich, once
plucked crumbles into gray ashes in the hand of
him who runneth after it.
My future and educational prospects looked
promising. No effort or labor was counted too
29

THIS IS THAT

great upon the part of my parents to send me to
school, and indeed it was no little matter for them
ten miles must be covered each day, five in the
morning and five at night, on the tnain or with
horse and carriage, despite country roads, with
their mud or rain or snow.
There was introduced into our class room at this
time, a text-book entitled "High School Physical
Geography/ 7 which delved into the problems of
earth formation, rock strata, etc., and learnedly
described the origin of life and the process of evolution. There were quotations from Darwin and
other authorities on these weighty subjects. Explaining the origin of life upon this planet, it
taught us that from the sea, with its slime, seaweed
and fungus growth, insect life appeared. From
insect life came animal life, and through continuous processes of evolution at last man appeared,
who, of course, was higher than the monkeys or any
other creature.
How these theories or teachings impressed other
students I can not say, but they had a remarkable
effect upon me.
"Man? a process of evolution?
Why, then God had not created him at all, as
the Bible said He did preachers were true when
they said there were errors and mistakes in the
Bible." On and on raced the thoughts in my young
mind until I reached the point :
"Well, then, if the Bible is mistaken in one place
it is very apt to be mistaken in others. Its information is not reliable, and I guess there's no God at
all, and that's why Christians act so pious in church
on Sundays and do as they please through the
week."
"No, I guess there is no God." Even the existence of the big moon and the twinkling stars had

been explained by science. The sun, once a great
mass of molten lava, had acquired a whirling mo30

GIRLHOOD
tion and thrown off all these other planets, earth,
moon and stars. Nothing about God, just science
and a logical outcome of conditions now revealed,
by wise astronomers who had studied it all out
through great telescopes (which had cost fabulous
sums of money and taken many years to invent) ;
and therefore they knew all about it.
This book raised so many questions in my mind
that I delved deeper into other infidelistic theories.
So interested did I become that I wrote an article
to the "Family Herald and Weekly Star," published
at Montreal, then Canada's leading paper. My
inquiries were answered by Archbishop Hamilton
and many others. Arguments both for and against
the book and its teachings were brought out.
Is it any wonder that our pulpits are filled with
infidels and higher critics today?
Out of the letters that poured in for months from
England, New Zealand, Australia, and all parts f
of America, as well as from my own land, each
containing a different explanation, not one said :
"Child, the Bible is true. Take the simple Word
of God and believe it just as it reads." isThe more I read and observed the lives of Christians, the more skeptical of the reality of God I
became. (How I could ever have doubted is today
a puzzle and a shame to me.) The devil must
have blinded my eyes for a time to the genuine
Christians about me. All that I could see was
empty profession. I saw men singing in the choir

or sitting in the pews on Sunday and attending all
sorts of worldly functions during the week. I began reading my Bible, to see whether it contradicted itself and how it compared with the books
which I had read. Oh, I must know the truth
was there anything in religion?
Every time I had an opportunity I questioned
and cross-questioned each Christian that I could
get hold of. But I did not seem to get far. My
31

THIS IS THAT
first attempt was made upon my Mother. I had
been thinking earnestly upon the subject, and just
as she was coming up the steep cellar steps with
a pan of milk in her hands, I met her with the
question :
"Mother, how do you know there is a God?"
Poor dear, she was so surprised that she nearly
fell backwards, down the steps. She explained
things the best she knew how, bringing forth Scriptures, and pointing to creation with all its wonders
as proving the handiwork of a Creator.
Each attempt at explanation I met with the
learned words of those books and the superior ( ? )
twentieth-century wisdom of my seventeen summers books and wisdom which left mothers and
Bibles far behind. Her arguments seemed to
shrink to nothing, and her eyes opened with astonishment as she sat down suddenly on the kitchen
chair, unable to get a word in edgeways.
My next attempt was made upon the minister
when he came . to our house to tea. Mother was
out in the kitchen preparing the proverbial ministerial chicken dinner, but I had business in the

parlor, ostensibly displaying the family album, but
in reality endeavoring to probe him with the questions upon my mind.
"Does the Lord ever perform any miracles or heal
any sick folks now?" I asked.
"Why, no child, the day of miracles is over," was
his surprised reply. "People are expected to use
the intelligence and wisdom the Lord has given
them along medical and surgical lines these are
really miraculous, you know."
"But doesn't it say, over here in James 5:14, if
any are sick among you to 'let him call for the elders of the church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord:
And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and
they shall rccorcr'?
32

GIRLHOOD
"And is there not a scripture that says, 'Jesus
Christ is the same yesterday, and today, and forever f and 'He that believeth on Me, the works
that I do shall he do also; and greater works than
these shaill he do; because I go unto my Father'?
"How do you reconcile the fact that the Lord no
longer does such miraculous things, with these
scriptures?"
My questions were evaded, and I was made to
feel that I was but a mere child, and therefor"
could not understand these matters. They were
never explained to my satisfaction.
Alarmed over my attitude and questions, my
Mother asked me to join some church. When I
made excuses she offered to take me to all the dif-

ferent churches, asking me to study the teachings
of each of them and to join the one that seemed
best. I replied that I felt I was doing enough
church work now, with the entertainments and concerts, and added, in a self-righteous way, that I
thought I was just as good as any of the others I
didn't see any particular difference in our lives,
whether I was a member of the church or not did
not matter.
"Well, let us go to the Salvation Army special
meetings tonight. It is a long time since we have
been there together."
Poor Mother ! Will I ever forget her face when
she found they were having an entertainment there
that night, and the first selection rendered after
we entered was:
"High diddle, diddle,
The cat and the fiddle,
The cow jumped over the moon !"
acted out by one of the local officers, amid the
applause of the laughing audience. He was dressed
to represent a colored minstrel.
Later we attended the special services being conducted by the Brigadier, his wife and daughter
33

THIS IS THAT
who invited ine very sweetly to give my heart to
Jesus. I argued with her that there was no God,
nothing in the Bible. She seemed to get into deep
waters and went for her mother, who also begged
me to come to the .altar. Then they sent for the
father, and before long I was the center of a group.
my Mother on the outskirts, listening with blushing face while I set forth, in my ignorance, my
opinion regarding evolution.

Oh, dear Jesus, how could I ever have doubted
You when You have been so good, so merciful and
so true to me all the days of my life!
Mother cried bitterly all the long drive home, and
all the reproach she Laid upon me was :
"Oh, Aimee, I never dreamed that I should brim 1
up a daughter who would talk as you have before
those people tonight! After all my years as a
Christian, after my prayers and my work in that
corps, you of all people, to talk like this! Oh,
where have I failed? Oh ! OH ! ! O-H ! ! !"
Conscience-stricken, and shamed before her grief,
I fled to my room, as soon as we arrived, to think
things over. I certainly loved my Mother ; to cause
her grief and sorrow Avas the last thing in this wide
world which I wished to do "and yet and yet."
Not pausing to light the lamp, I went over to my
bedroom window, threw it open wide and sat down
on the floor with my elbows on the window-sill, my
chin propped on my hands, and gazed reflectively
up at the starry floors of heaven and at the great
white silvery moon sailing majestically toward me
from the eastern sky, before I finished my broken
sentence "I wonder if there really is a God?
Who is right? What is the truth?"
The white mantle of snow which covered the
fields and the trees, glistened in the clear, frosty
air, and
My ! how big that moon looked up there, and how
ten million stars seemed to wink and blink and
34

GIRLHOOD

twinkle! I drew a comforter round me and sat on
and on, unmindful of the cold, looking up at the
milky way, the big dipper, and other familiar luminaries.
Surely, there m-u-s-t be a God up there back
of them all. They seemed to breathe and emanate
from His very presence and nearness.
At school we had studied the planets and how
each rotated and revolved upon its own axis, and in
its own orbit without friction or confusion. It was
all so big, so high, so above the reach and ken of
mortal man surely a DIVINE hand must hold
and control this wonderful solar system
Why ! how near God seemed right now !
Suddenly, without stopping to think, I threw
both arms impulsively out of the window and,
reaching toward heaven, cried:
"Oh God! If there be a God reveal Yourself
tome!"
The cry came from my very heart. In reality, a
whisper wias all that came from my lips but just
that whisper from an honest, longing heart, was
enough to echo through the stars and reach the
Father's throne. Up there, He whose ear is ever
open to the cries of His little children, heard me
and answered. Bless His Name.
Oh, if every doubter and professed infidel would
just breathe that one sincere prayer to God, He
would reveal Himself to them as He did to me, for,
He is no respecter of persons. Hallelujah !

35

THIS IS THAT

CHAPTER Y.
SALVATION AND THE BAPTISM OF THE
HOLY SPIRIT.
"And it shall come to pass, that before they call, I will
answer; and while they are yet speaking, I will hear." Isa.
65:24.
OUR prayer-answering God who sitteth upon the throne, whose ear is ever open
to our 017, and whose heart is touched
by our infirmities, was already answering the cry of this poor, unworthy child. He
had set on foot a chain of events which was to lead
not only to the salvation and baptism of my own
soul, but which was to lead me out into His vinevard and make me a worker in His dear service.

It was just a few days after my prayer at the
open window of my bedroom that (my Father having come into school for me) Ave were driving along
Main Street on the way home, eagerly talking over
and planning my parts in the grand Christmas
affairs and concerts in the various churches and
halls then looming above us. How pretty the store
windows were in their Christmas dress of green
and red and tinsel!
But look! Over there on the left hand side of
the street, there was a new sign on a window which
I had not seen before, and it read :

PENTECOSTAL MISSION
MEETINGS EVERY NIGHT

ALL DAY SUNDAY

Turning to my Father, I said :
36

SALVATION AND THE BAPTISM OP THE HOLY SPIRIT
"Daddy, I'd like to go in there tomorrow night.
I believe that's the place I have heard about where
they jump and dance and fall under the power, and
dp such strange things. It would be loads of fun
to go and see them."
And thus it was that the next evening found us
seated in the back seats (where we could see it all)
of the little Pentecostal Mission which had recently come to town. We were to have a rehearsal in
the town hall for one of our plays, later on in the
evening. This had just left me time to come in to
the Mission.
They seemed to be a very ordinary lot of people,
none of the wealthy or well-known citizens of the
town were there, and dressed as I was, with the
flowers on my hat, a gold chain and locket, and
rings on my fingers, I felt just a little bit above
the status of those round about me, and looked on
with an amused air as they shouted, danced and
prayed.
A man, whom I knew to be one of the town milkmen, shook from head to foot under the power, then
fell backward and lay stretched out on the floor
praising the Lord. At all these things I giggled
foolishly, not understanding it and thinking it all
very laughable.
Soon a tall young man, (six feet two), rose to

his feet on the platform and taking his Bible in
his hand, opened it and began to read. I could
not help admiring his frank, open, kindly face,
the Irish-blue eyes with the light of heaven in
them, and the bushy hair, one brown curl of
which would insist on falling clown close to his
eye, no matter how often he brushed it back with
his fingers.
As he spoke with earnest zeal I took him in from
head to foot (little knowing that this young man
was soon to be my husband). His text was found
in the second chapter of Acts, 38th and 39th verses.
37

THIS IS THAT
(There is one thing about a Pentecostal meeting.
You cannot go there very long without learning
that there is a second chapter to the book of Acts.
I learned this in my first meeting.)
The evangelist Robert Semple, by name be :
gan his discourse with the first word of his text:
"Repent." Oh how he did repeat that word
Repent! REPENT!! R-E-P-E-N-T ! ! ! over and over
again. How I did wish he would stop saying that
awful word. It seemed to pierce like an arrow
through my heart, for he was preaching under
divine inspiration and in pOAver and demonstration
of the Holy Spirit. He really spoke as though he
believed there was a Jesus and a Holy Spirit, not
some vague, mythical, intangible shadow, something away off yonder in the clouds, but a real, living, vital, tangible, moving reality dwelling in our
hearts and lives making us His temple causing
us to walk in Godliness, holiness and adoration in
His presence.
There were no announcements of oyster suppers

or Christmas entertainments or sewing circles
made no appeal for money. Not even a collection
was taken. It was just God, God, God from one,
end to the other, and his words seemed to rain
down upon me, and every one of them hurt some
particular part of my spirit and life until I could
not tell where I was hurt the worst.
"Repent!" The evangelist went on to say that
if the love of the world was in us the love of the
Father was not there: theatres, moving pictures,
dancing, novels, fancy-dress skating rinks (why,
it just looked as if somebody had told him I was
there, so vividly did he picture my own life and
walk), worldly and rag-time music, etc., he condemned wholesale, and declared that all the people
who were wrapped up in this sort of thing were of
the devil, and were on their way to hell, and that
unless they repented and that right speedily, re38

SALVATION AND THE BAPTISM OF THE HOLY SPIRIT
uouncing the world, the flesh and the devil, they
would be lost eternally damned forever.
I did not do .any more laughing, I assure you. I
sat up straight in iny seat. With eyes and ears
wide open I drank in every word he said. After
he had finished with the word "Repent," and explained what true salvation meant the death, burial and resurrection that we would know as we
were identified with our Lord, he began to preach
on the next verse
"And ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.
For the promise is unto you, and to your children,
and to all that are afar off, even as many as the
Lord our God snail call."
Here he began to preach the baptism of the Holy

Spirit, declaring that the message of salvation and
the incoming of the Spirit should be preached side
by side and hand in hand, and that for a Christian
to live without the baptism of the Holy Spirit was
to live in an abnormal condition not in accordance
with God's wishes. He told how the Holy Spirit
was received in Bible days and how the recipients of the Spirit had spoken in other tongues
languages they had never learned as the Spirit
gave them utterance.
He put particular emphasis on the "other
tongues" spoken of in Acts 2 :4, and boldly affirmed
that this was the Bible evidence of the baptism of
the Holy Spirit.
"Tongues?" said I to myself "Tongues? why,
I wonder what that is? I never remember having
heard of anything like that in the Bible before."
Then, to add still more to my amazement, the
speaker himself suddenly broke out talking in
tongues, in a loud voice, with his eyes closed and
his hands outstretched in my direction.
To me it was the voice of God thundering into
my soul awful words of conviction and condemnation, and though the message Avas spoken in
39

THIS IS THAT?
tongues it seemed as though God had said to me
"YOU are a poor, lost, miserable, hell-deserving
sinner !" I want to say right here that I kneic
this was God speaking by His Spirit through the
lips of clay. There is a verse in the 14th chapter
of I Corinthians which siays the speaking in tongues
is a sign to the unbeliever. This was certainly
true in my case. From the moment I heard that

young man speak with tongues to this day I have
never doubted for the shadow of a second that there
was a God, and that He had shown me my true
condition as a poor, lost, miserable, hell-deserving
sinner.
No one had ever spoken to me like this before.
I had been petted, loved and perhaps a little
spoiled: told how smart and good I was. But
thank God that He tells the truth. He does not
varnish us nor pat us on the back or give us any
little sugar-coated pills, but shows us just where
we stand, vile and sinful and undone, outside of
Jesus and His precious blood.
All my amusement and haughty pride had gone.
My very soul had been stripped before God
there was a God, and I was not ready to meet Him.
Oh, how could I have looked down upon these dear
people and felt that I was better than they? Why,
I was not even worthy to black their shoes. They
were saints and I was a sinner.
We had to slip out early, before the service was
over, and how I got through the rehearsal I can
not say, but one thing I knew, and that is that during the next seventy-two hours I lived through the
most miserable three days I had ever known up to
that time.
Conviction! Oh! I could scarcely eat or rest
or sleep. Study was out of the question. "Poor,
lost, miserable, hell-deserving sinner" rang in my
ears over and over .again. I could see those closed
eyes and that outstretched hand that pointed to
40

SALVATION AND THE BAPTISM OF THE HOLY SPIRIT
my shrinking, sinful soul that was bared before
the eyes of my Maker.

I began enumerating the many things which I
would have to give up in order to become a Christian there was the dancing. I was willing to part
with that, the novels, the theatre, my worldly
instrumental music. I asked myself about each
of them and found that I did not count them dear
as compared with the joy of salvation and knowing my sins forgiven.
There was just one thing, however, that I found
myself unwilling and seemingly unable to do. I
knew that I could not be a Christian and recite
those foolish Irish recitations and go through
those plays and dialogues. A child of God must be
holy and consecrated, with a conversation covered
with the blood of Jesus. My Bible said that even
for one idle word (let alone foolish words), we
should have to give an account before the judgment throne of God. Yet it was too late now to
cancel my promises for Christmas, too late to get
others to fill my place. Evidently there was nothing to do but wait until after Christmas in order
to become a Christian.
But how could I wait? I was desperately afraid.
I trembled with conviction. It seemed as though
every moment which I lived outside of God and
without repentance toward Him was lived in the
most awful peril and gravest danger of being cast
into hell without mercy. Oh, that every sinner
who reads these words might feel the same awful
conviction upon his soul!
The second and third day I fell to praying something like this :
"Oh God, I do want to be a Christian. I want to
ever love and serve You. I want to confess my
sin and be washed in the blood of Jesus Christ,
But oh, please just let me live until after Christmas, and then I will give my heart to You. Have
41

THIS IS THAT
mercy on ine, Lord. Oh, don't, don't let me die
until after Christmas."
Many people smile now as I testify of that awful
terror that seized upon my soul, but the eternal
welfare of my soul was at stake for me it was
going to be life or death, heaven or hell forever.
At the end of the third day, while driving home
from school, I could stand it no longer. The lowering skies above, the trees, the fields, the very
road beneath me seemed to look down upon me
with displeasure, and I could see written everywhere
"Poor, lost, miserable, hell-deserving sinner!"
Utterly at the end of myself not stopping to
think what preachers or entertainment committees or anyone else would think I threw up my
hands, and- all alone in that country road, I
screamed aloud toward the heavens:
"Oh, Lord God, be merciful to me, a sinner!"
Immediately the most wonderful change took place
in my soul. Darkness passed away and light entered. The sky was filled with brightness, the
trees, the fields, and the little snow birds flitting
to and fro were praising the Lord and smiling upon
me.
So conscious was I of the pardoning blood of
Jesus that I seemed to feel it flowing over me.
I discovered that my face was bathed in tears,
which dropped on my hands as I held the reins.
And without effort or apparent thought on my
part I was singing that old, familiar hymn:
"Take my life and let it be

Consecrated, Lord, to Thee;
Take my moments and my days,
Let them flow in ceaseless praise."
I was singing brokenly between my sobs:
"Take my life and let it be
Consecrated, Lord, to Thee."
42

SALVATION AND THE BAPTISM OF THE HOLY SPIRIT
My whole soul was flowing out toward God, my
Father.
"M-Y F-A-T-H-E-R!" Oh, glory to Jesus! I
had a heavenly Father! No more need for fear,
but His love and kindness and protection were now
for me.
When I came to the part in the song that said
"Take my hands and let them move
At the impulse of Thy love"
I knew there would be no more worldly music for
me, and it has been hymns from that time forth.
And when I sang
"Take my feet .and let them be
Swift and beautiful for Thee' 7
I knew that did not mean at the dance hall nor
the skating rink. Bless the Lord.
"Take my lips and let them sing
Always, only, for my King."
No more foolish recitations and rag-time songs.
"Oh, Jesus, I love Thee,
I know Thou art mine;
For Thee all the follies
Of sin I resign."

Song after song burst from my lips. I shouted
aloud &nd praised God all the way home. I had
been redeemed!
Needless to say I did not take part in the entertainments, and many in our town thought me
fanatical and very foolish. Nevertheless the succeeding days were brim full of joy and happiness
How dearly I loved God's Word! I wanted it
under my pillow when I went to sleep, and in my,
hands when my eyes opened in the morning. At
school, where I used to have a novel hidden away
inside of my Algebra and Geometry, there was now
a little New Testament, and I was studying each
passage that referred to the baptism of the Holy
Spirit.
Of all the promises in which I found comfort
43

THIS IS THAT
there was none, I believe, that compared with the
simple promises of Matthew 7: 7 to 11.
"Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye
shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you :
"For everyone that asketh receiveth and he that
seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall
be opened." Here He assured me that if I asked
bread He would not give me a stone, also that He
was more willing to give me the Holy Spirit than
earthly parents were to give good gifts to their
children.
I would get about so far with my reading, and
Oh, the Bible seemed to me all so new, so living and
speaking, (and it was God speaking to me), that
unable to wait another moment, I would excuse

myself from the room, go down to the basement,
fall upon my knees and begin to pray:
"Oh Lord, baptize me with the Holy Spirit.
Lord, you said the promise was unto even as many
as were afar off, even as many as the Lord our
God should call. Now Lord, you've called me, the
promise is unto me; fill me just now."
The girls found me thus praying and did not
know what to make of me, so utterly was I changed.
No more putting glue in teacher's chair or helping
to lock him in the gymnasium, or practising dance
steps in the corridors at noon hour. A wonderful
change had taken place all old things had passed
away and all things had become new. I had been
born again and was a new creature in Christ Jesus.
Each day the hunger for the baptism of the Holy
Spirit became stronger and stronger, more and
more intense until, no longer contented to stay in
school, my mind no longer on my studies, I would
slip away to the tarrying meetings where the dear
saints met to pray for those who were seeking the
baptism of the Holy Spirit.
What wonderful hours those were! What a revelation to my soul ! It was as though heaven had
44

SALVATION AND THE BAPTISM OF THE HOLY SPIRIT
come down to earth. So much of the time was I
away from school that I began to fall behind in
my studies for the first time, .and although the final
examinations were near, I could not make myself
take any interest in Algebra or Geometry or
Chemistry, or anything but the baptism of the Holy
Spirit and preparing to meet my soon-coming Savior in the air.

Then came the day when the principal of the
High School sent a letter to my Mother which told
her that unless I paid more attention to my studies
I was certainly going to fail.
And to make matters worse, the same day one
of the S. A. officers came to call upon Mother, saying:
"Now, Sister, we don't mind so much the other
people going to that Pentecostal Mission, but we
really are surprised and think you do wrong in
letting your daughter go. You being connected
with the work for so many years, it sets a bad
example to other people for you to allow her to
be in any way associated with them." They told
her also that this so-called power was all excitement or hypnotism and false.
When I went home that night Mother was waiting for me. She gave me a very serious talking
to, and wound up by issuing the ultimatum:
"Now, if I ever hear of your leaving school and
going down to that Mission again, or to the tarrying meeting's, I will have to keep you home altogether. I will not have you talked about in this
way."
I went to school on the train the next morning
as the roads were banked high with snow, and all
the way in I was looking out of the window at the
falling flakes of snow and praying for the Lord to
fix it all some way so that I should be able to
knock until He opened or else to baptize me at
once.
45

THIS IS THAT
Walking from the train to High School it

was necessary to pass both the Mission and the
Sister's home where I often went to tarry for the
baptism. As I went past the latter I looked longingly at the windows, hoping that she might be
there and that I could speak to her from the sidewalk without going in and thus disobeying Mother's command, but not a sign of her did I see.
I walked slowly past, looking sadly and hungrily back all the way; then finally came to a halt
on the sidewalk and said to myself :
"Well, here now, Jesus is coming soon and you
know it is more important for you to receive the
Holy Spirit than to pass all the examinations in
the world. You need the Holy Spirit oil in your
vessel with your lamp in order to be ready for
His appearing.
"As you have to make a choice between going to
school and seeking the baptism I guess you won't
go to school at all today, but will just go back to
the sister's house and make a whole day of seeking
the baptism."
With this I turned and walked quickly back to
the house, rang the door bell and went in. I told
the sister my dilemma, and she said quietly :
"Let's tell Father all about it." So we got down
and began to pray. She asked the Lord in her
prayer either to baptize me then and there or to
arrange it some way that I could stay until I received my baptism.
The Lord heard this prayer, and outside the window the snow which had been falling in light
flakes, began to come down like a blinding blizzard.
My heavenly Father sent out His angels to stir up
some of those big, old, fleecy clouds of His, and
down came the snow and
causing the window-panes to rattle, and one of our
old-fashioned Canadian blizzards was on.

The entire day was spent in prayer and at night
46

SALVATION AND THE BAPTISM OF THE HOLY SPIRIT
on going to the depot to see about my train home,
the ticket agent said, through the window :
"Sorry, Miss, but the train is not running tonight. The roads are blocked with snow. We ape
not able to get through." Oh, Hallelujah! I was
not sorry ,a bit.
Then the thought came "This will not do you
much good, for you will have to call Mother on the
telephone and she will ask you to go to her friend's
home to stay, and warn you not to go near the
Mission." But when I went to the telephone and
gave the number, Central said :
"Sorry, wires all down on account of the storm."
This time I did shout "Glory" and ran almost all
the way back to the sister's home.
The storm increased, and as fast as the men endeavored to open a pathway, the Lord filled it in
with mountains of white snow, until at last all
thought of getting through while the storm lasted
was .abandoned.
Oh, how earnestly I sought the baptism of the
Spirit. Sometimes when people come to the altar
now and sit themselves down in a comfortable position, prop their heads up on one hand, and begin
to ask God in a languid, indifferent way for the
Spirit, it seems to me that they do not know what
real seeking is.
Time was precious, for while man was working
so hard to shovel out the snow, and God had His

big clouds all working to shovel it in, I must do
my part in seeking with all my heart.
Friday I waited before the Lord until midnight.
Saturday morning, rising at the break of day, before anyone was astir, in the house, and going into
the parlor, I kneeled down by the big Morris chair
in the corner, with a real determination in my
heart.
My Bible had told me "the kingdom of heaven
47

THIS IS THAT
suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force."
Matt. 11 :12. I read the parable again of the man
who had knocked for bread and found that it was
not because he was his friend, but because of his
importunity, that the good man within the house
had risen up and given him as many loaves as he
had need of. Now Jesus wag my friend; He had
bidden me knock, and assured me that He would
open unto me. He had invited me to ask, promising that I should receive, and that the empty He
would not turn hungry away. I began to seek in
desperate earnest, and remember saying:
"Oh, Lord, I am so hungry for your Holy Spirit.
You have told me that in the day when I seek with
my whole heart you will be found of me. Now,
Lord, I am going to stay right here until you pour
out upon me the promise of the Holy Spirit for
whom you commanded me to tarry, if I die of starvation. I am so hungry for Him I can't wait another day. I will not eat another meal until you
baptize me."
You ask if I was not afraid of getting a wrong
spirit or being hypnotized, as my parents feared.
There was no such fear in my heart. I trusted my

heavenly Father implicity according to Luke 11 :11,
wherein He (assured me that if I asked for bread
He would not give me a stone. I knew that my
Lord was not bestowing serpents and scorpions on
His blood-washed children when they asked for
bread. Had He not said, if your earthly fathers
know how to bestow good gifts upon their children,
"how much more shall your heavenly Father give
the Holy Spirit to them that ask Him?" Lu. 11 :13.
After praying thus earnestly, storming heaven,
as it were, with my pleadings for the Holy Spirit,
a quietness seemed to steal over me, the holy presence of the Lord to envelop me. The Voice of the
Lord spoke tenderly :
"Now, child, cease your strivings and your beg48

SALVATION AND THE BAPTISM OF THE HOLY SPIRIT
ging; just begin to praise Me, and in simple, childlike faith, receive ye the Holy Ghost."
Oh, it was not hard to praise Him. He had become so near and so inexpressibly dear to my heart.
Hallelujah! Without effort on my part I began to
say:
"Glory to Jesus! Glory to Jesus!! GLORY TO
JESUS !!!" Each time that I said "Glory to
Jesus!" it seemed to come from a deeper place in
my being than the last, and in a deeper voice, until
great waves of "Glory to Jesus" were rolling from
my toes up ; such adoration and praise I had never
known possible.
All at once my hands and arms began to shake,
gently at first, then violently, until my whole body
was shaking under the power of the Holy Spirit.
I did not consider this at all strange, as I knew

how the batteries we experimented with in the laboratory at college hummed and shook and trembled under the power of electricity, and there was
the Third Person of the Trinity coming into my
body in all His fulness, making me His dwelling,
"the temple of the Holy Ghost." Was it any wonder
that this poor human frame of mine should quake
beneath the mighty movings of His power?
How happy I was, Oh how happy ! happy just to
feel His wonderful power taking control of my
being. Oh Glory! That sacred hoi^ i ^ awp^f ^n
me, the remembrance of it gfl^rwinpgq thrills rr)p s\p
JLjvrite.
Almost without my notice my body slipped gently to the floor, and I was lying stretched out under
the power of God, but felt as though caught up and
floating upon the billowy clouds of glory. Do not
understand by this that I was unconscious of my
surroundings, for I was not, but Jesus was more
real and near than the things of earth round about
me. The desire to praise and worship and adore
Him flamed up within my soul. He was so wonder49

THIS IS THAT
ful, so glorious, and this poor tongue of mine so
utterly incapable of finding words with which to
praise Him.
My lungs began to fill and heave under the power
as the Comforter came in. The cords of my throat
began to twitch my chin began to quiver, and
then to shake violently, but Oh, so sweetly! My
tongue began to move up and down and sideways
in my mouth. Unintelligible sounds as of stammering lips and another tongue, spoken of in
Isaiah 28:11, began to issue from my lips. This
stammering of different syllables, then Avords, then

connected sentences, was continued for some time
as the Spirit was teaching me to yield to Him.
Then suddenly, out of my innermost being flowed
rivers of praise in other tongues as the Spirit gave
utterance (Acts 2:4), and Oh I knew that He was
praising Jesus with glorious language, clothing
Him with honor and glory which I felt but never
could have put into words.
How wonderful that I, even I, away down here
in 1908, was speaking in an unknown tongue, just
as the believers had in Bible days at Ephesus and
at Caesarea, and that now He had come of whom
Jesus had said "He will glorify Me"
I shouted and sang and laughed and talked in
tongues until it seemed that I was too full to hold
another bit of blessing lest I should burst with the
glory. The Word of God was true. The promise
was really to them that were afar off, even as many
as the Lord our God should call. The comforter
had come, lifting my soul in ecstatic praises to
Jesus in a language I had never learned. I remember having said :
"Oh Lord, can you not take me right on up to
heaven now? I am so near anyway. Do I have to
go back to that old world again?"
"Hypnotism," you say? If so, it is a remarkably
long spell and an exceedingly delightful one which
50

SALVATION AND THE BAPTISM OF THE HOLY SPIRIT
lias lasted for eleven years, making me love Jesus
with all my heart and long for His appearing.
Besides this you must take into consideration that
there was no one in the room to hypnotize me. I
was all alone when I was saved, and all alone when
I received the baptism of the Holy Spirit.

"Demon power" "all of the devil," someone
may say. If so the devil must have recently gotten
soundly converted, for that which entered into my
soul makes me to love and obey my. Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, to exalt the blood and honor
the Holy Ghost.
"Excitement," you say? Never! It has stood the
test too long, dear unbeliever. In sickness, in sorrow, even in the gates of death He has proved
Himself to be the Comforter whom Jesus said He
would send.
Hearing me speaking in the tongues -and praising
the Lord, the dear Sister of the home in which I
stayed, came down stairs and into the parlor, weeping and praising the Lord with me. Soon Brother
Semple and other saints gathered in. What shouting and rejoicing! Oh hallelujah! And yet with
all the joy and glory, there was a stillness and a
solemn hush pervading my whole being.
Walking down the street, I kept saying to myself:
^Now you must walk very softly and carefully,
with unshod feet, in the presence of the King lest
you grieve this tender, gentle dove who has come
into your being to make you His temple and to
abide with you forever."
The next day was Sunday. The storm had
cleared away; the sun was shining down in its
melting warmth. Attending the morning services
at the Mission, we partook of the Lord's Supper,
and as we meditated upon His wonderful love, His
blood that was shed for us, His body that was
broken on the tree, it was more than I could bear,
51

THIS IS THAT
and I went down to the floor under the power
again. Oh who can describe that exceeding weight
of glory as He revealed Himself, niy crucified Savior, my resurrected Lord, my coming King!
School-mates and friends were standing up to
look over the seats to see what in the world had
happened to me, but I was lost again with Jesus
whom my soul loved, speaking in tongues and shaking under the power.
One man was so scandalized to see me lying on
the floor that he got up and left the meeting, and
going to the telephone called my Mother. (The
wires which had been down during the storm, unknown to me, had been repaired and were up by
this time. ) He said :
"You had better come into town and see to that
daughter of yours, for she is lying on the floor in
the Mission, before all the people, chattering like
a monkey."
Poor Mother! She was frantic to think her
daughter should so far forget her dignity -as to disgrace herself in such a manner. She called me to
the 'phone, and I heard her dear voice saying:
"Aimee! What in the world is this that I hear
about you lying on the floor in the Mission? What
in the world does this all mean?"
I tried to answer, but broke out speaking in
tongues again.
"What's that?" she demanded. I tried to explain. Then came her voice, stern and forbidding.
"You just wait 'til I get there, my lady; I will
tend to you!"
(Just to relieve the tension on your mind I will

run a little ahead of my story and tell you that
my dear Mother has her own baptism now, and
spoke with other tongues ON THE FLOOR,
TOO!)
Returning to the Sister's home, I sat down at the
52

SALVATION AND THE BAPTISM OF THE HOLY SPIRIT
organ, awaiting in some trepidation and fear, I
.confess, the coming of my Mother. To keep my
courage up I sang over and over that old, familiar
hymn :
"I will never leave thee nor forsake thee;
In my hands I'll hold thee;
In my arms I'll fold thee;
I am thy Redeemer; I will care for thee!"
What would Mother say? Would she understand? Why, it had not been so very long since the
power of God used to come down in the dear old
Salvation Army. Had I not heard her tell how
Brother Kitchen (whom they used to call "the
Kitchen that God lived in".) had shaken as he
kneeled in prayer, until he had gone clear across
the platform and had lain stretched out under the
power at the other side? Had I not heard my
Father tell how the old-time Methodist Church
used to have this same power? Praying God for
strength and wisdom, I sang on
"E'en though the night
Be dark within the valley,
Just beyond is shining,
An eternal light."
Six o'clock arrived so did Mother ! 1 heard the
jingle of the sleigh-bells suddenly stop in response
to my Mother's "whoa!" Then an imperious ring
of the bell shivered the tense silence within the

house. Slipping down from the organ stool I
caught my coat and hat in my hand as I hastened
to the door. Mother met me, and with :
"My lady, you come right out and get in here
this minute," lost no time in bundling me into the
cutter. The Sister and Brother both tried to get
a word in edgeways, to reason with and explain to
her, but she would hear none of it, and in a moment
we were off.
All the way home Mother scolded and cried and
almost broke her heart over her daughter that had,
53

THIS IS THAT
as she supposed, been cast under some dire spell
by those .awful people, who had now been nicknamed by the town, "The Holy Rollers." Oh, praise
the Lord! No matter what the devil called them
he had to admit that they were holy anyway, and
that's more than he could have said of many professing denominations, now, isn't it?
Being an only child, loved and petted, it needed
only a word of scolding or remonstrance to bring
the tears, but now, when she was scolding me more
severely and saying more harsh things than she
ever had in my life, for some mysterious reason
I couldn't shed a tear. I felt duty bound to squeeze
out a few tears, out of respect to her feelings, but
I could not do it to help myself. All I could do
was sing and sing and sing all the way
"Joys are flowing like a river,
Since the Comforter has come;
He abides with me forever,
Makes the trusting heart His home."
The Spirit within rose up and filled me with joy
unspeakable and full of glory. Poor Mother would
turn to me and say:

"Oh Aimee! do stop that singing. I can't understand how you can sing; you know your Mother's
heart is breaking. Surely you don't call that a
fruit of the Spirit." But it did not seem as if I
were singing at all : it just seemed to sing itself
and came out without any effort.
"Blessed quietness, holy quietness,
What assurance in my soul;
On the stormy sea, Jesus speaks to me,
And the billoAvs cease to roll."
Upon our arrival home we found my Father
sitting by the dining-room fire, Avith his head in
his hands, saying:
"Humph! Humph! Humph!" He always did
that when he felt very badly over something. Leading me up to him, Mother said :
54

SALVATION AND THE BAPTISM OF THE HOLY SPIRIT
"Now I want you to tell your Father all about
it. Tell him the way you acted and how you lay
on the floor before those people." Well, it certainly did look dreadful to tell it, but Oh, that
something kept whispering and echoing in my
heart :
"E'en though the night
Be dark within the valley,
Just beyond is shining
An eternal day."
When at last they sent me to my room, I kneeled
down quickly and began to pray. It happened that
I was kneeling beside the stove-pipe hole and could
not help overhearing a part of the conversation
between my parents. It was something like this:

"Oh, what shall we do? Those people have got
our girl under their influence, hypnotized her,
mesmerized her or something."
"It is perfectly useless to argue with her, for
no matter what we say, she only thinks she is being persecuted and Avill hold to it all the more tenaciously."
"Oh, what shall we do?" With this the door
closed and I heard no more.
Oh, how can I describe the joy and the glory that
had come within my soul? that deep-settled peace,
that knowledge that He would lead and guide and
would bring all things out right.
When next my Mother permitted me to go to
school she told me of the decision which- they had
come to, namely, that if I went near those Pentecostal people once more they would take me away
from school for good, education or no education.
As she told me this the Holy Spirit gave me wisdom
to make this reply:
"Mother, the Bible says that children are to obey
their parents in the Lord, and if you can show me
by the Word of God that what I have received is
not in accordance with Bible teaching, or show me
55

THIS IS THAT
any place where we are told that the baptism of the
Holy Spirit, with the Bible evidence, speaking in
tongues, is not for today, I will never go to the Mission again." I staked my all on the Word.
"Why certainly I can prove it to you," she replied.
"Those things were only for the Apostolic days. I
will look up the scriptures and prove it to you when

you get home tonight."
Dear Mother she had been a student of the
Bible and had taught Sunday School and Bible
class for years. Oh, would she be able to prove that
all these manifestations of the Holy Spirit's power
and presence were only for by-gone days? I was not
very well acquainted with the Bible on this subject, yet knew that what I had received was from
God.
Assured that Mother would search the Bible honestly, I had pledged myself to stand by the consequences: Whatever the Bible said should stand.
Thus it was that we both turned to the Word of
God as the final court of appeal to settle the whole
matter.
Mother got out her Bible, concordance, pencil and
pad, and with heart and mind full of this one thing,
immediately sat herself down at the breakfast table,
spreading her books out before her, without pausing even long enough to gather up the breakfast
dishes for washing the lamps were not cleaned,
and the beds were unmade.
( Oh, if any unbeliever will sit down with an open
Bible and an unprejudiced heart, there is no need
for us to defend our position, so clear is the Word
of God on this subject.)
It was half past eight in the morning when I left
home for school. At five-thirty, when I returned,
Mother was still seated at the breakfast table, with
her Bible and paper before her, and would you
believe it? the breakfast dishes were still unwashed, the lamps uncleaned, the beds unmade, an
56

SALVATION AND THE BAPTISM OF THE HOLY SPIRIT

unheard-of state of affairs for Mother, ever an excellent housekeeper.
I waited with bated breath for her decision. My
heart softened within me as I saw by her reddened
eyes that she had been weeping. Oh, what would
her answer be? The sniile upon her face encouraged me to ask
"Oh, Mother, what is it?"
Now, dear reader, what do you suppose she said?
With shining face she replied
"Well, dear, I must admit that of a truth, this
is that which was spoken of by the prophet Joel,
which should come to pass in the last days!"
She had found that, away back in Isaiah 28:11,
He had said "With stammering lips and another
tongue will I speak to this people" that the prophet
Joel had clearly prophesied that in these last days
there should be a wonderful outpouring of the Holy
Spirit, likened unto the latter rain, wherein the
sons and daughters, the servants and the maids
were alike to rejoice in this glorious downpour.
With one spring across/ the room, I threw my
arms about my Mother's neck, squeezing her till
she declared I had almost, broken her neck. How
happy we were as we danced around the table
laughing, crying and singing together
"'Tis the old time* religion,
And 1 it's good enough for me '"
If everyone who is skeptical of the reality of the
baptism of the Holy Spirit would take the Word of
God and search from cover to cover, he too,
would be convinced without the shadow of a doubt
that "This Is That."

57

CHAPTER VI.
CALLING INTO THE VINEYARD, AND
MARRIAGE.
"Come, my beloved, and let us go forth into the field; let
us lodge in the villages." S. of S. 7:11.
THE chain of events related in the foregoing chapters brings us right up to the
place where God spoke to his poor little
handmaiden, whose heart was rejoicing in
the new-found Savior the time when He called
me to preach The Word, and ordained me in my
room as related in the beginning of chapter one.
(If you have forgotten, turn back and refresh
your memory.)
An intense, heaven-sent longing to be a soul winner for Jesus was born of the Spirit within my
soul. He! had done so much for me; He had plucked
my feet out of the mire and the clay. Oh, to be
able to win other souls, shining jewels to lay at His
precious feet ! Oh, to be able to tell of the Redeemer's love to perishing humanity! God spoke within the depths of my being* and told me that "Before
I called thee, I knew thee ; before thou earnest forth
I sanctified thee; and I ordained thee."
"Why, you are but a child; no one would listen
or have confidence in you," whispered the Enemy.
"What do you know about preaching, anyway?"
nodded Self and Common-sense. "Here are preachers, a country full of them, learned, college-bred,
who have read books and digested theological studies for years. It is preposterous for you even to
think of going out as a worker."
"But not many wise 'men after the flesh, not
59

THIS IS THAT
many mighty, not many noble, are called : but
hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak
things of the world to confound the things that
are mighty " argued the Word. "Has He not
declared that with a worm He shall thrash
a mountain that when we are weak, then
we are strong and that a little child shall
lead them? Has He not said that upon the
servants and upon the handmaidens He would
pour out His Spirit in the last days, and that they
should prophesy? Did He not say that after the
Spirit had come c out of your innermost being' (not
out of your head, intellect or knowledge) ( should
flow rivers of living water'? You know the rivers
are flowing. Just open your mouth wide and He
will fill it."
"Yes, but remember in addition to your youth
and lack of mental equipment," cried Human
Affection, "there is your Mother to be considered.
You are an only child, her only comfort and object
of affection in this world. Surely you would not
consider leaving her out here in the country all
alone, after all that she has done for you?"
"Here you have love and home and comfort, all
you can wish for. If you went forth as a worker
you would have to leave all these," added Love
of Comfort.
"If any man love Father or Mother more than
Me, he is not worthy of Me," said the tender voice
of Jesus. "No man hath given up houses or lands
for My sake and the gospePs, but he shall receive
a hundred-fold now in this time, and in the world
to come eternal life. If you would come after Me
you must take up your cross daily, denying yourself, and follow Me."

"But, Lord, these Pentecostal people have no
earthly board behind them, no salary," cried Prudence and Forethought, "What about shoes and
clothes, and necessary expenses?"
60

CALLING INTO THE VINEYARD AND MARRIAGE
"Take no thought for what you shall eat or for
what you shall drink or what you shall put on, for
the Lord knoweth you have need of these things,"
calmly interrupted implicit Faith.
"Oh, yes, Lord, by Your grace I will take up my
cross, 'twill be a joy," sang Consecration. "I will
trust You and follow You, come what may. My
all is on the altar, have Your dear way with me,
whether 'tis 'go' or whether 'tis 'stay/ let Your
perfect will be wrought out in my life. I feel my
own weakness and insufficiency know not what
the future holds am but a child, but
'I can hear my Savior calling,
Take your cross and follow, follow Me.'
Oh, here I am, Lord, send me. Such a burden
for souls is mine that I would be willing to crawl
upon my hands and knees from the Atlantic to the
Pacific just to say to one poor, lost soul
'Dear sinner, Jesus loves you.' '
"You must go with me, Jesus, you must help
my infirmities and speak for me, for behold I can
not speak, I am a child."
But the Lord said unto me, "Say not, / am a
child, for thou shalt go to all that I shall send thee,
whatsoever 1 command thee thou shalt speak. Be
not afraid of their faces, for I am with thee to
deliver thee, saith the Lord. Then the Lord put

forth His hand, and touched my mouth, and said
unto me. Behold, I have put my words in thy
mouth."
The battle over, the conflict ended, the consecration made, come what might, no matter who
should doubt the transaction that took place in
that sacred hour, I had been ordained, not of man
but of God.
Day by day the call grew louder, rang more
clearly in my ears. Sitting at the piano I would
sing, hour after hour, from the fullness of my
heart,
61

THIS IS THAT
"I'll go where you want me to go, dear Lord,
Over mountain or plain or sea;
I'll say what you want me to say, dear Lord,
I'll be what you want me to be."
Tears would roll down my face; my body was
there, but my Spirit was far away out in the harvest fields working for Jesus.
So enwrapt was I in the call of the Master that
I was often but dimly conscious of my Mother's
leaving her work each time I began to play, no
matter what part of the house she was in, and coming to the parlor door, leaning against it and wiping the big tears from her eyes on the corner of
her apron. God was speaking to her Mother-heart,
taking her back to the day of her prayer for the
little girl, reminding her of the dedication service
when she had promised to let her go where He
would send, even to the ends of the earth. She
realized that the great divine call had come to her
daughter, and that the time for her supreme sacrifice was near. She remembered the words of

Hannah :
"Oh, my lord, I am the woman that stood by thee
here, praying unto the Lord. For this child I
prayed; and the Lord hath given me my petition
which I asked of Him: therefore also have I lent
him to the Lord; as long as. he liveth he shall be
lent to the Lord, and she worshipped the Lord
there."
Just how it was all to come about, little did we
know. The meetings were a feast to our souls.
Workers came freely to our country home, and
when the Evangelist, Kobert Semple, that blessed
man of God who, because of his Christ-like bearing, moved as a prince among men, passed on to
another town, he continued to encourage and instruct me in the Lord by many long letters, all of
which were filled with scriptures and food from
God's storehouse.
62

CALLING INTO THE VINEYARD AND MARRIAGE
Never has it been my privilege to read such letters as those that came from the inspired pen of
this saintly man of prayer. He walked and lived
and breathed in the atmosphere of heaven. To
know him was to love and respect him.
Then came the time of his return visit to our
town and the memorable night when I had volunteered to nurse the two little children of the sister
in whose home I had received my baptism. The
little ones had been stricken down with typhoid
fever, and the mother was fatigued with long care
and watching.
Late in the evening, as I was tending the little
ones and setting things to rights in the room, the
door opened and in walked Robert Semple, offer-

ing his services and prayers. After he had prayed,
the children fell into a quiet sleep, and we sat
down side by side to read the Bible by the light
of the shaded lamp. Robert talked earnestly of
the Savior and His love, of the work, of the great
fields of golden grain, white already unto the harvest, of the need for laborers in these closing
hours of the dispensation, of the soon coming of
Jesus and the many souls yet to be saved, of what
a life of faith meant the sacrifice^ the joy, the reward then, reaching over he took my hand in
his and, telling me of his love, asked me to become his wife and enter the work as a helpmate
by his side.
This is the first time I have ever attempted to
lift the veil even a little from that sacred, hallowed
hour, when we kneeled side by side, hand in hand,
and he reverently prayed God to look down and
solemnize our engagement and send us forth as
true laborers, in obedience to His call, to rescue
poor perishing souls from eternal destruction.
While on my knees, with closed eyes and throbbing heart (Why, this was the very room in
which I had received my baptism!) the room
63

THIS IS THAT
seemed filled with angels who lined either side of
the golden, sunlit path of life that stretched away
into the vista of coming days of glorious love and
joyful service to our Lord and King.
Here was the visible answer to the call.
Here was the loving human hand sent to unlatch the gate of opportunity and guide my steps
into that shining path and start me well upon the
way that way that has led through sunshine and

shadow, tears and smiles, joys and sorrow, life
and death, mountain-top and valley.
Little did I know that night, as I contemplated
the shining way that led on and on to the Father's throne, how soon the strong, dear arm that
was now about me as we prayed, and led me out
into the work, would be removed; that after two
years of married life I should be left alone, yet
not alone.
The impenetrable mist with which God mercifully veils the future remained unrent, yet, had
I known of the little mound of fresh-digged earth
that should mark the grave of this dear heart in
Happy Valley, Hong Kong, China, I should not
have hesitated in that softly whispered "yes,"
with which I met his question; nor would I have
shrunk one instant from the call to stand by his
side. I deemed it one of the greatest privileges
and honors I had ever known.
Oh, Jesus! Jesus! how wonderfully He hatj
planned it all for poor, unworthy me! How he
had sought and called and chosen me! Is it any
wonder my heart sang with rapturous love and
praise for such a Redeemer?
The straight-forward, manly way in which Robert went to my Mother for her consent, coupled
with the dealings of the Lord in her heart on the
subject, made her willing to part with her daughter, though she declared, mother-like, that it took
64

CALLING INTO THE VINEYARD AND MARRIAGE
the sunshine and the laughter and the music from
the farm and from the home.
I am not going to try to describe the little wed-

ding which took place under the flower-decked
arch on the lawn the follo\ving August, nor the
long tables spread beneath the apple trees for the
wedding supper, nor the Mother-face that tried
to keep brave and smiling as the little white wedding-dress was laid aside and the navy-clad bride
entered the carriage that was soon hidden by a
cloud of dust as it sped away to catch the train
for Stratford the mission field of which my husband was in charge.
"Were the whole realm of nature mine,
That were an offering far too small ;
Love so amazing, so divine,
Demands my love, my life, my all."

65

CHAPTER VII.
EARLY MINISTRY MY BROKEN ANKLE
HEALED.
"Let us get up early to the vineyards; let us see if the
vine nourish, whether the tender grape appear, and the pomegranates bud forth: there will I give thee ray loves." S. of
S. 7:12.
THE happy days of service for Jesus which
followed need not be described in detail.
We had three little rooms in the heart of
the city where swirling smoke clouds from
nearby foundries swept over the roof and tiny
back-yard where I struggled desperately with my
first washing. I would wash and rub and rinse,
and as fast as I washed the clothes the soot would
black them. It was a battle between the smoke
and me, and I was greatly troubled, having always
heard that the housekeeping qualities of a good
wife must be judged by her washing and her bis-

cuits. Cinders would have won the day had it not
been for the help and advice of one of the* sisters.
Rooms were furnished in an unpretentious way,
and even with my eyes filled with smoke from
the broken door of the little kitchen range, my
first pan of biscuits, hard and brown though they
were, were considered a great and triumphant
success by the husband who came in, from his
toil in the boiler works, at noon. Never were biscuits praised so highly, and it is doubtful whether
biscuits ever were quite so hard, but the spirit
to learn and try to please was there just the same.
The little assembly was poor in this world's
goods, and my dear husband, not willing to lay us
as a burden upon them, had accepted this humble
67

THIS IS THAT
position of work, though in other cities he might
have commanded a dignified position with a good
salary. Like Paul he was not afraid to work with
his hands.
The Lord blessed our labors in Stratford, Ontario, saving and baptizing precious souls, leading me on and out in a new way. From Stratford
He definitely led us to the city of
LONDON, ONT., CAN.,
where the beautiful home of dear Sister Armstrong was opened to us. Meetings were held in
her parlors until her rooms grew too small, and
were then moved to the home of Brother Wortman.
The teaching of Pentecost was practically new
in the city at the time when the Lord led my
husband thither. Inside of a year, however, over

one hundred had received the baptism of the Holy
Spirit with the Bible evidence, speaking in
tongues, sinners had been saved, and there were
several remarkable healings. As a result from the
working of the Spirit in these meetings, a large,
thriving, centrally located Pentecostal Mission
has been built on one of the main streets and the
work of God is progressing gloriously to this
day.
CHICAGO, ILL.
The Lord began to impress us that we were
to go to Chicago, 111., to attend the meetings of
Brother W. H. Durham, and as we were praying for the necessary means, He laid it upon my
Mother's heart to provide for the fare and other
necessary expenses.
Oh, the teaching and the deepening, and the experiences that were ours in the little North Avenue assembly, where we worshipped for several
months, have meant so much in the years which
have followed! It was here that the Lord gave
me the gift of interpretation.
68

EARLY MINISTRY MY BROKEN ANKLE HEALED
While praying upon my knees by the side of my
bed one day, I was speaking in tongues (when
one has received the Holy Spirit and He has
right of way, it is difficult to keep from praying
in the Spirit, as when the soul becomes just so
full that our human mind cannot give utterance to
or express its desires, the Holy Spirit within rises
and helping our infirmities, prays through us
with groanings that cannot be uttered, or praises
and glorifies Jesus as the case may be).
This day, as I was worshipping the Lord in

other tongues, as the Spirit gave utterance, I
suddenly became conscious of the fact that I could
understand the words that the Spirit was speaking through me. He described the glorious morning when the mists should be rolled away, the
breaking of eternal dawn over the hills, the nearness of the approach of our Lord, which was reaching out and with flaming colors, illuminating the
sky with the promise of His appearing. The
glory, the beauty, the majestic tread and kingly
garments of the Lord were described in wonderful
language that I never could have thought of.
When the power lifted from me I was left feeling
as though I had had a taste of heaven.
Not understanding this experience, I did not
mention it to anyone, but that night, when seated
in the North Avenue Mission, Brother Durham,
during his preaching, spoke a lengthy message in
tongues. No one in this assembly had had the
gift of interpretation up to this time, and they
had been praying earnestly for its bestowal upon
someone.
As the Pastor spoke, the power was flowing
through my being. Tt just seemed as though the
message were rolling in and rolling in and rolling
in. The moment the Spirit ceased speaking
through him I felt the greatest drawing to spring
to my feet and open my mouth, assured that if I
69

THIS IS THAT
did the message would roll and roll forth in English.
I could feel my face growing red; it seemed as
though everyone must know I had the interpretation, for I shook from head to foot during the
silence that ensued, but even though the Brother

pointed over the audience in my direction and
said
"Somebody here has got the interpretation," I
still sat on in my chair, fearful of getting to my
feet lest I should be mistaken.
Meeting over, he came down to me and said:
"You had the interpretation, did you not?"
After telling him my experience, he bade me go
right to the altar and ask the Lord to forgive
me for quenching the Spirit, assuring me that
if I did not obey the Spirit I would grieve Him
and the gift be taken away.
The next meeting wherein a message in tongues
was given through the brother, I yielded to the
Spirit, who seemed literally to lift me to my
feet, and spoke through me in English, the interpretation of the message which had been given in
tongues. I was amazed to find how easy it was:
I had nothing to do with it at all. It was almost
exactly the same as speaking in tongues, my lips
and tongue were controlled by the Spirit in identically the same way. The words did not pass
through my brain but came flowing out of my innermost being just as the Spirit gave utterance.
The only difference between this and speaking in
tongues was that it came in English. The language was such as I never could have used.
The saints shouted leaped to their feet and
the power fell everywhere. Meeting after meeting thereafter, the Spirit gave through me the
interpretation. Instead of having the effect of
puffing me up, as one might have expected, this
gift seemed to humble me more than anything I
70

EARLY MINISTRY MY BROKEN ANKLE HEALED

had ever had. The enemy would strongly tempt
me to get up and run from the building when it
seemed as though anyone were going to speak in
tongues.
One of my severest tests came when a certain
message in tongues, seemingly composed of but
three or four words, had a corresponding interpretation a couple of sentences long. I knew that
the interpretation had not arisen in my mind,
but was spoken by the Spirit; nevertheless, not
being able to understand the difference in length,
and feeling that everyone else must notice it too,
I sat down covered with confusion.
Imagine my joy and relief when a man rose in
the back of the hall and stated that the message
in tongues had been in his own language and that
the interpretation exactly corresponded. With
a rush of relief I recalled how that in school in
our Latin lessons one word in Latin would mean
three and sometimes four words in English, and
how Daniel's interpretation of the handwriting on
the wall varied in length :
"Mene; God hath numbered thy kingdom, and
finished it.
"Tekel; Thou art weighed in the balances, and
art found wanting.
"Peres; Thy kingdom is divided, and given to
the Medes and Persians."
How could I have been so stupid as to have
doubted? Yet to this day perhaps some of my
readers, when they have heard a message in
tongues whose interpretation apparently did not
correspond in length, have doubted and condemned.
Today we are made to realize in a very definite
way that the Lord is restoring His church to her

full Pentecostal glory and perfection, where every
gift and fruit of the Spirit is to be manifested.
71

THIS IS THAT

FINDLAY, OHIO
MIRACULOUS AND INSTANTANEOUS HEALING OF A
BROKEN ANKLE.
WHILE at Findlay, Ohio, at Brother Leonard's Mission, attending the two weeks'
special meetings conducted by Brother,
Durham, we prayed night and day for
those seeking the baptism, and the Lord met every
one. At times the whole floor in front of the altar
was covered by the slain of the Lord. Amongst
those seeking the baptism of the Spirit was a minister and a doctor of that city. ,
One evening, being tired in body, from the longhours at the altar, I went upstairs to lie down,
during the tarrying meeting. I had hardly settled down to rest, when, hearing the big bass
voice of the minister shouting, "Glory ! Glory ! !
Glory!!!" I bounded off the couch to go and see
if he was receiving the Holy Spirit, rejoicing that
our prayers were being answered.
In running swiftly down the long flight of
stairs I tripped, and, bending my ankle back
under me, fell from the middle of the stairs all
the rest of the way to the bottom. I could fairly
hear the bones crunch under me as I fell. My toes
turned towards where the heel ought to be, and
my ankle swelled rapidly.
Up to this time, having always enjoyed the best

of health, I had never had occasion to take the
Lord as my personal healer, although I had witnessed many wonderful healings. Now, as the
saints gathered about me and prayed, I must confess that my mind was more occupied with the
pain and excruciating agony of my broken foot
than with the Lord as my healer; consequently I
was not healed that night.
72

EARLY MINISTRY MY BROKEN ANKLE HEALED
The doctor examined my foot and said the bone
was not only cracked, but that in wrenching my
foot backwards in iny fall, I had completely torn
and severed four of the ligaments that move the
toes, all being torn but that running to the big
toe, thus pulling my toes around and backwards.
As soon as the swelling had been reduced sufficiently to permit a plaster of paris cast to be put
on, Dr. Harrison and his son, also a practising
physician of that city, set the bone, drew the bent
foot back into place, and put on a heavy cast.
He explained to me that the torn cords could not
grow together; that my ankle would, therefore,
always be stiff, but by keeping the plaster cast on
for four weeks, till thoroughly healed, my foot
would be straight. They both warned me not to
touch it to the floor, or put any weight upon it.
A pair of crutches was purchased, and by their
aid I went hobbling to the train that was to take
us back to Chicago.
The afternoon we arrived, I attended the service in the mission, and rested my aching and feverish foot on the platform in front of me. Everj
jar of the floor sent a stabbing pain through it,
and, sick with the pain, I went to my room, a
block away from the hall. While sitting there
commiserating with myself over the black and

swollen toes, which were all I could see of my
foot, a voice spoke to me and said:
"If you will wrap the shoe for your broken
foot, and take it with you to wear home, and go
over to North Avenue mission to Brother Durham and ask him to lay hands on your foot, I will
heal it."
The idea of wrapping up a shoe, which was
tight-fitting even with my foot in a normal condition, struck me so humorously that I laughed the
thought away; but again and yet again came the
voice :
73

THIS IS THAT
"Wrap up your shoe to wear home, take it with
you as you go to be prayed for, and I will heal
you." The Word says, "My sheep hear my voice,"
and, at last I reached for my crutches, hobbled
over to my other shoe, wrapped it up, and with it
tucked under my arm, started clumsily down the
winding staircase to go to the mission for prayers.
On the way over the crutch slipped through a
hole in the wooden sidewalk, and as my toes
struck the hard boards, the perspiration stood in
beads upon me, from the excruciating pain that
shot up my limb. I felt dizzy and faint as I
reached the foot of the steps (Brother Durham
lived over the mission). Trembling and white from
pain, I felt unequal to climbing the stairs, so two
of the brothers carried me up on a chair.
I told them just what the Lord had told me.
There were twelve in the room besides myself, and
all but one began to pray. The one who did not
pray was an infidel, a brother of our Pastor.

As Brother Durham was walking up and down
the room, calling on the Lord, he suddenly
stopped, and laying his hands on my ankle, broke
out praying in tongues, and then in English said :
"In the name of Jesus, receive your healing."
I suddenly felt as if a shock of electricity had
struck my foot. It flowed through my whole body,
causing me to shake and tremble under the power
of God. Instantaneously my foot was perfectly
healed, the blackness was gone, the parted ligaments were knitted together, the bone was made
whole. Glory to Jesus! I was healed!
Trembling with excitement and joy, it took me
fully five minutes, with the help of the saints,
to remove the plaster of paris cast. The infidel
who was present said:
"Don't be foolish. Leave it on, you will only
have to pay a doctor three dollars to replace the
cast."
74

EARLY MINISTRY MY BROKEN ANKLE HEALED But, glory to Jesus, I was healed. At last the
plaster was removed, the absorbent cotton off, my
stocking on, also the shoe (which fitted perfectly
now), and I leaped to my feet and began to dance
and jump on the healed foot.
Everyone in the room was filled with the Spirit,
and we all danced and sang and talked in tongues.
Hallelujah ! It is no wonder we shout His praises ;
when we have Jesus we have something worth
shouting over.
Suddenly remembering my husband would be
coming on the next elevated train, I ran down the
stairs, my crutches left behind, and all the way to

the station, and told him the wonderful news. My
ankle was as strong as ever.
The mission was full to the doors that night,
and when the Pastor asked me to step to the platform and tell of my wonderful healing, and the
saints saw that the crutches and plaster cast were
gone, and that I could leap and dance upon the
foot, they shouted and praised the Lord. Many
of the Chicago onlookers who knew not the healing power, doubted that the ankle had ever been
broken. When the word went back and the healing was announced publicty in Findlay, Ohio,
many of the public there who knew it was broken,
would not believe it was healed. How like human
nature. "If they hear not Moses and the prophets,
neither will they be persuaded though one rose
from the dead."

75

CHAPTER VIII.
CALL TO FOREIGN FIELDS.
"And He said unto me, Go ye into all the world, and preach
the Gospel to every creature." Mk. 16:15.
IT WAS shortly after our return to Chicago
and the miraculous, instantaneous healing of
my broken ankle, just related, that my husband and myself were made to realize in a
very definite way that the time had come for us to
obey the call to China which the Spirit had been
laying upon his heart more and more for some
time.
We began praying for the fare and clothing
which would be necessary. As I have explained,
we had no earthly board behind us, no organiza-

tion to lean upon. We, therefore, looked straight
to Jesus, the One who had called us, and asked
Him to supply our every need. In just a little
over two weeks the necessary clothing and the
fare had been donated by the dear saints of God,
not by the rich, but by the poor.
We find, all over the country, in our meetings,
that the rich and the near-rich will come to us
and say :
"Oh, I am so sorry that I am not in a position
just now to give something. My money is tied up
and I am so situated that I am not able to do
much now; how I wish I could." And while they
are humming and hesitating over it, the pooj:
step up, and with a glad light in their eyes, grip
our hands with a hearty:
"God bless you! Here's a dollar, or here's five
or ten," as the case may be; "Oh, I only wish it
77

THIS IS THAT
were more, but I will have more when next week's
pay envelope comes in. How proud I am to have
this privilege!"
Farewelling in Chicago, we went to Canada,
accompanied by Brother Durham, holding revival
meetings in different towns and cities in Ontario. In London we found the Lord still graciously pouring out His Spirit and had a glorious
revival while there this time.
My home town being but twenty miles distant,
I had the opportunity of saying farewell to my
parents, but even when Mother waved me off at
the depot, she smiled bravely as far away as I
could see her waving her handkerchief from the

platform. I held my hand out of the window and
pointed up, bidding her look to Jesus.
After our last meeting was closed in Toronto,
where many were baptized in the Spirit, we
boarded the train for St. John's, N. B., and as ij
was pulling out of the Union Depot, we heard the
sweet voices of the saints singing: "God be with
you 'til we meet again."
Leaving St. John's, we set sail for Liverpool,
England. From there we went to Belfast, Ireland. In Belfast the Lord sent a wonderful revival. In three weeks over two score were baptized in the Holy Spirit and all spoke in other
tongues.
Mr. Semple's home, which was in Magherafelt,
the North of Ireland, being but a few miles distant, we visited there. His dear father and mother,
two brothers and two sisters, each vied with the
other in packing the trunk of new clothing and
good things for us. When at last the day of our
departure had come they said "Good-bye" to their
son, and Mrs. Semple (Robert's mother) declared
that the Lord gave her the witness right then that
she would never look upon his face again in this
world. But Hallelujah! "Greater love hath no
7B

CALL TO FOREIGN FIELDS
man than this, that he lay down his life for the
brethren."
While waiting in London, England, for the
boat on which we were to sail, we were entertained by dear saints who showed us the greatest
hospitality and love. In attending Pentecostal,
services held in London we found that the Lord
was pouring out His Spirit in the very same way

as in America, and that hundreds of earnest
Christians had been baptized with the same Holy
Spirit, speaking with other tongues and praising
the Lord. It was here that the Lord gave me
that marvelous vision of the Dispensation of the
Holy Spirit and the message in prophecy which
has always seemed so glorious to me because He
gave it.
Standing on the deck, as the boat slipped away
from the wharf, we lifted our voices in song with
the crowd of saints who stood on the pier. How
sweet and encouraging their dear voices sounded
as they rang over the ever-increasing distance
between us. As far as we could hear they were
singing:
"God will take care of you."
And when we could no longer hear them we could
see the waving handkerchiefs and hats of these
precious children of the Most High God.
Skirting the edge of the Bay of Biscay, we
sailed on to Gibraltar, then in through the blue,
sunlit waters of the Mediterranean, to the Suez
Canal, and on into the Ked Sea, through which
the Children of Israel had been led dry-shod. We
were surprised at the great width of the Sea,
and learned that it was called the "Red Sea" because of the desert wind storms which blow the
red sand across the water, giving it at times its
red appearance.
Soon we were plowing through the waters of
the Indian Ocean. After our visit at Ceylon it
79

THIS IS THAT
was not long until we were nearing our destina-

tion at Hong Kong.
En route we gathered good reports of the outpouring of the Latter Rain in Egypt, India, Ceylon, Malta, etc., too lengthy to relate at this
time. Suffice it to say that they received the
Holy Spirit as Avell as we, with the same Bible
evidence, speaking in tongues. Sick were healed
and signs and wonders were wrought in the name
of the holy child, Jesus.
On the boat plentiful opportunity for witnessing for Jesus was given us. My husband spent
hours and hours each day waiting upon God; the
balance in reading the Word. It seemed as though
we were being drawn nearer to the Master every
day, and belonged less and less to this world.
After weathering a severe typhoon, came the
day when we saw, in the early morning sunrise,
the mountain of Hong Kong, and beheld the harbor with its numerous busy sampans.
We were met by saints and taken to the Missionary Home, of -which Brother Macintosh was
at that time in charge. Brother and Sister Dixon
and other missionaries were here, and we learned
that the Latter Bain was falling in China, as well
as in America, as God's little children faithfully
proclaimed the truth. Yes, when the Chinese receive the baptism they speak in other tongues just
as did the hundred and twenty on the day of
Pentecost; the sick are healed and the lepers
cleansed. Hallelujah !
In China we felt as never before the need of
the Holy Spirit as a Comforter, and found it
much more difficult to pray through. It seemed
at times as though the air were filled with demons
and the hosts of hell, in this wicked, benighted
country, where for many centuries devil worship has been an open custom. We have seen
Chinese bowing themselves down before their

80

CALL TO FOREIGN FIELDS
great gods, burning hundreds of dollars' worth of
paper to feed their flames of devotion to their
gods, and roasting their pigs and offering them
with rice and other dainties to the great stone
dragons in temple and cave.
Ancestral worship is observed by almost all.
It is a peculiar sight to see them carrying food,
rice, chicken, candied nuts and fruit, to lay upon
the graves of their dead. A missionary once
asked a young Chinaman who had recently been
saved, when he was going to stop taking food to
the grave of his dead. He replied:
"Why, I suppose when your people stop taking
flowers as a tribute to the memory of their departed."

81

,

CHAPTER IX.
THE DEATH OF MY HUSBAND.
"When thou passest through the waters, I will be with
thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee."
Isa. 43:2.
WHILE in China my husband seemed
to be drawn nearer and nearer to the

Lord each day. He spent hours in
prayer day and night. He really travailed in Spirit for the Chinese, and often made
the remark that he felt as though he would
never return to America, but would rise to meet
the Lord from China, carrying precious Chinese
souls in his arms to Jesus. He used to sing over
and over that little chorus
"Bringing in the sheaves,"
only he worded it
"Bringing in Chinese,
Bringing in Chinese ;
We shall come rejoicing,
Bringing in Chinese."
After the heat of the day, we would $fteii go
out to sit on the beach in the evening, and while
different workers would be talking together I
would suddenly miss my husband. Diligent search
would find him hidden away off somewhere behind a boulder or rock, praying earnestly for
souls. At other times he would walk through the
beautiful graveyard of Happy Valley, reading the
inscriptions of missionaries who had laid down
their lives for Jesus. How beautiful were flowers
and fountains, and foliage such rare beauty as
we had never seen !
83

THIS IS THAT 1
As we sat many hours studying and reading
under these trees, little did we realize that soon
dear Robert was to be laid at rest in this very
spot in Happy Valley.
The intense heat and the filthy, unsanitary condition of the country in which we dwelt began to
tell upon our health. Malaria was raging, and

to go out even for five minutes at noonday without a cork helmet and a heavy parasol meant
almost certain death.
We were away down the coast at Macoe when
my husband was taken seriously ill and was carried, in a very weak condition, to the steamer and
back to Hong Kong and up the mountain to an
English sanitarium, built especially for missionaries, where care was given free of charge.
Suffering with malaria in its worst form, I
went with my husband to the hospital where we
could be near (I in the ladies' ward, his ward
some distance away), even though we could not
see each other except on visiting days.
Eobert was just in the hospital one week, and
the anniversary of our second year of married
life was celebrated during this time by a little
exchange of notes sent by the nurse. During the
few short visits I was permitted to make to his
ward, I ever found his well-worn Bible (the one
from which he had preached me under conviction
and explained the way of salvation and the baptism of the Holy Spirit), my husband's constant
companion. It Avas marked from cover to cover
and his fingers seemed to be always between its
.pages.
Each day he grew weaker, and although I was
confident the Lord would heal him, he felt as
though his work were ended, that he had fought
a good fight and finished his course, and henceforth there was laid up for him a crown of righteousness.
84

THE DEATH OF MY HUSBAND
One evening, at the end of the week, the doctor

gave me special permission to sit with my husband, and as my heart leaped with joy at the
prospect, little did I dream the reason of this
special kindness. I only felt grateful to the doctor, and the thought that my dear one was so
soon to be taken from me never entered my mind.
As I sat there by his bedside a great lump in my
throat seemed to be choking me as I gazed at the
thin, pale face, so changed in these few days, but
feeling that I must be brave and encouraging I
tried in a pitiful way to talk cheerfully of the
soon-coming of the little one we had both planned
and hoped for so long.
As we were talking thus I heard the click of
the white-robed nurse's heels as she came down
the long ward to tell me it was time for me to go
back to my own ward now. And O, I shall never
forget the sweet smile that lit up his countenance.
Some way a terrible premonition of some sorrow
befalling me, an idea vague and unformed, seized
upon my heart, and as I clung to the white-enameled bar at the foot of his bed, I think he must
have seen the look that swept across my face,
for still smiling encouragingly he looked into
my eyes and said:
"Good night, dear; I'll see you in the morning." These were the last words he ever spoke
to me, but O, I know there is going to dawn a
bright and cloudless morning some of these days,
when there shall be
"No more parting, no more tears,
No more crying, no more fears,"
for these things shall pass away when the Lord
shall come. Why, it seems that I can almost see
the early rays of dawn breaking in the sky just
now, and the Spirit softly whispers :
"The morning is at hand ; Jesus is coming soon ;
be faithful just a little longer."
85

THIS IS THAT
"Good night, dear; I'll see you in the morning."
Oh, dear reader, will you be there in the morning? Will you be ready to meet Jesus on that
day?
I returned to the bed in the women's ward with
an uneasy feeling hard to describe, and lay for
hours staring out into the darkness, listening to
the irregular breathing of the other patients about
me.
At midnight I sat up in bed with a frightened
start. Out of the window at the foot of my bed
I could see across the great square court, and in
the window which I knew to be beside my husband's bed I saw a bright light burning. Some
way a great terror seized upon my soul, as I heard
the quick step of the night nurse coming along the
corridor connecting the two wards. Straight to
my bed she came, and with a tense catch in her
voice that I -will never forget, she told me to slip
on my kimono and slippers and to hurry to the
next ward, that my husband was very ill.
"He's not he's not not d dying?" I managed to gasp through my stiff lips.
"Come quick! He is sinking fast," were the
words that sounded like a death knell, as we hurried down the long passage to what?
"Death? O, surely not; it couldn't be," I reasoned. I had never seen anyone die. I was not
yet twenty years of age, and away out here on
the opposite side of the globe from the Mother
who had always shielded and protected me from
every wind that blew.
"Dying? Impossible! Why, what of the little

one that is to come? Surely he will live to see
her clad in the glory of the tiny wardrobe so
proudly tucked away?" All these thoughts raced
like lightning through my mind. I was as one
dazed. My lips were trembling; my knees shook
till I could scarcely walk.
86

THE DEATH OF MY HUSBAND
Then, as I stood by his bed, and saw that even
unconscious as he was, the light of the glory world
illuminated his face, I sank down in a heap by
his side and clung to his cold hand. He did not
open his eyes, did not see me. However, I think
he must have been seeing Jesus, so rapt was the
expression that lighted up his countenance.
Then, at that moment, when all the world
seemed to be crumbling and slipping from beneath
my feet, the Comforter, the blessed Holy Spirit,
whom Jesus had sent, rose up within me and revealed Jesus in such a precious way, made the
will of God so sweet, showed the prepared mansions so real that I shouted "Glory!" by the death
bed of Robert Semple, from whom I had never
dreamed of parting. Waves of joy rolled over my
soul, and I was lifted from earth to heaven, and
it seemed as though I accompanied him right to
the pearly gates. "The Lord gave and the Lord
taketh away, blessed be the name of the Lord."
When I felt the doctor shaking me by the shoulder, I at last raised my head from the bed, and
loosened my clasp on the dear, cold hand. Stooping to kiss the cold forehead for the last time, I
realized the great need of the Comforter. He did
not fail me, but sweetly spoke in my ears :
"He is not here; he is risen."

O dear friend, never again say that you have no
need of the Comforter whom Jesus sent. It is not
only in the hour of rejoicing on the mountain-top
that you need Him, but in sorrow's dark hour,
down in the valley and the shadow of death, you
too need the Comforter. Hallelujah ! You must
not think, when you see us dancing and shouting
for very joy in the meeting, that it is all excitement and surface blessings, for this is not true.
Ah no, the Holy Spirit still abides when the feet
are led doAvn into the dark waters and it seems
as though the floods would overflow then He is
87

THIS IS THAT
there to comfort and uphold; and when we pass
through the fiery furnace He reveals the form of
the Fourth, like unto the Son of God, as never
before.
Oh, how we thank you, dear Jesus, that you
ever said: "I will not leave you comfortless; I
will send another, even the Holy Ghost."
I was never permitted to look upon the face of
my dear one again, as the doctor was anxious to
spare me all suffering possible, but Oh, how could
I have borne it when I saw them pulling down
the shades in hopes that I would not see, and
heard the heavy tread of feet as they carried their
burden past our windows and down the steps, if
it had not been for this precious Holy Spirit?
Our slender funds were well-nigh exhausted and
an immediate demand for money and funeral expenses was the next thing to be considered, so I
lifted my heart to the Lord who had said :
"Take no thought ... I will supply your
needs." The afternoon mail of that very day

brought a letter from two dear sisters in Chicago, containing sixty dollars. The letter was
dated one month previous and stated that the
Lord had awakened them up in the middle of the
night saying:
"Little Sister Semple is in trouble. Rise immediately and send her sixty dollars." They had
gotten up and sent the money, and here it was at
the spot just when needed. Oh hallelujah! It
had arrived long before the hasty cablegram to
my dear Mother could have brought the necessar} r
funds from her ever-ready heart.
Morning after morning, of the month that followed, I would wake up with a scream as my
great loss swept over me, and I thought of the
little one who would never see her father. Then
the Comforter would instantly spring up within
me till I was filled with joy unspeakable, and my
88

THE DEATH OF MY HUSBAND
hot, dry eyes would flow with tears of love and
blessing.
Then came the little daughter, a tiny mite of
a thing, but Oh such a comfort! Here again the
Comforter was Avith me. Truly Jesus is a hus
band to the widow and a Father to the fatherless. I named the little one Koberta, after her
father, Kobert. It was in Hong Kong, on the top
of the mountain, that my tiny little daughter was
born, and when she was six weeks old I sailed
to Shanghai.
On leaving Shanghai we went to Japan, Moji,
Kobe, Nagasaki. Upon leaving Japan we set sail
for Honolulu and the U. S. A., I carrying my precious little burden in a Japanese basket.

Mother had sent money, some of which I had
not yet received, and on the boat I kept figuring
up and found that there was not enough to take
me clear across the continent. Without telling
my needs to an earthly soul I kept looking up
to Jesus and witnessing for Him every occasion
I found on the boat. My feelings on this return
trip I will not try to describe, but Oh, there
seemed to be such a great big, vast emptiness
yawning all about me, and I snuggled the dear
little warm bundle, Roberta, closer to my heart.
As I was stepping off the steamer at San Francisco, the purser came running after me, and
touching me on the arm, said:
"Oh wait a minute! Here is something for
you from the passengers." Opening the envelope
which he slipped into my hand, I found sixtyfive dollars which had been donated by them.
All through the trip it seemed as though there
were not one thing which I needed but the Lord
quickly sent. It was nearing Christmas time,
and China being so warm, I had nothing but the
lightest of bonnets for the baby. I was in my
state room, turning the tiny bonnet on my fingers,
89

THIS IS THAT
thinking that I should have a warm one for her
when I reached the snow of our own land, when
a rap came at my door and a lady's voice said:
"Oh, we have just brought the baby a warm
eiderdown bonnet and cape. You are sure to need
it,"
At another time I was wishing for a heavy

shawl for her. The porter came to the state room,
saying that Mr. , who had gotten off at the
last port in Japan, had left this warm woolen
shawl, which he declared he would no longer need,
with instructions that it was to be given to "that
little missionary lady with the baby." It was a
beautiful, expensive shawl. How I did praise
Jesus !
At another time a thermos bottle was needed.
Without a word to a soul it was brought to my
door and quietly handed in. These are only a few
of the many things that I might tell you of how
He tempers the wind to the shorn lamb and tenderly watches over His little children.
On board the train, which was speeding across
the Kocky Mountains and heading toward Chicago, I was afflicted for the first time in my life
with train-sickness, and was obliged to remain in
my berth for a couple of days. Different passengers had warned me that we had one of the
crankiest old conductors on this car they had ever
seen, and not to ask any favors of him under any
consideration. But Oh, my Lord can make a lion
as gentle as a lamb and turn the bitter into sweet,
That dear conductor walked the floor hour after
hour and took care of the baby for me, even carrying her nursing bottle in his pocket to keep it
warm. Praise the Lord!
After a few days' stop in Chicago, we journeyed
on to New York City, where my Mother was
engaged in Salvation Army work. As the train
pulled into the depot she was there to meet me,
90
:

THE DEATH OF MY HUSBAND
and I held the baby in one arm, but with the other
was still able to point up to the sky to Jesus,
just as I had when the train had last pulled out
for China. Praise the Lord. When you have the
Holy Spirit in your heart He will help you to still
keep your hand up and "Keep on praising God."

91

CHAPTER x.
NINEVEH TO TARSHISH AND RETURN.
"Then Jonah prayed unto the Lord his God out of the
fish's belly . . . And the Lord spake unto the fish, and it
vomited out Jonah upon the dry land.
And the word of the Lord came unto Jonah the second
time, saying,
Arise, go unto Nineveh, and preach unto it the preaching
that I bid thee.
So Jonah arose, and went." Jonah 2:1, 10. 3:1 to 3.
HAVE you ever had a secret tucked away
in the closet of your Christian experience which you shrank from exposing
to the sunlight of public gaze and
criticism? a spot where somewhere on your spiritual anatomy, so sore that the very thought of its
being touched. by a curious, probing finger made
you wince? a certain period of your life which
you would a little rather not have generally
known or discussed, all of which has long ago
been confessed, forgiven and buried beneath the
cleansing blood?

Have you, in telling your experience, been
tempted to take a hop, * skip and a jump over
your deviations from the straight and narrow
path of God's best and perfect will for you?
Have you felt like leaping over and omitting,
when telling your Christian experience, the things
which should have been omitted in real life?
Well, that has just been my case exactly.
If this were to be a fine-sounding story of a continued forward march, without ever such a thing
as a waver, this chapter would never be written.
The Lord has made me to long, however, that
each step of my experience may be a blessing and
93

THIS IS THAT
an encouragement to someone. It is easy to tell
of the times when we have lived in victory, run the
heavenly race without a single tumble, and when
God has blessed us and made us a blessing: the
hours of defeat, when we stumbled in the darkness by the way, however, may be of more blessing to the poor backslider who is groping his
way back to light, than any other experience
could be.
The Lord had been wonderfully with me
through the ordeal of my husband's death, subsequent events, and my return to the homeland.
At times the awful waters of loneliness through
which I waded, however, seemed as though they
would roll over my head, but each time He was
with me to comfort and bear me up.
The following year found me battling against
the swift, contrariwise tide, struggling to keep my
feet, and to take up the broken thread of my
life where last left oft*. My work in the meeting;

necessitated taking with me, and .often keeping
out till midnight, and as late as two o'clock in
the morning, my frail little daughter, who eventually became very ill. I was given expert advice
upon her frail condition and was told that I
would be responsible for her life if I did not "get
her a quiet home and proper food, as the constant
moving about and changing food would be the
death of the child."
I had come home from China like a wounded
little bird, and my bleeding heart was constantly
pierced with curious questions from well-meaning
people who could not see the will of God in our
call to China, and who felt that there must be
a mistake somewhere, either in Robert's sudden
death or my return home. I could not answer
them, not being able to see the will of God in
all this yet myself. Wherever I went amongst
the dear people who had helped to send us to
94

NINEVEH TO TARSHISH AND RETURN
China, I would seem to feel an atmosphere of
questioning (whether spoken or unexpressed),
which little by little wore upon me until soon I
began to feel like some guilty thing who had
no business to be there, but far aAvay somewhere
I could not tell just where.
Oh ! how I longed for some one who would understand or put their arms about me and help
me at this critical moment of my life, and this
was just the time that the Lord permitted those
I loved best to seem to draw aside the arms that
had been before so strong and dependable, causing
a little curtain of reserve to drop between us,
leaving me on the outside with my baby.
Looking at it in the natural, it is hardly to be

wondered at that, like Hagar, with my child, I
departed and wandered in the wilderness, and
that I lifted up my voice and wept. Pentecost
seemed as the mistress, dealing hardly with me.
and God as Abraham who apparently did not
intervene in my behalf.
The loom of life seemed then to be but a
tangled maze whose colorings had suddenly
plunged from mountain-tops of sunlit glory to the
depths of a seemingly endless valley of bewildering gloom. It is only now, after having watched
through the succeeding years the steady flying to
and fro of the shuttles of destiny, ever guided by
the tender wisdom of the Hand Divine, that I
begin to see the head and form of the Master
being wrought out and woven upon the loom of
my life.
It was just at the time of my greatest perplexity, when I lad begun to lose out spiritually and
wander awa.Y *">m the Lord, and was longing^to"
make a homtf P the baby, that I married again.
Before the mj^JTage took place, however, I made
one stipulation wherein I told my husband that
all my heart and spul was really in the work of
95

THIS IS THAT
the Lord and that if, at any time in my life, He
should call me to go to Africa or India, or to the
Islands of the Sea, no matter where or when, I
must obey God first of all. To this he agreed
and we were married under these conditions, and
settled down in a furnished apartment.
Disturbed and troubled in my heart, stepping
out of the work of the Lord, I turned again to
the world, endeavoring to stifle my longings to
be reinstated at the banqueting table of my King.

I wonder if there is anyone on earth who is
really as abjectly miserable as the backslider? It
was such a relief to be able to stay away from
the meetings, and yet such a pain to be away
from them (if you can analyze that), that I was
torn between the two conflicting forces. Some
of the saints saw me backsliding and drifting
into the world, and my position became still more
intolerable.
When my husband received an invitation from
his mother to come to her home in Rhode Island
I was willing to consent to board the boat in my
endeavor to "flee unto Tarshish from the presence of the Lord."
But Oh ? dear reader, what a great wind the
Lord sent out into the sea! Such a mighty tempest was there in the deep that our frail domestic
craft was rocked to and fro, so that the ship
was like to be broken.
Day by day matters grew worse instead of better; I grieved and mourned and wept for my
Jesus and the old-time place in Him. I was a
mystery and a constant source of Discomfort to
those round about me* ^ /
Earthly things home comfort ^^li, what did
these matter? I was out of 'Hi^degJr will, and
my soul refused to be comforted.
Shutting myself awa} 7 in my room I would sit
on the floor in the corner be:-nd the bed, and
96

NINEVEH TO TARSHLSH AND RETURN
cry over and over the one word that I could say
when I tried to pray:

"Oh Oh Jesus! Jesus! Jesus!! JESUS!"
Seeing my unhappy, melancholy state, my mother-in-law advised us to rent and furnish a home
of our own, saying that the work would occupy
my mind and keep me from thinking so much
about myself. This was done. With the help
of our parents and our own earnings, a well-furnished home was made, containing all that heart
could wish B-U-T J-E-8-U-8, and Oh, without
Him nothing matters !
"Why can't you be happy and act like other
folks, and forget your troubles?" I was asked
again and again. Time after time I tried to shake
myself from my lethargy and depression and busy
myself with household duties. Such a fever of
restlessness came upon me that it seemed as
though I must wear the polish off the furniture
and the floors by dusting them so often. A dozen
times a day I would take myself to task as I
would catch sight of my tearful face in the looking-glass, saying:
"Now, see here, my lady, this will never do!
What right have you to fret and pine like this?
Just see those shining, polished floors, covered
with soft Axminster and Wilton rugs. Just look
at that mahogany parlor furniture and the big
brass beds in yonder, the fine bathroom done in
blue and white, the steam heat, the softty-shaded
electric lights, the pretty baby's crib with its
fluff and ribbons, the high-chair and the rockinghorse. Why aren't you glad to have a home like
this for the babies, as any other mother would be?"
"Why, it's perfectly ridiculous for you to think
of going out into the world again, and remember if you found it hard with one baby before,
what do you suppose you would do now with
two?"
97

THIS IS THAT
Having had it thus out with myself, I would return to my work, half satisfied for a few minutes, saying:
"Well, yes, that's so. I had better give up all
thoughts of such things, settle down and get
used to my present life."
But, Oh, the Call of God was on my soul and
I could not get away from it. For this cause I
had been brought into the Avorld. With each
throb of my heart I could hear a voice saying:
"Preach the Word! Preach the Word! Will
you go? Will you go?" and I would throw myself on my knees, tearfully sobbing:
"Oh ? Lord, You know that I cannot go. Here
are the two babies and here is the home, and here
is husband, who has not the baptism and is
not even seeking it. I will work here in the local
mission, and that will do." But no, the answer
still came back, clear from heaven :
"Go! DO THE WORK OF AN EVANGELIST; Preach the Word! The time is short; I
am coming soon."
"Oh, Lord, I am in a pretty state to preach
the Gospel, I am. Why, I feel so miserable and
down and crushed. I need someone to help me
instead of me helping others." At times, lifting
my eyes quickly after prayer, I could almost see
the devil rubbing his hands and leering at me,
saying :
"There's no hope. You might just as well give
up. Everyone knows you've backslidden, and
would have no confidence in you." Then would

ensue another spell of bitter weeping.
My husband and his mother would often say :
"Well, Aimee I don't see what more you want.
I don't believe anything could make you happy.
It must be your disposition." (Why, bless the
Lord, when in His will I am so happy and full
of gladness, my feet and my heart are so light,
98

NINEVEH TO TARSHISH AND RETURN
that they can not keep from dancing. It seems
that no one on earth could possibly be so happy
as I.)
My nerves became so seriously affected that
the singing of the teakettle upon the stove or the
sound of voices was unbearable. I implored the
little one to speak in whispers. I hated the sunshine and wanted to keep the shutters closed and
the window-shades drawn tightly. The doctors
said I would lose my reason if something was not
done. I became very ill in body and inside of one
year two serious operations were performed. Each
time, before going under the surgeon's knife, and
during many other times of critical illness, when
it seemed as though I were going to die, I would
call the saints to pray for me that I might be
delivered, but each time they prayed I could
plainly hear the voice of the Lord saying:
"Will you go? Will you preach the Word?" I
knew that if I said "Yes," He would heal me.
But how could I say "Yes?" Difficulties rose
like mountains in my path. Oh, now I have
learned, that no matter what the obstacles may
be, if Jesus says "Go," and I start, by the time
the obstacle is reached I will either be lifted over
it or it will be gone. God does not ask us to do

the impossible. If He tells you to do a thing,
no matter how hard it seems, you just start to
do it and you will find, like Christian of old, that
the lions are fettered and unable to hinder your
progress.
After the first operation I was worse instead
of better. Complications set in, heart trouble,
hemorrhages from my stomach, and intense nervousness among others. The doctors said that another operation would be necessary.
Oh, that home which I had thought to enjoy!
Almost all my enjoyment was what I could see
from my bed! I wonder if Jonah had nearly as
99

THIS IS THAT
rough a passage as I did when he ran away and
disobeyed God. His trip was not as long as mine
anyway. We read that Jonah paid his fare, and
I certainly paid mine to the uttermost farthing.
The second operation was put off and put off,
with some vague hope of trusting God, but how
could I trust Him when out of His will, and
when every time in prayer I got the answer which
throbbed and pounded through my being with
every pulse-beat
"Will you go? Will you go? Preach the Word!
Preach the Word!"
At last, doubling over with a scream with
appendicitis, on top of all else, I was rushed again
to the hospital. As I was being prepared for the
operating table I prayed earnestly from my valley of despair
"Oh, God, please take me home to be with You.

It doesn't seem possible for me to go back and I
certainly cannot bear it to go on. I am a misery
to myself and to everybody round about me.
Please, please take me home to be with You."
But Oh, I am so glad that He spared me. Praise
His precious name.
After I had come out from under the ether and
the knife, wherein five operations in one had been
performed, the poor, unconscious "what-there-wasleft-of-me" was put back in the bed and I opened
my eyes on the white walls of the hospitalquivering with pain from head to foot, which, instead of growing better grew worse and worse.
Twice my mother had been called by a telegram to see me die. Her heart was torn as the
wheels of the train sped over the track, and she
prayed that she might be there in time. From
the depot she was rushed to the hospital, and
chokes up yet, as she sits here beside me and tries
to describe her feelings as she entered the room
reeking with ether, and looked upon the little
1QQ

NINEVEH TO TAKSHISH AND RETURN
form lying on the pillow that had been the center
of so many scenes of hope and life and happiness.
She thought of the day she had prayed for the
little girl who should go out in the world to
preach the Word, the day of the dedication under
the banners of blood and fire, the golden future
of joyful service, and here was the wreck!
Was this all?
Something within her refused to let go of God
and His promises to her regarding me. Whilst
the doctors and nurses in the outer room were
gravely explaining to her the scientific reasons

why I could not live, explaining that mine had
been such an exceptional case, and endeavoring to
reconcile her to my death, her heart was going
out in an agony of prayer to God that her daugh-,
ter's life would be spared.
Brokenly she wept and prayed, renewing and
redoubling her vows to God to help in every way
to get me back into the work and keep me there,
to do all in her power to help me with my children and in every struggle, come what may.
The nurses, hardened as they were by long
training, were frankly in tears, and the doctor
"herumphed !" and cleared his throat as I came
out of the ether, and declared that that hospital
had never witnessed such a scene, for I was
preaching, telling of Jesus, begging lost souls to
come to Him, in that high strong voice which
patients have when coming out from the anaesthetic. Broken though I was in body and spirit,
the very moment that reason lost her sway, my
soul began to sing and preach and pray to my beloved Jesus.
Later Mother came into my room, and kneeling
down, looked into my eyes and said :
"Mother is here, darling. Mother will help.
She understands and will stand by you, dear." In
the look which was exchanged it seemed as though
101

THIS IS THAT
a spark of hope and understanding was instilled
and glowed in both of our souls, which has never
gone out, but has burst into a flame, ever mounting upward as days go by.
One evening, after a nurse and doctor had been

in almost constant attendance all afternoon, three
young internes came in and gathering me gently
in their arms, carried me, mattress and all, into
the separate room where people were taken to
die.
About two in the morning the white-robed
nurse, who had been stroking my hand, saying:
"Poor little girl; poor little girl," seemed to be
receding. The fluttering breaths which I could
take were too painful to go deeper than my throat.
Everything grew black someone said:
"She's going." Just before losing consciousness, as I hovered between life and death, came
the voice of my Lord, so loud that it startled
me:
"NOW WILL YOU GO?" And I knew it
was "Go," one way or the other: that if I did not
go into the work as a soul-winner and get back
into the will of God, Jesus would take me to
Himself before He would permit me to go on without Him and be lost.
Oh, don't you ever tell me that a woman can
not be called to preach the Gospel! If any man
ever went through one hundredth part of the hell
on earth that I lived in, those months when out
of God's will and work, they would never say
that again.
With my little remaining strength, I managed
to gasp:
Yes Lord I'll go." And go I did!
I could not have been unconscious for more
than a moment, but when I opened my eyes the
pain was gone. I was able to take deep breaths
without the agony which had accompanied the
102

NINEVEH TO TARSHISH AND RETURN
tiniest breath before. I was able to turn over
without pain, and proceeded to do this, much to
the alarm of the nurse. In two weeks, to the
amazement of everyone, I was up and well, though
weak in body. I have hardly known an ache or
a pain from that day to this.
On several occasions before and after my return
from the hospital, little attempts were made to
break the news of my determination to go forth
into the vineyard at once.
"Why, what a crazy notion for you to even
think of such a thing! Why don't you be like
other young women and be contented to stay at
home and attend to the housework?" and other
outbursts of like nature invariably met my timid,
yet firm ventures to gain the consent of the household.
Too weak to argue, I was also too weak to dare
even think of disobeying God. That great white
whale, the operating table, had thrown me up on
the shore. The Lord had spared my life under a
definite promise that I would serve Him. Foolish and impossible as the idea might seem, I was
going to strike out for Nineveh, without a moment's hesitation, live or die, sink or swim, praying for Divine guidance and filled with a determination to say "Yes" to that call
"Will you Go? Will you Go?" I did not
know just how or where I was to go, but intended
to start anyway, and that at once, throwing myself at His feet and trusting Him implicitly. I
was assured that He who parted the Red Sea and
rolled back the waves of the Jordan would someway remove rivers and mountains for me and
take me through the fires unburned.

Mother now being in Canada, I telegraphed
there for money; and when alone in the house one
night, 'phoned for a taxicab, and at eleven o'clock
bundled my two babies inside while the chauffeur
103

THIS IS THAT
piled thie two suitcases on top, and away we sped
to catch the midnight train for home and Mother.
To make a new start and begin all over again it
seemed the most natural thing in the world to go
back to the starting place from which I had set
out before.
God was with me and I was conscious of His
leading and support at every step. With my little
baby clasped in one. arm and Roberta sleeping in
the other, I held them tightly to me as the immensity of what I was doing swept over me. The
streets wene dark and almost deserted as we
rolled along toward the depot.
So here I was setting forth for the second time
in my life to obey the great call to preach the
Word, but how different it was from the first
time how changed the scene!
Scene One. The first time it was high noon
and the warm, friendly sun smiled and beamed
down upon us from the sky life and hope spread
their garments before the little rosy-cheeked bride
as she was waved away by tearful but loving and
sympathetic friends and relatives, one hundred
or more of whom had gathered on the country
lawn, some coming many miles to see her off,
showering her with flowers, rice and "God
bless you's." That time I had gone forth leaning
in every way for strength, wisdom and guidance
on the strong arm of my husband; blest and victorious in my soul. An open door of ministry

lay before us; wie were sure of our footing, knew
just where we were going.
Scene Two : Setting forth alone at midnight
almost running away with my two babiesweak in body empty and lean in my soul no
earthly arm to lean upon no visible open door
before me no loving friends no flowers or "God
bless you's." But Oh, I praise Jesus for the experience! Nothing could tempt me to part with
104

NINEVEH TO TAKSHLSH AND RETURN
the lessons taught me in those hard places of
going through alone with Jesus and thrusting
my roots of faith and dependence, confidence and
trust down deep into Himself.
My former life in the work had been like that
of a vine which twined about the stalwart oak,
but when that stronghold to which I clung had
been taken away and transplanted into the heavenly gardens, when my clutch had been loosened
and let go there was nothing left of the vine, that
had reached so high, but a pitifully broken,
crumpled little heap which lay in tumbled confusion on the earth. But now I had found One to
cling to and fasten my hold upon who was as the
cedars of Lebanon, who w r ould endure forever,
from whom I could not be removed One who
would never die nor leave me. Oh, it was Jesus!
Jesus ! !
Yes, thank God for the hard places, for the
winds and the icy blasts of winter's storm, for
Oh, 'twas there I learned for the first time a little
of what it meant to be rooted and grounded and
settled to die out and to go through a valley of
crucifixion that led to resurrection power and
glory.

Did you ever ride along through a tunnel or
subway that was pitch dark and seemingly endless? then all at once, away in the distance, you
saw a tiny light which you knew must be the
opening of the tunnel and sunlight? That's just
the way I felt. I was still in the darkness of the
tunnel, but I saw the door, the beacon light of
God's dear sunlight His smile of approval, and
I was running toward it.
"Here we are, lady, just in time!" broke in the
voice of the driver, as the car pulled up at the
curb in front of the depot.
I can not remember now how those two sleeping children and all the baggage were gotten on
105

THIS IS THAT
board, but I do know that a few minutes later,
when the train steamed out into the night and
sped through the fields and the sleepy towns, we
were all on board and the babies sleeping as
sweetly as they ever had in their lives in the snowwhite Pullman bed.
I was obeying God, and although the enemy was
still endeavoring to hound my tracks with accusations and forebodings of future disaster, he had
someway lost his grip and his power to overthrow
me. When he twitted me with the leanness and
the barrenness of my soul, that hurt the most of
anything because it was so true, my heart sang
within me:
"Never mind, Rebecca's on her way to the well
to the fountain-head to the sure source of supply to the banqueting table of the King, and
we'll soon be filled up now."

106

CHAPTER XL
GETTING BACK.
"For ye were as sheep going astray; but are now returned
unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls." I Pet. 2:25.
WHEN the 11 :55 pulled into the station
of Ingersoll my Father and Mother
were there to meet me so was the
pony I used to ride. She was only a
colt then, but she knew me and whinnied affectionately.
"Suppose she knows you?" said Dad.
"Surely she does/ 7 I smiled. And as if to remove
all doubts on the matter, Fritzie lifted her right
front foot to shake hands and quivered all over
as she nozzled my cheek with her velvet nose,
smacking her lips and pretending to hunt for the
old-time sugar lump both tricks I had taught her
long ago my, how long it did seem! Was it centuries or was it just years?
Usually Fritzie was quite staid, but how she did
pick up her heels and run that day! It seemed
as though she couldn't get home and out of her
harness quickly enough to play with me. I wondered if she remembered how we used to leap the
fences, and the time she followed me right into the
kitchen and stamped about, to the dismay of my
Mother.
How familiar arid restful and green the dear old
fields looked on that drive homeward. Here was
the old toll-gate. A mile beyond was the place

where I had given my heart to Jesus and cried
"Lord, be merciful to me, a sinner/' as the sleigh
jingled along, drawn by Fritzie's mother. A mile
107

THIS IS THAT
beyond that again was the little white school house
on the corner. Every foot of the way was associated with girlhood memories.
No explanations were asked, but Mother informed me that IfTiad all T)een settled that I was
to leave for the Pentecostal camp meeting at
Kitchener (then called Berlin) the next day. She
herself had planned to attend, but immediately
upon the receipt of my telegram had given up all
thought of going and had written to engage accommodations for me.
"But, Mother! the children would I be
able "
"Never mind the children," she interrupted. "I
have taken care of children before and cared for
Roberta almost all the time anyway, and Rolf
and I will get along fine, won't we, Sonny?" A
delighted gurgle and a wide smile, that displayed
the new baby teeth, was his response.
"Yes, and we've got the best Jersey milk in the
country 'to make him grow like a weed," boasted
my Father, as if to conclude the subject.
"But but how can I get back to Kitchener,
when I feel so leaked out spiritually? The last
time I was there was with Brother Durham and
Robert. I was so blest; prayed for the seekers.
What would they think?
"But, I'll go, Mother. Oh, I am so happy, so

glad for the opportunity. Are you sure that the
extra work will not be too much for you?"
"Too much work? I should say not! Oh,
Aimee, nothing is too much or too hard to see you
get back to God and back to the place where He
wants you. Will you promise me that you will
come back in this meeting? We will stand by
you, and God will help you."
But I needed no coaxing nor inducement having set my face like a flint, and though all the
108

GETTING BACK
world were pulling the other way I MUST go
through any other course meant death.
Before leaving the next morning for the camp,
a telegram was sent to my husband, saying:
"I have tried to walk your way and have failed.
Won't you come now and walk my way? I am
sure we will be happy."
At Kitchener we were met with the wagon which
carried the passengers and baggage to the camp
grounds. I soon found myself alighting in the
little city of tents, pitched in snow whiteness beneath the green foliage of the forest trees. Glad
hands and familiar faces gathered round to welcome me back, but I felt conscience- and dutybound to make an embarrassed, but hasty, explanation to one and all that I was not where I once
was, and said to them
"I prayed for others when they needed prayer.
Now I need someone to pray for me and help me
get back the blessing and fire of God upon the
altar of my heart."

Perhaps some of you can imagine my feelings as
I sat in the audience looking up at the platform
whereon sat different ones whom but a few years
before I had prayed with when they came through
the baptism. There they were, shaking and quivering under the power, faces radiant hallelujahs
ringing and here sat I, dabbing at my eyes with
a wet handkerchief and saying:
"Oh Jesus, You used to bless me like that. I used
to shake under the power and praise you just like
that.
"Oh, bless me now, my Savior;
I come to Thee."
(All through the months of my disobedience to
God, the Holy Spirit had never left me, but had
prayed through me in tongues many times, and
was indeed an abiding Comforter. Oh, the mercy,
109

THIS IS THAT
and the long-suffering of God! How little I deserved it!)
When the call for the altar service came I stole
forward amongst the others and bowed at the
altar, feeling utterly unworthy to touch even one
of the rough planks which formed its floor. All I
could do was bow my head and weep. The brother
in charge came along and said :
"Now, Sister, lift up your hands and praise the
Lord, just as you used to tell others to do." But,
Oh no, I felt that I had much to make right with
the Lord first that I must beg Him to forgive
me and apologize and humble myself in the dust
before Him. How little Ave know after all of the

great loving heart of God who runs to meet
the penitent soul even as the father ran to meet
the prodigal of old.
Brokenly I begtan to sob :
"Oh, Lord, forgive m ' before I could finish
the words I felt as though the Lord had put His
hand over my mouth and said to me:
"There, my child, it's all right. Don't say anything more about it." This was so sudden and unexpected I could not comprehend it, but thought
surely I must be mistaken, surely I would have
to beg and plead for hours and it would be very
hard to get back to God after having been so disobedient and wandering away. So I settled myself down and tried it again
"Oh Lord, dear Lord, can you ever forgive
me '' a.gain came the same peculiar sensation as
of the Lord stopping my mouth and saying:
"It's all right; it's all forgiven. Don't say any
more about it." It was just as though someone
had injured me in some way, had come to me to
ask forgiveness, and I had said:
"Oh yes, that's all right. Never think of it
again. Just forget it."
110

GETTING BACK ,
Well, the suddenness and the magnitude of this
hearty reception completely bowled me over. It
broke my heart and bound me to Him more than
any whipping could ever have done. Such love
was more than my he!art could bear. Before I
knew it I was on my back in the straw, under the
power, saying:

"Dear Lord, just let me be as one of your hired
servants. I do not feel worthy to testify or work
at the altar or preach, but just let me love you
and dwell in your house, my Saviour."
The next thing I knew the Spirit was speaking
in tongues through me, giving me the interpretation. A brother from London had a, message in
tongues the Lord gave me the interpretation of
that and he fell back under the power. I was
laughing and weeping and shaking. A little knot
of people gathered round to rejoice with me. The
Spirit lifted me to my feet and 1 walked up and
down praising the Lamb for sinners slain. Palling
on my knees I worshipped the Lord again.
A dear old Mennoriite preacher who had been
seeking his baptism for years was kneeling at the
other end of the platform. It had been my privilege to pray for his brother as he came through
to the baptism the night before we left for China.
The Lord seemed to guide me to this brother now,
and walking on my knees, with my hands outstretched before me, something within me spoke :
"In the name of Jesus Christ, receive ye the
Holy Ghost." Immediately the brother fell to the
ground and was speaking in tongues almost before
he reached it. After all his years of waiting, tjje
Comforter had come in like a flash of glory to
abide forever.
The old-time power and the anointing for praying with seekers rested upon me. Many other instances, which I will not refer to here, took place.
Rut Oh, the Lord did not let these wonderful
111

THIS IS THAT

answers to prayer, as I prayed for the seekers,
come to puff me up, but to encourage me. It was
balm to my wounded, troubled soul.
Never have I worked harder at the altar services in our own meetings than at that camp meeting. We stayed as late as twelve and sometimes
two in the morning, praying for seekers and were
up again to early morning meeting. He was
restoring my soul, He was leading me out to green
pastures. I had come to this camp meeting to
see God, and Oh, how He did reveal himself to
me!
Camp over, I returned to my Mother's to find
her happily running the sewing machine on the
piazza, making clothes for the children, who were
laughing in the hammock that swung beneath the
apple trees. Delightedly I repeated the story already written in my letters of the blessing of the
Lord upon my soul, and added that I had but one
week to wash and iron my things and get ready
for the next camp meeting, which was to be held
in London, twenty miles away, the very city where
the Lord had taken my husband and myself to
carry the message of Pentecost some years before.
Happy to do anything to advance my Saviour's
cause, I had been given the task of painting a
great twenty-five foot banner, roping and preparing it to go across the street, advertising the meetings.
Within the house was a little pile of letters,
demanding my immediate return "to wash the
dishes," "take care of the house" and "act like
other women." But I had put my hand to the Gospel plow, and I could not turn back. I was going
through, and I had the assurance that the Lord
would bring my husband also. I certainly never
could win him the other way and he would have
had to have parted with me for good if I had died,
which I surely would have done had I remained

112

GETTING BACK
out of the work. I was going through; Jesus was
with me and nothing in all the world mattered
now. My heart was right with God.
Although in many ways the enemy endeavored
to discourage, frighten and turn me back, as he
did poor Christian in Pilgrim's Progress, and
though the tests were hard and his tactics cunningly planned, Jesus held me firm and did not
allow me to swerve from my path nor stumble in
the way.
The blessed London camp meeting over, th;e
Lord strongly impressed me to accept an invitation from Sister Sharp of Mount Forest, Ont., to
conduct Bible meetings there in a little hall called
"Victory Mission." The power and the glory of
the Lord came down in a precious way. The mission soon became too small to hold the people;
we were obliged to hold the services on the
spacious lawn between the Sister's home and the
mission. Such a spirit of revival came down upon
the people that soon a tent was bought, hungry
people filled it night after night and those who
could not get in stood in rings round its border.
Then came the day when the power fell. It was
half past ten in the morning, and in my room I
was praying:
"Oh Lord, send Thy mighty power today. Lord,
send the power. Send the power, Lord."
Outside, in the tent, two brothers shook hands
with each other and said :
"Praise the Lord." As they spoke the power
of God struck them both; one fell one way, and

one the other, and lay stretched out under the
power shouting and glorifying God. Little children began to come in off the street to see what it
meant. One look was sufficient and away they
ran to bring others to see the strange sight.
Mrs. Sharp's mother, who had a very sore and
badly poisoned foot, came hobbling out of the
113

THIS IS THAT
house, her knee on a chair which she used as a
means of conveyance. No sooner did she reach
the tent that the power struck her and she tipped
over (chair and all) was healed, and later danced
and praised the Lord.
Sister Sharp came running into the tent, and
down she went, The toAvn crier, Avho used to
ring the bell advertising theatres, ball games, etc.,
came in, and over he went with his bell, and lying
under the power added his voice with the others
to the praises of the most high God.
It is not necessary for me to go on and relate
the wonderful w r ay in which Jesus worked in this
meeting, to tell how the town was stirred, how our
Sister was haled before the magistrate and liberated, how over a hundred were saved and scores
received the baptism, as dear Sister Sharp has herself written an account of the meetings, which you
will find related in Chapter One, Part II, of this
book.
However, I must tell you the best news of all,
for right in the midst of one of the meetings which
was held in Mount Forest, my husband landed
with his suitcase, to attend the meeting.
So changed was I, so radiantly happy, so filled

with the power of God and the unction of the Holy
Spirit, that he had to admit that this was indeed
my calling and work in life. Before many hours
had passed he himself had received the baptism
of the Holy Spirit, spoke in tongues and glorified
God.
How the Lord does vindicate and honor those
who go through with Him! As my husband saw
the workings of the Holy Spirit, sinners coming to
the altar for salvation, believers receiving the Holy
Spirit, and heard me delivering the messages
under the power of the Spirit, for truly it was not
I, but Christ that lived in me, he told me that he
recognized that God had called me into this work
114

GETTING BACK
and would not have me leave it for anything in
the world. And through the succeeding years,
though part of the time he is with me and part of
the time elsewhere, the Lord has made him perfectly willing for me to go on, whether he is along
or not.
The Lord has wonderfully blessed and supplied
my every need and the needs of the two children,
for food, clothing and traveling expenses. We
have lacked no good thing. The way has been
groAving brighter and brighter day by day. The
harvest of souls is increasing month by month.
The work is spreading out and the nets are filled
with abundance of fish. Glory ! Glory ! ! GLORY !

115

CHAPTER XII.
REVIVAL FIRES FALL
"And Elijah . . . repaired the altar of the Lord that
was broken down.
Then the fire of the Lord fell, and consumed the burnt
sacrifice . . . And when all the people saw it, they fell on
their faces and said, The Lord, He is God." I Kings 18:30,
38, and 39.
AFTER the meeting at Mount Forest the
Lord called us back to the U. S. A. to
dispose of our little store of earthly
goods and to give me also an opportunity to work with my own hands and feet to
help raise the money with which to purchase a
new 40x80 Gospel tent which the Lord had shown
me definitely it was His will for us to have. We
had the assurance that the balance would be in by
the time the tent was to be paid for, and true to
His word, offerings began to be handed to us in
the little meetings.
THE TENT MEETING IN PROVIDENCE, R. I.
The new tent was to have been ready for our
camp meeting, which was to begin June first, but
the Lord intervened and did not allow it to be
completed on time. Knowing little of the winds
and power of the elements which have to be taken
into consideration when picking out a location for
a tent meeting, we, in our ignorance, selected a
fine, high hill, on the bluff of the bay where those
who came to meeting could enjoy the breeze and
the water. That there was a breeze no one who
was there and saw the tents go down could deny.
Whatever else the location may have lacked in,
117

THIS Ig THAT

the breeze was ever there. If anything could have
discouraged us with tent work, surely our experience in Providence would have done so, but praise
the Lord, He did not permit our n<ew tent to be
completed, and therefore the tent company put
up an old tent of their own which had almost seen
its day, and cost us nothing for the damage done
to it.
But in spite of wind and the hours of struggle
to drive the stakes and tie the ropes and keep the
tents up, the Lord sent thousands of people to
the camp meetings and many precious souls wept
their way to Jesus' feet and received the blessed
Holy Spirit, the Comforter whom Jesus sent.
Neighbors who were utterly indifferent at first
when they saw our valiant struggles with the wind
and storms, came to our help and toiled with us.
Then, feeling they had some interest in the tent
which they had worked so hard to keep up, came
in to hear the message delivered in it, and were
brought to the Lord one whole family was saved
in one night.
The series of meetings was almost over when one
forenoon the last wind storm came, and in spite
of all our efforts, down went the big tent with
many tears in its rotten old seams which we had
worked for hours to sew up, just a short time ago.
My husband, who had worked faithfully each time,
was discouraged, and declared that that tent could
not be put up again. He had taken a position and
returned to secular work, and would not be back
that day, but I knew that hundreds would be there
for the night meeting. I could not manage that
big tent alone, so with the help of a little boy, in
the heat of the noon hour, we set to work. We
had ten small 10x12 tents scattered about in different places in the grounds; some had been
erected; some were still in their bags. These we
carried, one by one, raised them on their poles,

118

REVIVAL FIRES FALL
stretched the canvas and drove the stakes, lashing
them, pole to pole, all in one straight row. This
had the appearance of one long tent, one hundred
feet long and twelve feet wide (if you can imagine hoAV that looked). Then we carried in the
chairs. By this time people were arriving and
they turned in and helped us.
How the Lord did bless our efforts, this tent
was so low the wind could not take it down. Souls
were swept into the Kingdom ; many danced, shook
under the power, and received the Holy Spirit.
Two sisters from Onset Bay, Cape Cod, who
attended the meeting, asked us to ship our tent
there and, undismayed by the experiences in Providence, we shipped the tent. Although we have lowered our tent several times since, never once have
we ever had our tent torn down by the wind from
that day to this.
Before going to Onset a short meeting was held
at Montwait Camp grounds, Massachusetts, and
the Lord blessedly poured out of His Spirit, saving and baptizing hungry souls. The enemy was
still testing my faith and endeavoring to draw me
back from the work, but thank God, my feet were
kept from slipping, even though many times
I have had to go through alone. When the meeting was almost over in Montwait the Lord spoke
to my husband, in Providence, E. I., in three
dreams, calling him to leave his secular work in
the plant where he was employed and come and
assist me with the tents.
ONSET BAY.
In Onset our new tent was pitched in the Holi-

ness Camp ground, and though the battle was
hard, Jesus gave victory. The war against spiritualism, Christian Science, and demon powers was
hot and heavy, but we sang and preached the
119

THIS IS THAT
blood of Jesus until the break came and the Lord
poured out His Spirit.
COKONA, L. I., N. Y. <*
While yet in Onset the Lord began to speak to
me of Corona and different times when praying,
would bring the word "Corona" before me. I
had been asking the, Lord for a typewriter and
thought He was going to give me a Corona as the
word kept ringing in my ears, when a letter came
through the mail, however, from a dear colored
sister, stating that the Lord had directly led her
to send for us to come to Corona, L. L, (just outside of New York City) to hold a meeting. My
spirit quickened within me as the Lord gave the
witness that this was that which He had been
speaking of.
The weather now being too cold for tent meetings in the East, we asked the Lord to supply the
means whereby we might ship our tents to Florida, where it would be warm enough for a winter
campaign, and still praying to this end, wie went
to Corona.
Upon first arrival this seemed a most discouraging field. No one but this precious colored sister
was known to have received the baptism of the
Holy Spirit according to Acts 2:4. Though we
walked for blocks, not a hall could we find to rent,
but I kept praying, and though everyone else
doubted my call, I knew that God had sent me.
Finally word came from the Swedish church that

we would be welcome to open meetings there
during the week.
The second night the church was filled to the
door, though church members had been warned by
their ministers to keep away from the Pentecostal
people and have nothing to do with those folks who
talked in tongues. Just one week from the day
meetings were opened the break came. A Sunday
120

REVIVAL FIRES FALL
School teacher from one of the large churches, a
man whose sound Christian standing had beeA
known for years, was the first to receive the baptism. The wife of a leading citizen was the second,
and Avhen the altar call was given scores from the
audience, which was made up entirely of church
members, gathered about the altar.
Never having seen a Pentecostal meeting, they
were very stiff and did not know how really to
get hold and seek the Lord. Knowing that their
ministers had warned them that this was all hypnotism, however, I was very careful not to lay
hands upon, or speak to the seekers, but prayed
by my own chair earnestly:
"Oh, Lord, send the power. Lord, honor your
Word just now."
Then it was that Mrs. John Lake, who had risen
from the altar and taken her seat in the audience
again, suddenly fell under the power, with her
head upon her husband's shoulder. In alarm the
people said :
"She has fainted. Bun and get some water."
But I knew she hadn't fainted, and I kept on praying:

"Lord, send the power. Baptize her just now."
Quite a crowd had gathered round her, but before they could get back with the water, praise
the Lord, her lungs began to heave with the power,
her chin began to quiver, and she broke out speaking with other tongues to the amazement and delight of all.
On and on she spoke, in such a clear, beautiful
language, her face shining with the glory of the
Lord. One would say to another:
"What do you think of it?" and others would
say:
"Oh, isn't it wonderful, marvelous! How I
wish I had the same experience!"
121

THIS IS THAT
The news of this well-known sister's baptism
quickly spread through the town. The next night
three were slain under the power and came
through speaking in tongues, and thus the meetings increased in power, numbers and results each
night.
After preaching in the church one week, Pastor
W. K. Bouton invited us to his church to preach
on a Thursday night. (After Avarning his people
not to come near our meetings he had come himself.)
The Lord had convinced him of the truth that
there was something deeper yet for himself and his
church.
The night on which we spoke at his church I

had to ask the Lord not to let me be afraid or
overawed by the visiting ministers who sat behind me on the platform, and to give me liberty
and power in preaching His Word and He never
fails. He remembers our weakness, praise His
name.
As I spoke, hearty "Amens" and "Hallelujahs"
came from all over the church. I felt that I must
preach the truth without compromise or fear at
least once in this church as they might never ask
me again. When finished I took my seat, not presuming to give an altar call in someone else's
church.
The Minister rose and said:
"How many of you people believe what Sister
McPherson has said to be the truth, feel that you
have not received the baptism of the Holy Spirit
in the Bible way, and would like to receive this
experience? Lift your hands."
They tell me that every hand in the church wen{
up. (My eyes were so full of tears of joy I really
could not say.)
The people rose from their seats and flocked up
the aisles, gathered completely round the chancel
122

REVIVAL FIRES FALL
rail, inside the chancel, right behind the pulpit,
and prayed between the pews and all over the
church for the baptism of the Holy Spirit. What
a glorious sight it was! This church had been
kept clean from concerts and suppers and worldly
amusements. Through their consecrated pastor
they had been brought up to the place where they
were just ready to be swept into the fulness of

the Spirit's power.
Three received the baptism that night. One
lady fell by the organ, another at the other side
of the church. Then two brothers who had not
been on speaking terms with each other for over
a year were seen talking to each other in the center of the church. One had asked the other, with
tears in his eyes, to forgive him, and immediately
fell back in his brother's arms under the power of
the Holy Spirit. Alarmed, his brother lowered
him to the floor.
I do not believe the scenes in that dear church
could be described this side of heaven. Each
time someone fell under the power the people
would run to that side of the church. When someone would fall on the other side they would turn
and go over there. It was all so new and
strange.
The Pastor, however, did not run to look as
the rest did, but kneeled by his pulpit with his
hands over his face, looking through his fingers
every once in a while to keep a watch on proceedings. ( Laughing over it together later, when he had
received his baptism, I told him it appeared as
though he believed in the verse that told us to
"watch and pray.") He was yearning for the
power of God, and yet naturally fearful lest his
people should be led into confusion and error.
Seeing the questions and excitement of the people as the power of God prostrated their dear ones,
the enemy whispered:
123

THIS IS THAT
"Well, you will never have an invitation back to
this church now. There never was anyone stretched

out under the power on that green carpet before.
They will never ask you back here again."
Oh ye of little faith, wherefore did ye doubt?
At midnight, when the meeting was beginning
to break a little, the Pastor touched me on the
arm and said:
"Sister, we have talked this over with the officials and the church is yours for as long as you
want it, and when you want it. When shall we
have the next meeting?"
"Tomorrow night," I replied.
Tomorrow night found the church not only filled
to the doors, but the vestry and Sunday School
rooms as well, this night seven received the baptism. The Minister invited me to preach the Bible
evidence of the baptism speaking in other tongues
as the Spirit gives utterance and to take full
liberty in every way.
During altar service he kneeled, looking through
his fingers once in a while, at the strange proceedings taking place in his dignified congregation.
Sinners broke down and wept their way to Jesusfeet Protestants and Catholics alike. Such praying and calling upon the name of the Lord, the
minister feared would result in the people's being
arrested for disturbing the peace.
The third night nineteen received the baptism
of the Holy Spirit. Down they went right and
left, between the seats, in the aisles, in front of
the chancel rail, up on the platform. Oh Glory !
One night, while praying with a young lady who
was receiving the baptism, I happened to catch
the minister's eye as he was watching and beckoned him to come where he could really see and
hear. He kneeled beside the young lady whom he
knew well as a devoted Christian worker, ancT

soon saw her face suffused with heavenly glory
124

REVIVAL FIRES FALL
as she was filled with the Spirit and broke out
speaking with other tongues and praising the
Lord. As he watched and listened a wistful look
came over the brother's face and without a word
he went round to his pulpit again and kneeling
down with closed eyes, lifted his hands and began
to pray.
"Oh Lord, fill me. Oh Lord, fill me." Over and
over he prayed this simple prayer in earnestness
and humility before the Lord. The Spirit kept impressing me to go and pray for him. At first I
hesitated, feeling my un worthiness, but at last I
went and kneeled behind him and began to pray
as simply as he:
"Lord, fill him."
"Lord, fill me," he would cry.
"Lord, fill him," was the prayer that filled my
soul.
I do not know how long we kept on praying
thus, but I do know that when I opened my eyes
it seemed almost too good to be true. The minister was swaying from side to side, and soon fell
backwards under the power and rolled off the little
step and lay under the glorious power of the
Lord, just inside the chancel rail.
Someone spoke to his wife, who had been sitting
in the audience, and said: ,
"Oh, there goes William !"

This was too much and with one bound she was
in the aisle and ran to the front sobbing imploringly :
"Oh, Will, Will, speak to me. Speak to me."
Kneeling beside her I was praying with all my
might that the Lord should baptize this dear Pastor as it would mean so much to the entire church
and in fact the whole town. Fearful lest she should
disturb him, I said:
"Oh my dear, you wouldn't disturb him while
he is under the power, for the world, would you?"
125

THIS IS THAT 1
"Oh, but he's dying. He's dying!' 7 she wailed.
"I know he's going to die!"
"Oh no, he is not dying/' I hastily explained.
"This is the power of the Holy Spirit, dear. He is
safe in the arms of Jesus and if you watch a few
minutes you will see him receive the Holy Spirit,
I am sure."
"Oh, but I know he is dying! He had a vision
once before and he almost died then. Will, Will,
speak to me," she implored.
I doubt if I could have restrained her much
longer, but just at that tense moment, when the
congregation were gathered round in breathless
circles, leaning over the chancel rail, some even
standing on the pews to see over the other's
shoulders, Pastor W. K. Bouton was filled with
the blessed Holy Spirit and began speaking with
other tongues in a clear, plain language of which
the Lord gave me the interpretation, message
after message.

People fell to the floor here and there through
the audience. Strong men sobbed like babies, and
when at last the Pastor rose to his feet he walked
up and down the platform, and said :
"Oh, friends, I have to preach!" And preach
he did, under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit,
telling the people that "This is That," commanding them to be filled with the Spirit, to get oil
in their lamps and prepare for the coming of the
Lord.
In the two weeks that followed practically the
entire congregation from pulpit to the door, besides members who came in from other churches,
were baptized with the Holy Spirit and spoke in
other tongues.
All the trustees except one were swept through
to the baptism. This one held aloof for some time,
saying :
126

REVIVAL FIRES FALL
"Ok, I don't believe that all this noise and shouting and falling under the power is necessary. I
believe in the Holy Spirit, but not in this shouting and talking in tongues."
"Well, brother, even if you don't understand
it all now, do not sit back here in the seats. Come
up to the altar. You feel it will be all right to
seek more of Jesus, don't you?"
"Oh yes, I will seek more of the Lord," he replied. "That's all right," and he took his place
with the others at the altar.
It was only a few minutes later while praying

with the seekers, and they were going down one by
one under the mighty rushing wind of the heavenly gales that were sweeping from heaven, that
we heard a great shout, and something struck the
floor with a thump.
Making my way as quickly as possible to the
place where this great roaring was coming from.
I found its source of origin was none other than"
the trustee who had but shortly before declared
that all of this noise and shouting was unnecessary. I doubt if there was anyone in the church
who made as much noise as he. He shook from
head to foot ; his heels beat a tattoo upon the floor ;
he fairly bellowed and roared forth in other
tongues as the Spirit gave him utterance, his face
filled with joy and glory.
One brother who had thought it unnecessary
to speak in tongues talked for hours after he had
been filled, and coming to me as I was on the sidewalk, just leaving for home, said, as he shook with
the power:
"S-S-Sister M-M-McPherson, w-w-will I ever b-be
able to t-t-talk in E-English again?" and away he
went with other tongues again. Oh hallelujah !
Sometimes the greatest doubters get the biggest
baptisms and the people who despise noise make
127

THIS IS THAT
the most noise of all when they receive this oldtime power.
Many sick bodies were healed. A young woman . (
daughter of a Catholic family, was carried to the
church in a taxicab, and came hobbling in upon
crutches, crippled with rheumatism, unable to lift
her hands and move the stiffened joints of her

shoulders.
Here is her testimony as it was written for publication in the Bridal Call, our monthly magazine :
"TESTIMONY OF HEALING
"For the past six years I have suffered from one
of the worst cases of rheumatism, known as 'Anthritis Rheumatism/ but praise God! He has healed
me. For four years I was compelled to use
crutches, and the. stiffness was just taking a grip
on each joint gradually. Until last December I
could neither wash nor dress myself, and when
one would even try to help me I would weep and
moan with pain. My jaw became so stiff I could
scarcely get a morsel of food into my mouth unless I broke it into very small pieces. But praise
God since I have learned to say 'Glory to Jesus'
every particle of stiffness has left my jaws. I
have never again used the crutches since dear Sister McPherson's visit to the Free Gospel Church in
Corona. Her prayers, together with the dear ones
at that church, were answered, and Glory to Jesus.
I have received my baptism with the Holy Ghost
and fire.
"I am gaining in strength every day. Today I
can wash, iron, sweep, run the sewing machine,
and on days when mother is compelled to be away
from home, I prepare two meals. I thank God
today that we have a Pentecostal church in Corona, and also that God has placed in our midst
our dear pastor, Brother Bouton, who is ever willing at all times to serve our Master, and lead his
128

REVIVAL FIRES FALL
flock in the 'straight and narrow path/ " (Signed)
Louise Messnick.

I will not attempt to describe to you the wonderful way in which the work is going on day by
day in this church. Brother Bouton has written
a little of himself. See Chapter 2, Part II.
Now that the work was going on so beautifully
here, the Lord told us the time had come to begin
our journey to Florida. We announced our expected departure to the people. We did not tell
anyone that we were asking the Lord for the
means wherewith to ship our tent and pay our
fares, but the last night of the meeting Brother
Bouton set a table out and was getting ready to
ask for an offering for us, but before the song
which they were then singing was finished or he
could get an opportunity to ask for an offering,
the people started. Up the aisles they came, one
after another, laying their offerings upon the open
Bible.
The Lord sent us, through these dear saints, just
the amount needed. As we explained to them that
we were called to preach among the poor and go
to those who had not yet heard the message of
Pentecost, they promised to send us a box of
clothing to give to the poor, and ship it to us as
soon as possible.
Corona, its dear saints, and our own precious
experiences while there will never be forgotten.

129

CHAPTEE XIII.
CALLED TO DWELL IN TENTS.

FLORIDA TENT CAMPAIGN, 1917.
"For I have not dwelt in an house . . . but have gone
from tent to tent, and from one tabernacle to another"
I Chron. 17:5.
OUR first Florida tent meeting was held in
Jacksonville, the gateway to the lower
south. A tract of land centrally located
was loaned us free of charge, and we immediately set to work erecting tents, buying lumber,
building seats, platform, installing lights and making the preparations necessary for each tent meeting. Some twenty-four hours before the meetings
Avere to open all was in readiness, the last bill had
been paid, and the piano installed, and we had five
cents left over. How happy we were that the Lord
had known just how much to give us!
While we were yet speaking of this wonderful
way in which God had provided, a poor old colored lady came in, begging clothing, money or ;
food for herself and children. We told her we
were very sorry that we did not have any food to
give her (we expected to fast ourselves until the
meetings opened and offerings came in) nor any
clothing at present, but we gave her the five cents
which we had left.
Soon after she had gone, an automobile drove
up to the tent, containing workers who had come
from Atlanta, Ga. They were hungry and wanted
supper right away, and not wishing to tell them
that we had neither money nor food, I slipped
131

THIS IS THAT
away in my tent, and kneeling down, told the
Lord about it, saying:

"Oh, Lord, if you want us to fast and pray until
the meeting opens tomorrow Amen. But if you
want me to have something to set before these
people, please supply the food."
Rising, I heard a man's big, gruff voice on the
street in front of our tent, saying:
"Whoa tharM"
Springing from the wagon, he came in with a
cheery smile, carrying a box in his arms, marked
"Prepaid," which he deposited upon the ground,
with a
"Bight smart heavy box you got here. Sign on
this line, please," and he departed.
"Why, here is the box of clothes which the
Corona saints promised to send for the poor people! Now I will be able to give some clothes to
that dear old colored lady and her children,"
flashed happily through my mind, causing the
thought of supper to be forgotten for the moment,
Kunning for the hammer, we pried the top off
the box. Sure enough, here was a coat and here
were some dresses. The coat felt very heavy, and
an experimental shake brought rolling out of its
sleeves and pockets cans of corn, peas, salmon and
a box of crackers.' Still further search through
the box revealed rolled oats, sugar, condensed
milk and practically everything that was needed
for supper. Oh Glory to Jesus!
This is just one sample of the wonderful way in
Avhich the Lord provides for His children when
they go forth without purse or scrip taking no
thought of what they shall eat or what they shall
drink or what they shall put on. He had sent us
our supper all the way from Corona, L. I., to
Jacksonville, Fla., and had it there right on the
tick of the clock, for the bells were ringing six.

The Lord is never late. Oh, aren't you glad He's
132

CALLED TO DWELL IN TENTS
on time? He's coming on time, too, dear ones.
Very soon the floors of heaven will roll back and
He will appear.
The two Pentecostal Missions came in with us.
The tent meetings opened with a good attendance,
and the crowds increased day after day. The
altar was, time after time, filled with seekers for
salvation, the baptism, and healing, and the Lord
did not turn the hungry empty away.
Practically every state in the Union was represented by the tourists who gathered to this place,
and many w r ere amazed as they saw and felt the
power of the Holy Spirit, heard the messages in
tongues and interpretation, the heavenly music
and singing, and saw the saints at the altar falling prostrate under the power, coining through
to the baptism and speaking in languages they
had never learned in their lives.
One brother spoke in Hebrew and a Hebrew
scholar who was present, heard and understood.
Hallelujah!
Two young men were healed, one of a broken
arm, broken at three places, and dislocated at the
wrist; the other of a broken hand. Both removed
the plaster and the splints before the audience,
convincing everyone that they were made every
whit whole. One sister was healed instantly of
cancer.
Note. As it would be difficult to write from memory of
the many eventful meetings which took place, 1917 and 1918,
we have selected paragraphs from reports from Pentecostal

papers.
CAMP MEETING AT TAMPA, 1917.
Glory to Jesus ! Glory ! Glory ! It seems you
must almost hear us shouting and praising the
Lord away up north. What a Avonderful Saviour
we have! He has taken the foolish to confound
the wise, and the weak to put the strong to flight.
He is laying bare His mighty arm. He is separat133

THIS IS THAT
ing His people, yea, He is calling out a people
from a people. Bless His name!
The Lord is blessing in Tampa. Meetings have
increased in number and power steadily. Last
night the tent was packed to the farthest corner,
many standing and more turned away.
This has been a gathering under unique circumstances with this country standing under the dark
clouds of trouble, on the brink of war. Tourists
have heard for the first time the soon coming of
Jesus and of the latter rain outpouring of the
Spirit. With joy many have received the message
and been baptized, declaring that they will return
to their towns and cities and proclaim the truth.
An entire family from Minneapolis received the
baptism the same night.
Great amazement fills the audience as the power
of God falls. Many have been slain under the
power and began to speak in tongues, prophecy
and interpretation.
One lady did not have time to get to the altar.
The power fell on her as she stood to her feet,
and before she could get to the aisles the Lord had

baptized her, as she went. The first sentence was
interpreted "Jesus is coming soon, coming soon.
Get ready."
Sinners cried out for mercy, and came to the
altar without urging. Young men and old have
taken out pipes, cigarettes, tobacco and playing
cards, left them behind and gone away with shining faces.
A brother a professing Christian and church
member for years (without salvation) confessed
his sins publicly as the power fell, and running
to the altar gave up his beer, tobacco, and many
things. He was so filled with joy, which, though he
was an old man, he had never before experienced,
that he danced and shouted and cried, much to
the amazement of his neighbors, for he lives in a
134

CALLED TO DWELL IN TENTS
beautiful home right across from the tent. This
is a wonderful opportunity to work. Just on the
eve of Jesus' return to earth, this whole country
is waiting with bated breath for they know not
what, and we hear His voice beseeching us
"Hasten! Preach the Word, for Jesus is coming
soon."
The Lord has given us a Gospel automobile, with
which we are able to hold eight or ten meetings
a day, distributing thousands of tracts and hand
bills, and carrying big display signs of the tent
meetings.
PLEASANT GROVE CAMP DURANT
Durant is twenty miles from Tampa, and many
of the people here are very poor. Some can not
even read or write, but how hungry they are for

God ! Yesterday the ground was thick with teams,
wagons and automobiles of those who had driven
here from a radius of thirty miles around. The
Lord is saving and baptizing souls and healing the
sick. There are messages in tongues and interpretation. It is a wonderful sight to see. people crowd
to the front during altar service, standing on tiptoe on the benches to see the strange sight, men
and women, slain under the mighty power of God,
speaking in tongues as they are filled with the
Spirit.
ST. PETERSBURG
Just a shout of victory from St. Petersburg,
Fla., this wicked city where Pentecost has never
been preached.
A great celebration was on when our meetings
opened. People play cards and gamble on tables
by the sidewalk; the streets beside the park and
city hall were roped off at night for dancing, and
as the band played the people danced in masks
and fancy costumes on the public streets.
135

THIS IS THAT
Our snow-white tent, though comfortably situated, and decorated with palms and flowers to
make it attractive, was but a 'poor inducement for
such a worldly throng. Standing on the street,
giving out hand bills and tracts, I looked at the
long lines of automobiles and conveyances streaming by in the parades. This week was something in
the nature of a Mardi-Gras and the cars were
decorated to represent the state or business of the
owner.
Suddenly the Lord spoke to me and said: "Decorate your car and join the parade !" At first this

looked impossible. Surely the decorations must
cost an enormous sum of money. But the Lord
showed me how it could be done. We built a
wooden frame just the shape of a tent; then taking
a white sheet (which was one of the luxuries of
our camp life) we made of it a miniature tent,
stretching it over said frame, using cord for guy
ropes, and large nails for stakes. On one side of
the miniature tent we painted the words :
" Jesus is coming soon;" on the other side
" Jesus saves;" on another side
"I am going to the Pentecostal Camp meeting.
Are you?"
Putting down the top of the Gospel auto, the
miniature tent, some seven feet long, five feet wide,
was lifted up and set over the car so as just to
leave room for the driver. The- car was also decorated with palms and Avild flowers, which we
gathered by the way, tied with tissue streamers.
Concealing a baby organ under the tent, I sat
beneath it out of sight of the crowd, and the Lord
shut the policeman's eyes so that we could slip
into the grand parade of cars and get the full
length of Main street with our advertisement. We
must get an audience to our tent meeting, even
if we had to sail forth with flying colors into the
136

CALLED TO DWELL IN TENTS
territory of the enemy to advertise our soul-saving business.
Early next morning we got in line with the other
cars. The brass bands were going by; the liqupr
man advertised his business, the telephone, the

wheat man and the florist; the butcher, the baker,
the tourists representing their different states
all were there, having entered and listed their cars.
When it came our turn to slip in, the policeman's
back was turned, and he was motioning behind his
back for us to come on, and holding back tratfic
from the other direction with his hand, so in we
went. We were far enough behind the bands so
that our little baby organ and chimes could be
heard distinctly, playing
"Just as I am, without one plea,
But that Thy blood, was shed for me."
and other familiar hymns such as
"Oh get ready, Oh get ready, for the judgment
day."
"For you I am praying,
I'm praying for you."
Thousands of people lined either side of the long
street, leaning out of their windows, standing on
the roofs and after the first astonished stare the
people began to laugh and clap their hands and
cheer, and that night the tent was packed, and we
had no more trouble getting crowds. Sinners were
saved, believers baptized. The Salvation Army
closed their doors and came in to work with us,
bringing their drum and musical instruments.
*Note: DOES THE WORK STAND? Though two
years have passed since this meeting, letters are
still coming from Jacksonville, Tampa and St.
Petersburg, from those who were saved and baptized during these meetings, stating that they are
standing true to this day and going deeper with
the Lord.
137

THIS IS THAT

SAVANNAH, GA.
This great city, with its hundreds and thousands
of living souls, that has never had a Pentecosta|
mission within its borders, nor heard the message
of the latter rain, has been laid heavily upon our
hearts.
After shipping our tabernacle, tents, and
camping outfit on the railroad, laying hands upon
it and asking the Lord to send it right straight
through (though freight had been paralyzed by
war shipments) we ourselves traveled in the Gospel auto, carrying workers and Gospel literature.
The tent arrived almost as soon as ourselves. The
Lord led us right to a spot of land which was
loaned to us free of charge, and the first night several came forward for salvation. The second night
one of those who had been saved the first night
received the baptism. Never have we seen a more
hungry, intensely earnest people than these, and although we are unable to stay, we are opening a
mission, leaving our benches and fixtures here with
Sister Swift of Durant, Fla., whom we brought
with us in the car as a worker, and who, with her
husband, will care for the work.
PREACHING IN THE COTTON FIELDS.
From Savannah, Ga., we traveled by Gospel
auto through South and North Carolina, Kentucky, Maryland and New Jersey, preaching as we
went, and giving out thousands of tracts. We find
this a comparatively inexpensive way of reaching the people, getting to people who never could
be reached any other way.
The poor people in the cotton and tobacco field
districts, far from Pentecostal Missions, in this
way receive the literature and testimony.
At night we run our car into some quiet field or
forest, beside a stream of water, pitch our tent,

build our camp fire, and put up our camping cots
138

CALLED TO DWELL IN TENTS
for the night; up and about our Father's business
again with the rising of the sun.
We had but eighteen dollars on which to make
the trip from Savannah to Long Branch, N. J.,
the scene of the next camp meeting, but the Lord
made either the eighteen dollars or the gasoline to
-stretch, for we still had money when we arrived at
our destination.

139

CHAPTER XIV.
THE BRIDAL CALL
"Write the vision, and make it plain . . . that he may
run that readeth it." Hab. 2:2.
WHILE in Savannah, Ga., the first editions
of the Bridal Call, our monthly magazine, were printed. The Lord had been
laying it upon my heart to edit such a
paper, and gave me, Himself, the name "THE
BRIDAL CALL," and the cover design, the Lord
appearing in the clouds, and the angels with their
trumpets. Over and over the Lord spoke to me
"Write the vision and make it plain, that he
may run who readeth it." Hab. 2 :2.
At first I hesitated, saying:

"There are so many Pentecostal papers, and
more capable writers who are able to give their
entire time and thought to the matter. It would
be impossible for me, having no office, nor abiding city, holding many meetings, traveling in the
Gospel car, mothering the children, and many
other things, to write or take the burden of a
paper." The Lord replied :
"With me, nothing is impossible." He showed
me His exact plan for the Bridal Call; that its,
message was not to be one of controversy, fighting,
great wisdom or eloquence, but simply what its
name implied a call to the bride to prepare for
her heavenly Bridegroom. So whatever reports,
testimonies or other matter may be in the paper,
we endeavor to have one article making plain the
way of salvation, one on the baptism of the Holy
141

THIS IS THAT
Ghost, and one on the coming of the Lord and the
preparation to meet Him.
So plainly the Lord spoke, giving me articles to
write, in such bursts of revelation, that the tears
streamed down my face, while my fingers flew
over the typewriter keys.
During our camp meeting in Savannah, the Lord
commissioned our consecrated Brother, F. A. Hess
(without any word from us), to undertake the
printing for several months, charging only for the
paper, of which we addressed, mailed and sent out
freely from the first issue, two thousand copies.
Later the paper was printed in Framinghani,
Mass.
Forging ahead into new fields, and having some-

times thousands of people in our audiences, we
have secured thousands of new names in outlying
districts never before reached by Pentecostal literature.
For two years the Bridal Call has been published regularly. Letters come almost daily, telling of people who have been blessed, saved, baptized, healed, and are on their way rejoicing,
through the humble little labor of love the
Bridal Call. It has meant many hours of work,
often late into the night, but these letters more
than repay all the effort that has been made.
The Lord is now opening for us The Bridal Call
Publishing House, centrally located at 125 South
Spring Street, Los Angeles, Cal., and has commissioned a brother here to print it, so that now
we will be able to send the paper promptly on a
given date. The circulation is increasing marvelously. Time is short now, and the last invitation to
the Marriage of the Lamb must go forth unhindered and multiplied.
We would like our readers to send rolls
monthly to your friends, that they may hear the
call and prepare to meet the Lord. At present we
142

THE BRIDAL CALL
are sending, monthly, as the Lord supplies the
means, thousands of papers, tracts and booklets to
prisons, homes, hospitals and struggling, out-ofthe-way missions.
A letter from the chaplain of one of our largest
penitentiaries, inviting us to send more of such
literature, states that he does not want Christian
Science or New Thought, but the old-fashioned
Gospel, to help sinful men and women back to

God. Please pray with us that God will make the
Bridal Call a ladder whereon many will climb to
life, hope and heaven. The letters which we receive from the prisoners are very pitiful.
Thank God! How wonderful to be deemed
worthy of such a privilege, such an opportunity.
Such work should not be stinted for means.
Many doors are open where we could send out
thousands. The devil's literature goes forth without stint, and we believe that the Lord will provide
means whereby this Bridal Call may be sent- to
all the hungry ones whom He lays upon our
hearts. All interested please write the "Editor"
personally.

143

CHAPTER XV.
EASTERN SUMMER TENT CAMPAIGN, 1917
CALL TO LONG BRANCH, N. J.
"The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me; because the
Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek;
He hath sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim
liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them
that are bound;
To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day
of vengeance of our Lord; to comfort all that mourn;
To give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for
mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness."
Isa. 61:1, 2, 3.
THE Lord witnessed to me concerning our going to Long Branch while in Savannah, Ga.,
I was waiting on the Lord for direct leadings. A number of letters, each containing

a call to some particular city, w r ere spread before me
as I prayed.
"Oh, Lord, lead me just as You would have me.
Do not let us get one step out of Your will in any
way, or the place that You would have us to be.
This call to Long Branch, N. J., seems to witness
in my soul, speak to me, Lord, in some way, if
this is of You. If not, take it away from me.
How I wish that I could find out more about the
place, its population, etc."
As I spoke, a New York paper was picked up
by a little gust of wind and blown across the tent.
Stooping over, still praying for the Lord to direct
me and speak regarding Long Branch, N. J., I
absent-mindedly picked up the paper and smoothed
it out upon my lap, with amazement when, in
large letters, printed half way across the paper,
this sign met my gaze "DON'T FAIL TO GO TO
LONG BRANCH, N. J."
145

THIS IS THAT
Beneath this sign was given a detailed description of the place, its accommodation, population,
etc., and it wound up, with glaring letters
"WKITE AT ONCE TO LONG BRANCH, N. J.,
THAT YOU WILL BE THERE."
How wonderful that this New York paper
should be away down here in Savannah, Ga.,
brought into the tent and right to my feet, open
at this identical place! The Lord put the power
upon me and witnessed that this was no mere accident, but truly another sign that He was leading.
(Condensed clippings and notes from reports.)
Showers of blessing are falling in Long Branch,

where a tiny band, seven in number, have been
praying for revival and an outpouring of the Spirit
for years. Brother and Sister W. Martin had
grounds ready, soon we had the tent erected and
filled with the glory of the Lord.
Workers and seekers have gathered from other
towns and cities, crowds increasing daily Sundays
people are turned away, unable to gain admission. Many have received the baptism of the
Holy Spirit, and scores have come to the altar for
salvation, and God is meeting one and all. A number have come out of the churches and received
the baptism, and are going on in a precious way
with the Lord. We go out daily with the Gospel
car, upon which is painted in large letters on one
side "Jesus is coming soon ;" on the other "Where
will you spend eternity?" Twenty and thirty miles
of territory is covered daily with literature, street
meetings and announcements.
During water baptism service by the ocean, the
power of the Lord fell and those being baptized
leaped, danced and shouted in the water, while
spectators wept and praised the Lord on the
shore.
146

EASTERN SUMMER TENT CAMPAIGN, 1917
Many of the young people have had marvelous
and inspiring visions, some seeing our Saviour
hanging on the Cross for our sins; others saw our
Lord descending in the clouds to catch away His
waiting people.
There have been many remarkable instances of
healing, one of which we relate : A preacher came
on crutches not believing that the Lord could
heal as in days of old, and in answer to prayer
God healed him instantly, in the middle of the

meeting and he ran about the tent, dancing, without his crutches and shouting: "Why, the Lord
still heals! He heals as in days of old!"
His wife was so overjoyed she ran up and down
the aisles and right up on the platform, shaking
my hand and making me dance over the platform
with her in such a way that it was impossible to
go on with the meeting for a time because of the
shouting of the people.
CAMP MEETING, HYDE PARK, BOSTON, MASS.
It seemed impossible to ship our tents from New
Jersey to Boston, Mass., as the embargo was on.
The Lord opened the way for us, to get a truck;
and equipment was rushed through and put up on
time. Praise God!
It was impossible to seat the throngs of people,
The Pentecostal saints came filled with the glory
and fire of God. Their testimonies and ringing
songs of praises brought the entire neighborhood
on the run to ask: "What meaneth this?" It was
a hopeless task to seat the people, though seats
were loaned us by the church and every available
inch of space packed. Thousands nightly fringed
the edge of the tent, standing clear out into the
road as far and farther than it was possible for
them to catch a word of the discourse.
At first the Catholic element did their best to
disturb and break up the meeting, but praise the
Lord, He gave us victory.
147

THIS IS THAT
A policeman who roomed near the tent complained to his chief that he could not sleep for the
noise of the people praying and shouting at all

hours of the night, and the brethren were asked
to appear at the station. They went in the Gospel car, leaving it in front of the door as they
entered. The policeman who had made the complaint was not in, and the chief told them to sit
down and wait for his return. Pacing up and
down the floor, he at last went to the window, and
looking out upon the car, with its lettered signs,
drew back with a start, and said:
"Jesus is coming soon! Coming soon? Well,
maybe so. I don't know."
"Are you prepared to meet Him if He should
come?" they inquired.
"Have you been born again? Do you know that
your sins are Avashed away, that you have passed
from death unto life?"
"No, no, I can not say that I do." They further
invited him to give his heart to Jesus, but this he
refused to do, giving several reasons why he could
not do so at this time. (This was the chief who
refused us proper police protection at our tent
meeting. )
Going over to the window several times, he read
aloud, in a thoughtful voice : " ' Jesus is coming
soon. 7 Well, well, maybe He is." And indeed He
came very soon for this man. That night, the disturbing element, seeing no restraining hand laid
upon them, were more disorderly than ever about
the tent.
The next day the chief was stricken with heart
failure at his desk and died in a few hours.
The news went round that entire section of the
town that he had refused protection to the Gospel
meetings then being conducted. Thereafter we
had three men stationed by the tent at every meeting and perfect order.

148

EASTERN SUMMER TENT CAMPAIGN, 1917
Scores have come seeking salvation; the slain of
the Lord are many, and deep conviction resting
upon the people.
One young lady, a school teacher, came to mock,
said she would never be one of those people, suddenly fell to her knees, crying for salvation, was
wonderfully saved, and the next night baptized
with the Holy Spirit.
Young men who ridiculed, were suddenly
stricken with awful conviction while a message
was being given in tongues and interpretation. The
face of the young man who led the way to the,
altar turned white, his knees and hands trembled
as he cried : "Lord, be merciful to me, a sinner."
His friends followed him. They were all wonderfully saved and are now seeking the baptism.
A little girl with a paralyzed leg and a stiff
knee was brought by her parents, for healing. One
leg was two inches shorter than the other. The
Lord instantly healed her and she was able to
bend her knee and the limb was 'lengthened and
became as the other one.
Sunday morning the power fell so no one could
preach, the Holy Spirit Himself spoke in prophecy
through Sister McPherson. Then she played the
piano in the Spirit, and all over the tabernacle
pealed forth the heavenly anthem.
HUNTINGTON, L. I., CAMP MEETINGS.
The camp grounds were a beautiful sight, with
the many white tents nestled under the tall locust
trees.

The meeting lasted ten days, souls were saved,
backsliders reclaimed, sick healed, twenty-six received the baptism of the Holy Ghost. One girl
who came to the altar to seek her baptism, wore a
heavy steel truss around her waist and running
down both sides of her limb, it fastened at the
bottom of a heavy shoe and strapped down her
withered, helpless limb. The Lord baptized her in
149

THIS IS THAT
the Holy Ghost and healed her limb. She removed
the truss, brace and shoe, stood up, and walked up
and down, perfectly strong and without pain. Her
mother wept and saints shouted. Surely we have
a right to shout with such a wonderful Jesus.
Among the number who came to the camp meeting from out of town was a lady, educated, refined,
a great believer in holiness. She brought with her
her little son of about eleven years. She had
come to study Pentecost, and analyze this baptism of the Holy Spirit with the Bible evidence, speaking in tongues, its effects, manifestations, etc. She was always asking questions and moving from one to the other as
they lay under the power, coming through to
the baptism. Sometimes her face would soften
and then again the look of a doubting Thomas
would come into her eyes and she would want to
handle and see.
One afternoon her son, who, without a question,
was seeking the baptism, fell under the power,
his face, which was always bright, suddenly took
on the radiance of heaven and his whole being
seemed to be transformed, as he broke out singing
in other languages, clear and beautiful, in poetry,
the Lord giving me the interpretation of the song.

When the mother turned around from her investigating and seeking for information, and saw
her son, who in his childlike faith had received
that which she was questioning, it melted her
heart and she herself fell under the power and
came through speaking in tongues.
One night, during a severe storm, when the
lights went out in the tent, we brought the Gospel
automobile up to the edge of the tent, and lifting
the side curtains, using the headlights of the car
for illumination. This was one of the most wonderful meetings of this series. The Spirit took
150

EASTERN SUMMER TENT CAMPAIGN, 1917
control in such a way that preaching was impossible.
Two ladies came from a Bible training School,
one who had been a Christian worker and missionary for years, was broken in health, and though
she did not know much of the baptism of the Holy
Spirit, asked to be prayed for for healing, during
the breakfast hour in the dining tent.
We prayed for her and she fell off her seat and
lay on the ground amongst the twigs and leaves,
with the ducks, which were a constant source of
annoyance to the cook, quacking about her. He
does humble His people! No matter how great a
worker one has been, everybody must get down.
Hallelujah !
In a few minutes the dear sister had received
the baptism of the Holy Spirit and was shaking
from head to foot, laughing with joy and talking

in tongues.
The last Sunday the floor was covered with
those . prostrated under the power. Many messages Avere given w r ith interpretation.
MONTWAIT, MASS.
Here precious saints gathered from far and near
and met in blessed liberty. The first night three
received the baptism of the Spirit and sinners received salvation.
On Sunday nine received their baptism, some
Avere saved and many healed. A dear Methodist
minister and his wife and daughter received their
baptism. Thirty or more received the Holy Ghost
in the ten days' meeting.
WASHBURN, MAINE, CAMP.
Since writing the heading of this report, I have
been sitting here before my typewriter wondering
where and how to begin. It was all so wonderful,
it would be impossible for me to describe, but
151

THIS IS THAT
longing to encourage the many poor, hungry saints
who are shut away from the meetings, I will do
my best.
The Lord was with us from the beginning. The
first few days some fifty-four received the baptism,
and the number increased daily until within two
weeks and a half it was safe to say over a hundred
received. Hardened sinners wept their way to
the altar; many sat and trembled from head to
foot under conviction, and sinners on their way
to the altar, fell in the aisles, often it was impos-

sible to preach, the Holy Spirit conducted the
meeting; messages in tongues and interpretation
came forth from many empty vessels, waves of
glory and marvelous singing swept over the audience.
A DRAMA ENACTED UNDER POWER OF HOLY SPIRIT.
One night a drama was all worked out in the
Spirit, showing forth the ten Virgins, going first
with white robes to meet the Bridegroom. They
said :
"He delayeth His coming; let us rest."
At first some argued that all should keep awake,
for He that would come, would come quickly; but
finally all were asleep.
Suddenly a loud cry
"Behold ! The Bridegroom conieth ! Go ye out to
meet Him !" Then all the virgins opened their eyes,
and examined their lamps in alarm. The five sisters enacting the part of the wise virgins, danced
for joy because of the oil, but the foolish begged
the wise to share their oil with them. The wise
said it was impossible, and sent the foolish to buy
oil of Him who had to sell.
Then followed a scene where the foolish knocked
at an imaginary door and haggled long over the
price they would have to pay for the oil; they
wanted to pay only a price which would not ineon152

EASTERN SUMMER TENT CAMPAIGN, 1917
venience them or cost a sacrifice, but the man who
sold asked for all to give one hundred per cent sacrifice before they could obtain oil. At last the

foolish Avent away, only to find that the wise had
been taken up to meet the Lord; then they fell
down and tore their hair and wept aloud.
This was followed by a ringing, warning appeal
to all to make full surrender, pay the price, buy
oil now, for the Bridegroom is at the door.
This Avas only one of the many wonderful messages and dramas worked out in our midst which
were beyond description. On Sundays hundreds
of automobiles, horses and carriages filled the
fields, and it was impossible to seat but a small
part of the people. The altar was full of sinners
seeking salvation, and Christians receiving the
baptism. Several ministers and their wives received, also many church members and workers,
several receiving right in their seats during service.
The fall of the year is coming and campaign in
the north and east drawing to a close. The farmers' wagons are busily wending their way between
the harvest fields and the barns, as they gather
the results of their summer's labor. They mop
their hot, perspiring faces, and heave tired but
happy sighs.
Many a time, while working at the altar hour
after hour, sometimes away into the morning
hours, after a heavy day, we have sunk down upon
a seat after it was all over and remembered that
the Master of the harvest was weary for us. But
oh, the joy of it ! Row after row of hungry souls
seeking salvation, the baptism of the Holy Ghost,
divine healing, or a. closer walk with God. The
floors have been full of wheat and the vats overflowed with oil and wine. The Ark has been in
the midst and we delight our souls in the Lord as
we live again the scenes of the past summer
campaign.
153

CHAPTER XVI.
SECOND SOUTHERN CAMPAIGN AND
GOSPEL AUTO WORK
"Then shall the lame man leap as an hart, and the tongue
of the dumb sing: for in the wilderness shall waters break
out, and streams in the desert." Isa. 35:6.
FROM THE NORTHERNMOST TOWN IN MAINE TO THBl
SOUTHERNMOST CITY IN FLORIDA.
THE cars were filled with workers as we left
Washburn^ singing and praising the Lord as
we journeyed, through the country, and the
brothers shouting through the megaphone,
the message of salvation and the soon coming of the
Lord. Much attention was drawn to the cars by
their big gold letters telling of Jesus' soon coming,
and asking the questions: "Where will you spend
Eternity ?" And as we pass through the hundreds
of towns and villages on our trips, we sing or testify,
or give out literature, meeting many hungry souls. ,
We traveled all the day, slept by the wayside at
night and the Lord always had a place prepared.
We have our Gospel Autos so arranged that we
can turn the front seat back and sleep in the car,
and the big out doors is our home. With joy we
kneeled by the running board at night to pray and
thank the Father for this glorious opportunity of
preaching the Gospel far and Avide in the otherwise unattainable places.
Oh that you could see the hungry faces that
gather around and listen to the Word in the
South. Frequently men step out from the crowd
during street meeting, and kneel weeping, at the
running board of the car, then rise to testify of
a determination to go through with Jesus.
155

THIS IS THAT
All through Virginia, North and South Carolina, and Georgia, we visited many poor homes,
cotton and tobacco fields, etc., with the message
of love. How eager the poor colored people were
to hear the Word and receive the papers! In this
way the poor have the gospel preached unto them,
and those who could never hear in any other way,
of Jesus' soon coming. Precious souls are at
stake, no time to be lost and we cry :
"Here am I. Lord, send me." Pray that we may
be faithful, unselfish, humble, and quick that
we may never lose an opportunity of preaching,
instant in season and out of season, the soon
coming of Jesus, and what it means to be ready
to meet Him. We want to lay down our lives
for the Master as He laid down His life for us. t
"He who saveth his life shall lose it, but he that
loseth his life for My sake shall find it"
Sometimes, while sleeping by the -wayside or
under damp tents, the enemy whispers of rheumatism, etc., but that is the word we meet him with,
and he disappears. He pictures others with comfortable homes and warm beds, and points in
scorn to our hard canvas cots, w r ith no home comforts, points to our smoky camp fire, and says
the price is great. But, glory to Jesus, there is
no desire in our hearts to go back, for we are
happy with Jesus alone, and just one glimpse at
the altar, filled with seekers after God, more than
repays.
Pray for us, dear ones, as we go forth in the
life of faith, with Him who said,
"Take no thought for what you shall eat 'or
drink, or for what you shaft put on, for the Lord
your God knoweth you have need of these things."

JACKSONVILLE.
We rejoiced to find converts who had been
saved and baptized during the first meeting, still
156

SECOND SOUTHERN CAMPAIGN AND GOSPEL AUTO WORK
walking with Jesus and growing in grace. The
results at the second meeting surpassed that of
the first. At times the entire altar was lined
with sinners seeking salvation. Many were baptized in the Spirit, and many healed.
****
The Lord then led us from the Atlantic Ocean to
the Gulf of Mexico, preaching and distributing
tracts to Durant ? Fla., there to conduct the
PLEASANT GROVE CAMP MEETING.
God led us, with marching and singing, to encompass the camp and lay hands upon seats,
altar, etc., and claim them for Jesus. The glory of
the Lord was in our midst. The tabernacle was
filled to overflowing and the groves strewn with
autos and teams from forty miles around. A
spirit of sweet unity and humility prevailed. There
were wonderful messages in prophecy and prophetic song. Dramas were worked out, accompanied by tongues and interpretation. Heavenly
music filled the place, and angel choirs were
heard.
Deep conviction rested on many, and the altar
filled with sinners seeking salvation. One dear
little girl who received the baptism plead with all,
in tongues and English, while under the power,
to come to that beautiful city of God.
TAMPA, FLA.

With much faith and eager hands upon arriving
we set to work getting up the big tent, and several
smaller ones, making seats, installing electrical
apparatus, painting signs, and advertising. The
residence district and business section were visited
with handbills, and God blessed our labor, and
the tent was filled and a large number stood outside. There were many new faces each night,
inquiring "What meaneth this?" Coming closer,
157

THIS IS THAT

and closer to the front, many soon plunged into
the fountain.
An elderly lady, from a highly respected family
of the city, after hearing Pentecost spoken against
in persecuting tones, decided to come and judge
for herself. Interested from the start, she attended
regularly, later accompanied by her son and
daughter-in-law. Soon she was gloriously baptized with the Holy Spirit; then the daughter, a
dear, sweet Christian, began very earnestly seeking Him, and her husband said he could barely
keep in his seat, the power of God for salvation
of his soul was so strongly upon him.
7 , Street meetings were held from trucks and
Gospel cars in many parts of Tampa and Ybor
j City, and from the band stand in front of the
City Hall.
A CROSS COUNTRY TRIP TAMPA TO MIAMI VIA OKEECHOBEE PRAIRIE WITH TRACTS AND GLAD NEWS.

When we left Tampa the car was well filled
I'with tracts and from the west to the east coast
t of Florida, a distance of three hundred and fifty
miles, we faithfully distributed literature until
ithin a few miles of our destination, when all
had been given out, and souls were crowding
about the car asking for more.
In this trip we passed through the Okeechobee
IPrairie, and Prairie City, visiting each house
ith the first Pentecostal literature they had ever
seen.
Our car being heavily loaded this trip, we did
not carry a sleeping tent, and learned a little of
hat Jesus meant when he said, "The birds have
ests and the foxes have holes, but the Son of
(man has not where to lay His head." The first
night we spent in the car; the second night was
spent wrapped in a blanket by the camp fire on
the prairie near Okeechobee, a new prairie town,
158

SECOND SOUTHERN CAMPAIGN AND GOSPEL AUTO WORK
where we spread the news of Pentecost. The third
night was spent in a fisherman's shanty near Palm
Beach, where also we witnessed for Jesus. The
next night was spent in a little railway depot to
keep out of the driving rain.
All the homes around us had their Christmas
trees and fine dinners, but as our tents had not
yet arrived, and we did not wish to spend the
Lord's money on a room, we built a palm-leaf
shanty dn the beach, and hung our simple Christ-

mas gifts on a little tree growing near. We kneeled
down around it and read the story of Jesus 7 birth,
and after prayer opened our little tokens. Praise
the Lord ! Though here we have no home and no
abiding city, we seek one whose builder and maker
is God.
TENT MEETINGS, MIAMI, FLA.
The first tent meeting conducted in Miami was
held among the white people, the second among
the colored saints. To the first meeting thronged
the rich and fashionable in their automobiles and
fine clothing. A tent meeting was a novelty.
They came to be amused, but many remained to
weep and pray. It was a beautiful sight to see
the tears rolling down their faces, as they came
humbly, and kneeled at the altar, giving their
hearts and lives to Jesus in response to the
simple message.
Because of the strong racial feeling, the dear colored people did not feel free to attend the white
meeting. The Lord put such a love in my heart for
the colored race that it was almost impossible for
me to pass one of them on the street without such
floods of love welling up in my heart that I had to
step up to them and inquire:
"Have you ever heard of the latter rain outpouring of the Holy Spirit, the baptism of the
Holy Ghost with the Bible evidence, speaking in
159

THIS IS THAT
tongues, and of the soon coming of Jesus?" I think
they must have felt my love for them for they
flocked about me whilst visiting and distributing
tracts in their neighborhoods. Thus it was that
after the white camp meeting we moved our

equipment to the other side of town amongst these
precious people.
MIAMI COLORED CAMP MEETING.
The tabernacle was filled, night after night,
with precious black pearls to be gathered for
Jesus. Picture a great platform thirty-two feet
long and twelve feet wide, filled with baptized,
colored saints, dancing, singing, clapping their
hands, testifying with unction and a clear ring
that carried conviction. Picture an audience
where the power of God fell till often the evangelist could not minister, but the Spirit took full
control; picture the colored saints, old and young,
dancing in the aisles, sinners weeping their way
to the altar, seekers receiving the Holy Spirit,
and talking in tongues, and then you would see
only a little corner of this meeting.
At times the power fell till every one raised
faces shining with heaven's light, just shouted, and
praised the Lamb for sinners slain, till the noise
could be heard blocks away, and people came running to cry: "What meaneth this?"
At other times a holy hush, a spirit of weeping
and great heart-searching and humbling swept the
people from their seats and they fell on their
knees in the aisles, between the seats, and at the
altar and are now cleansed whiter than the driven
snow, living pure, holy lives for the Jesus who
said: "Go, and sin no more."
Drunkards testified to having been delivered
from drink, gamblers to being set free from gambling; sinful girls and women of shame testified
160

SECOND SOUTHERN CAMPAIGN AND GOSPEL AUTO WORK

that the Lord had saved and cleansed them from
sin.
Long marches were taken through the streets,
and they sang as only colored folk can, played
their musical instruments and shouted till people
ran to know what had happened. Many danced
right on the march and demonstrated to all that
"It is joy unspeakable and full of glory."
Some two hundred colored saints have the baptism of the Spirit in Miami, and many more are
seeking and finding.
The people are very poor, and go to meeting in
aprons and overalls. Collections very small, and
were it not for the dear friends sending offerings
in letters, we would have fallen further behind
financially than we did. Several times, when we
were wondering how to meet the heavy expenses of freight, gas, oil, lumber, lights, groceries,
clothing, the needed amount came on the next
mail from some child of God whom Father had
been telephoning to. Thank God that even in these
days, when prices are soaring, it is possible to live
a life of faith. It has meant self sacrifice, and in
our reports we endeavor to picture the sunny
side, to encourage the many who live far from
meetings, but fail, perhaps, to show the other side,
where sometimes in driving rains, we find our
sleeping tents ankle deep in water, our bedding
wet, where we struggle to cook on smoky oil stoves
and yet keep singing and smiling, fighting the good
fight of faith.
KEY WEST FOR JESUS.
In the Island of Key West doors opened everywhere. Many begged us to ship our tent here and
conduct an evangelistic campaign that would reach
every corner of the Island, volunteering their help
and prayers, declaring that few evangelists came

,j
161

THIS IS THAT
so far out of the way, and that the whole city
would turn out to the meeting.
The grounds of the Harris High School (beautifully located) was chosen as a site for the tent
meetings. Every seat was taken nightly and many
were standing. New seats were obtained three
times and arranged outside of the tent, but it was
impossible to seat the large audiences. Ofttimes
the tent was filled two hours before meeting was
to begin, so anxious were these hungry souls to
obtain seats. Men and women came to the altar
for salvation, and for the baptism of the Holy
Spirit. Sick were healed and the Lord gave me
blessed liberty in proclaiming the message of the
hour.
My soul was so burdened for the dear colored
people that I announced from the public platform
that I had done my duty in the Lord toward the
white population of the Island, and must risk
their displeasure and disapproval now by going to
the poor colored folk and telling them the same
story. Some remonstrated, but as they saw the
earnestness and longing in my heart, almost all
agreed to help, and gave us no humbler spot for
said meeting than the spacious grounds that surrounded the court house.
Then began earnest visiting among the colored
people. At first it was impossible to make them
believe that this was a
COLORED CAMP MEETING.
or to persuade them that they were welcome to
come inside and take seats, but when they really

found it was true, how they flocked in !
One dear colored brother, whom everyone, black
and white, admitted to be a saint of God, created
considerable stir when he came up the aisle, and t
after looking at me, voiced aloud the amazement
which was written upon his face
162

SECOND SOUTHERN CAMPAIGN AND GOSPEL AUTO WORK
"Why, Lawd a' massy! If dar ain't de berry
woman what de Lawd showed me in ma' vision!
She hab on de berry same dress her hair am
combed de berry same way! Yes, dat's de berry
woman de Lawd showed me in ma' vision." He
later explained to us that the Lord had given
him a vision, some weeks previous, of a white
sister coming, taking him by the hand, leading
him through a river of water wherein a dove came
down and rested upon him, and later leading him
into the presence of the Lord.
It was impossible to keep the white people
away. So for the first time in the Island the
white and colored attended the same place of
worship and glorified the same Lord side by side.
We arranged seats for the white people at the
sides, reserving the center for the colored people,
but so interested became the people in the meetings
that reserve was a thing unknown.
The message of the Holy Ghost is new to the
dear ones here, some had not heard at all of the
Holy Spirit and only one colored sister knew that
He had come as a tangible Comforter.
Seven of the most spiritual of the colored workers and preachers have received the baptism of
the Holy Spirit during the last four days.

We are not keeping count of the numbers of all
that are being saved and getting through to God,
but the names are recorded in the Lamb's book of
life.
The poor and despised are having the gospel
preached unto them, and God is honoring His own
Word, preached in simplicity, but in demonstration and power with signs following.
Wonderful visions are seen by many receiving
the Holy Spirit. A sister saw a vision of the coming of the Lord, just after she had received the
baptism. Leaping to her feet she cried aloud:
163

THIS IS THAT
"O, don't you see Him ? Look ! Jesus is coining !
I see a beautiful star rising over the mountains
and hills. Jesus is in the center of the star. O,
see, he is bursting forth in glory and might ! Jesus !
Jesus ! ! JESUS ! ! !
Another sister coming for salvation, screamed
till she could be heard far away, and the people
came running:
"Lord, be merciful to me, a sinner!"
Soon she sprang to her feet, dancing and clapping her hands, her face illuminated with the joy
of salvation.
A colored preached seeking the baptism with no
one near him, fell prostrate and in a few moments
was speaking with tongues and glorifying God.
Suddenly his face convulsed as though in agony,
and the Lord took him through the crucifixion
scene. He described the death and love of Jesus,
the blood trickling from His wounds.

A boy fourteen years old, was gloriously saved,
and night after night, pleads and exhorts in the
most remarkable manner; many break down and
weep all over the tabernacle.
We had expected to close here last night (Sunday, March 10th), but all begged for the meetings
to continue till enough could receive the Spirit
to open a Pentecostal Mission of their own.
My strength has been holding out in a remarkable way, through this strenuous winter, but at
present I am very weak in body, and have to hang
on to God for strength for each meeting. Please
pray for me, saints, that I do not fail God. Souls
are coming home to Jesus. All around are thousands of hungry souls. The harvest is great,
the laborers few. As Brother McPherson is away
again, I am alone, playing, leading, singing,
preaching, and praying at the altar, besides having
the Bridal Call to prepare, it is the only power
of God that can sustain me. It is still a marvel
164

SECOND SOUTHERN CAMPAIGN AND GOSPEL AUTO WORK
in my eyes, the wonderful way the Lord helped me
while left alone at Key West, to drive stakes, tie
heavy guy ropes, and battle to keep the tent up,
amidst wind and rain, sometimes preaching all day
and sitting up the greater portion of the night to
watch the tents and keep driving the stakes in with
the big sledge-hammer, as fast as the wind pulled
them out, through the night watches, while a three
day nor'wester was on.
The wind died down and the meeting closed in
triumphant success. The Lord sent a brother
to help me take down the big tabernacle, and two
colored sisters to assist me in taking apart some

two hundred big long benches, pulling the nails
and piling the lumber under the blazing sun,
rolling the great strips of canvas, getting them into
their bags and shipping them to the next place.
Truly He gives His people supernatural strength
when they are in the center of His will.
The farewell scene at the depot is a pleasant
memory. The station platform was well-filled with
both white and colored saints who had got up early
to say a. last good bye, bringing little offerings to
help us with our fare, and wave us on our way.
Dozens came up and gripped my hand as I stood
on the steps of the train, telling how they had been
blessed in the meeting.
It was just at the time of my departure from
Key West that my dear Mother, with Roberta
(whom she had been caring for), joined me. She
had told me, when I entered the work, that if ever
I needed her help, no matter what it was, she
would give it, and now I did need her help as
never before. Being left alone so much, with the
care of the tents, meetings, and an ever-growing
correspondence which really needed the entire time
of one person, the Bridal Call subscription lists,
shipping of freight, arrangement of new meetings,
my strength was giving way.
165

THIS IS THAT
Sister N (who assisted in duties about the
tent) and myself were alone at night in the big:
court yard, with drunken men and soldiers, reeling
by the tents until all hours of the morning. God
marvelously protected and cared for us insomuch
that no one came near or molested us in any way.
I was strongly impressed, however, to telegraph
for my Mother to come to my assistance, not only

because I needed the protection of a mother's
presence, but to take hold of the business end of
the work, and now, in answer to prayer and the
appeal of the telegrams, here she was, sitting by
my side as the train sped across the long bridges
which spanned the ocean from island to island for
the hundred miles back to the coast of Florida.
Mother has been with me from that day up to
the time of the present writing. She has never
shirked a duty nor one of the responsibilities laid
upon her by the work, lifting from my shoulders
the entire burden of the correspondence, caring
for the long lists of Bridal Call subscriptions,
overseeing the care of the children, packing, travelling, and a score of other duties, and I have been
left free to give myself continually to prayer, the
ministry of the Word, and writing. She has ever
been a source of cheer and inspiration. How wonderful that she received the call first that through
her call I was brought into the work and that
the second time, through my call, she was brought
into the work again.
After a short meeting amongst the colored people
of West Palm Beach, and the colored camp meeting at Miami, we shipped our tents to Orlando,
Fla., and journeyed thither ourselves in our Gospel Auto, distributing tracts and witnessing for
Jesus all the way up the coast.

166

SECOND SOUTHERN CAMPAIGN AND GOSPEL AUTO WORK
ORLANDO TENT MEETINGS.
Our freight was delayed by an embargo, and
our time limited, having only a little over two
weeks before we must journey northward to pre-

pare for the Nation Wide Camp Meeting in Philadelphia, Pa.
Inquiring of the Lord, as we drove along Main
Street in our car, I saw a large, brown tent which
would seat at least five hundred people more than
our own tabernacle would hold. Inside we found
a fine floor, formerly used as a skating rink. The
Lord touched the owner's heart to rent us the tent
at a small cost for our series of meetings. This
was the first time the holding up of our freight
had delayed a camp meeting, and Father had a
better tent all up, empty and waiting for us, floor
and all.
People warned us that Orlando was aristocratic,
we need not expect them to come to a tent meeting, but we were sure God had not made a mistake
in sending us, so we went to work. Notices were
put in the papers, seats engaged, hand bills gotten
out and meetings opened. So persistently did we
advertise by hand bills, by numerous street meetings, driving up and down the streets, inviting
people to come to the tent and hear more about it,
that it is to be doubted whether there was anyone
within a radius of several miles but what knew
that there was a tent meeting in progress in
Orlando.
At first many merely lined up their cars in the
streets around the tent and listened at a dignified
distance, but soon the fire began to fall, and the
ice began to melt, and leaving their cars they
entered the tent and many, praise God, came to
the altar.
The crowds increased daily in numbers and interest. Six came to the altar for salvation the
first meeting, and there was not a meeting but
167

THIS IS THAT
sinners were saved and believers baptized with the
Spirit, night after night the long altar bench was
filled and so were hungry hearts.
Never were we treated with more love and respect, each seemed to vie with the other to help
and encourage us. First, (our small living tents
not having arrived), a cottage by the lake, with
a garage, was put at our disposal free of charge
during our stay. The best bakery in town sent
their delivery wagon, with such great baskets of
bread, pies, cake and cookies, that we had enough
to share with our people.
People who owned orange groves brought us
fruit by the bushel. The grocer sent boxes packed
to the brim with canned goods and vegetables,
flour and sugar. People came to our door to
tell us of the blessing they had received in the
meetings. Oh, it means so much to be in the
center of God's divine will. He will open doors
and close doors, overthrow the mighty and make
your enemies to be at peace with you. Bless the
Lord.
The tent, with a seating capacity of nearly fifteen hundred, was filled to overflowing, rows of
automobiles, and other vehicles lined the street.
Ministers and workers from various churches attended; some declared that this was the long-lost
power their churches used to have. Others scoffed
in derision.
Altogether the devil was afraid he was going to
lose some of his people. So he had one lady who
lived several blocks from the tent go to the police
and protest that she could not sleep at night. The
next evening a policeman brought a paper to the
tent, stating that we must close our meeting at
ten o'clock. Toward the end of my sermon I held
a watch in my hand and kept looking at it as I
spoke. I talked fast as I could, and at five minutes

to ten told the people I knew they were hungry
168

SECOND SOUTHERN CAMPAIGN AND GOSPEL AUTO WORK
and would like to come to the altar, and that
there were souls there that should be saved, but
that a lady had complained of the noise, therefore we would all rise and be dismissed, and please
not to stand or walk but to go out as quickly and
quietly as possible.
Will I ever forget the look on those people's
faces! Some of them almost owned the town,
and for them to be told they had to close a meeting at ten o'clock some of the men snorted at the
very thought, and on the way out said :
"We'll see about this !"
"The idea! This place was open as a skating
rink for months and was kept open until midnight.
Now the Gospel's being preached they want to
close it at ten o'clock, eh?"
"The Mayor's a friend of mine. I will see about
that. Don't you be afraid, little woman. This
thing will be all straightened out by tomomnv
night."
Neighbors came up; people who had, up to this
time, kept at arm's length and not been quite sure
whether they approved of us or not, hesitated no
longer, but were our warm friends from that
time on.
True to their word they got together in groups
on the streets talking it over. Next day a ladv
who was the owner of a large boarding house, went
about the neighborhood and had a petition signed
that this order should be cancelled, declaring that

the noise did not bother them. This clipping appeared on the front page of one of the Orlando
papers next day :
MRS. ROONEY AIDS CHURCH.
"Mrs. Bettie Rooney deserves the thanks of all lovers of
religious liberty for coming to the rescue and aid of Mrs.
McPherson, who is conducting a series of meetings in the
big tent.
"It seems that some one, whom Mrs. Rooney claimed lived
at a distance, had the city officers close the meeting at an
169

IS THAtf
early hour on account of the noise of the speaking and singing interfering with their sleep, when Mrs. Rooney, good
Christian woman that she is, immediately secured a petition
with the names of twenty-five citizens living right near the
gospel meetings, who protested to the Mayor against having
the meetings broken up at so early an hour, which of course
was acted on favorably, and the disgruntled ones will have to
find something else to bring against the meeting.
"The only real charge against the meeting is that they
preach the old fashioned GOSPEL, straight from the shoulder,
and it makes some of the hifalutin frock-tails, who orate in
the pulpit to swell congregations, who look through one eyeglass and wear silk tomfooleries, envious because of empty
benches prevailing.
"It would do some preachers good to get religion and pass
it on as these people are doing."
Immediately the order was cancelled and the
meetings went on, oft-times till midnight.
A young lady who came with a group of others
from fashionable families, full of unbelief, was

startled and thoroughly convinced when one night
the Lord put His power down upon me and gave
a message in tongues in the Spanish language, of
which I knew not a word. Here is her testimony :
"I was very much impressed at one of the tent
meetings, to hear Mrs. McPherson speak in Spanish, and directly afterwards to give exactly the
same message in English. She was not conscious
of speaking in Spanish. When told later of it she
was quite surprised and said she did not know a
word of Spanish. I also heard her talk in other
languages with which I was not acquainted.
ANNIE L. TREADWELL."
When it came time to close the meetings and to
move on toward Virginia and Pennsylvania, the
town wherein we were told the people were proud
and would pay no attention to us, turned out
enmasse to the closing meeting. One of the cftfzens made a speech in behalf of their townsmen,
thanking us for our labors of love amongst them,
inviting us to come back, saying that they would
do all in our power to assist us. A sum of
money was presented to help with the expenses
of the northward journey.
170

CHAPTER XVII.
MEETINGS IN VIRGINIA AND
GOSPEL AUTO NEWS.
"Let her glean even among the sheaves, and reproach her
not. And let fall also some of the handfuls of purpose for
her, that she may glean them, and rebuke her not.
So she gleaned in the field until even, and beat out that
she had gleaned." Ruth 2:15, 16, 17.

IT WAS late at night when we neared the state
of Virginia, after reaching which we would
still have a couple of hundred miles to journey. We all expressed the desire to press on
and spend the night on good old Virginia soil. We
had heard of the warm hearts of the Virginia people
and wondered whether it was really true. Crossing
the border we entered a sleeping little town and
drew up under the trees by the side of the road to
open out our automobile bed and erect our tent covering for the night.
Waking early and peeping out from under the
protecting curtains to get our first daylight view of
the place, we were surprised to find two houses
near us, one just across the street, the other a little,
to our right. A man and his wife standing on the
piazza of the former were looking toward us talking earnestly, no doubt wondering who we were.
Preparing to continue our journey, we had just
finished our roadside toilet, when the man came
hurrying across with a silver tray, with a large
glass bowl brim full of ripe, crimsoned strawberries, a pitcher of thick cream and a bowl of
powdered sugar. Then a little girl came running
from the other house with a pan of hot steaming
biscuits and a quart of fresh milk from the jersey
171

THIS IS THAT
cow in the field, neither knew what the other had
done. This was our first experience of the farfamed Virginian hospitality.
PULASKI, VA.
PREACHING ON THE COURT HOUSE STEPS.
We were entertained in the beautiful home of

Brother Z. Cecil during our ten days' meeting in
the town. In order to reach as many people as
possible with the message in the shortest time, it
was decided to hold daily street meetings in addition to the regular meetings in the Pentecostal
Holiness Church. When Brother Cecil went to
ask the town officials for permission to preach on
the street, they kindly invited us to come in and
make use of the court house steps and spacious
lawn.
The first night we went in a pouring rain and
preached, feeling that time is too short to stop for
a little rain. A large crowd gathered and the
power fell. Nightly the crowd increased until it
was a mass meeting and autos packed both sides
of the street. It was a beautiful sight as we
preached in God's big out-doors, and the people
sat on the grassy lawn around this spacious
building.
It was an unprecedented sight to see the power
falling in such a place as the saints sang and
danced upon the court house steps and down on
the pavement. Hearts were touched and tears
ran down the people's faces, and crowds followed
to the meetings,
IN THE PENTECOSTAL HOLINESS CHURCH.
The church was unable to hold the crowds who
stood all about the yards and street, trying to hear
and see. Several who had been seeking the baptism
of the Holy Spirit for years received, new convert*
just saved also rejoiced in receiving the Comforter.
172

MEETING IN VIRGINIA AND GOSPEL AUTO NEWS
TWO MISSIONS CONVINCED OF BIBLE EVIDENCE.
After the close of the services we had decided

to take two days 7 rest, but the call came to hold
some meetings at the colored church. There God
led along the line of the Bible evidence of the
baptism and made it so plain from His Word that
all doubts were swept away, and those who had
been conscientiously standing afar off rose to their
feet asking the people to forgive them, and stated
that they now saw the light, and come what
might, would never compromise again.
The leader of another mission invited us to come
to his place next night, saying :
"Sister, through that sermon tonight I am convinced that the speaking in other tongues as the
Spirit gives utterance is the Bible sign that invariably accompanies the incoming of the Spirit, and I
have accepted the light. Come and preach to my
congregation that they, too, may receive." The
following night found his assembly packed to th?
doors long before starting time, and God worked
and honored His Word. Hallelujah !
The big-hearted people of this town opened their
hearts and pocketbooks and our needs and traveling expenses were more than supplied.
KOANOKE, VIRGINIA.
Before leaving Pulaski, the Pastor from the
Pentecostal Holiness Church of Eoanoke called
upon us asking us to come to his church. The
saints desired the meeting should be held in a tent,
but the pastor insisted and on our arrival in
Eoanoke, we drew up finally at the parsonage
where our entertainment had been arranged. We
saw a gentleman seated upon the piazza and noticed
that his face looked dark and forbidding, and that
he did not welcome us in any way. Even when
173

THIS IS THAT
seated later with the pastor and his wife upon
the piazza, and he had been introduced as "Brother
So and So," he did not say a single "Hallelujah"
or "God bless you."
The first meeting was held in the church. The
Lord gave me the Wisdom not to go into the pulpit
or even on the platform, so I stood quietly in the
front and delivered my message upon the coming
of the Lord, and the preparation of the Bride to
meet Him. Fervent "Amens" came from the audience and tears filled many eyes.
This brother, who sat on the front seat, never
looked up, but had the same dark, thunder-cloud
look of sarcasm and displeasure upon his face.
When I had taken my seat he rose and gave a,
discourse, which was fully as long as that of
mine. Someone whispered :
"He is the state superintendent. He has heard
about this meeting and come down to stop it."
I cannot repeat his discourse in words, but
the substance of it was that if an angel came down
from heaven and preached any other doctrine than
that which was set forth in the rules and regulations of their church they were not to believe it;
that the message of tonight was all very well, but
that he had heard that Sister McPherson taught
actual transgressions and inbred sin were all taken
out at one time, when we entered the fountain of
blood. He said :
"We have the rules and regulations of our
church to uphold. Take away our strong teaching
of sanctification as a second definite work of grace
and you will destroy the foundations and the pillars upon which our church is built."
The audience sat with their faces a mixture of
misery and pity, but I was praising the Lord and

saying :
"Oh, thank you, Jesus," as He poured the
blessings into my soul.
174

MEETING IN VIRGINIA AND GOSPEL AUTO NEWS
When the dear man had finished speaking I rose
and said that it would not be courtesy for me to
make any reply in their church; that I had come
there under their urgent invitation and would be
willing and happy to preach outside, from the
Gospel car, or on a vacant lot, anywhere that the
saints arranged for me.
I told them that I believed in the finished work
of Calvary, believed that sin is sin whether it is
actual transgressions, Adamic sin or inbred sin,
whatever fancy name you give it, sin is sin; that
while man looks on the outward appearance (socalled actual transgressions) God looks on the
heart, (inbred sin) and as for holiness, why, without holiness no man shall see the Lord. We must
be saved, must be sanctified, but 'tis all through
the precious atoning blood of Jesus Christ. "The
blood of Jesus Christ, God's Son, cleanses us from
ALL sin."
Several leaped to their feet and said they would
get a place outside at once. (Both ministers said
"No, stay on for the time of the meetings in th<?
church. 57 ) The Lord gave many the witness and
the meetings being announced for Sunday, they
started out to search for land.
Lots some distance from the church and on the
main streets were traced up, but it was impossible
to secure them. Every other place was blocked
except the lot of land just opposite the Pentecostal
Holiness Church. This was given free of charge.

(How those precious saints worked all that
Saturday ! )
No tent being available, two great strips of canvass were secured and stretched over as large a
space as possible. Three assemblies loaned their
seats, lumber was hurried to the spot and a platform ;erected.
Each contributed something towards the erection of the hurried meeting place. One brother
175

THIS IS THAT
gave the electric light wires and fixtures; and
though 'twas late Saturday noon the electric company sent out a special car and installed a meter.
A Sister loaned her lovely piano for these out-ofdoor meetings, told us we were "welcome to the
whole house" and paid the drayage on the piano
for us. O, for more such consecrated people!
Thousands stood for hours packed all about the
tent after every available seat was taken, altar
filled, the saints sitting about the floor of the platform till it was almost impossible for me to move
about without stepping on someone.
Men were saved, Hallelujah ! Sick were healed.
Two ministers who had been fighting the outpouring of the Spirit, said :
"We will fight you no longer/ 7 and came to the
altar.
Street meetings were held every night on the
busiest corner from our Gospel car, and the city
was stirred. People wept as they stood about the
car. A dear man came with the tears rolling down

his face and kneeled at the running-board of the
car as Brother Dougherty (who arranged all
the meetings) prayed with him as he wept his way
through to Calvary.
SALEM ASSEMBLY COMES TO OUR HELP.
Whilst holding an afternoon meeting in Salem
the Pastor of the Salem Church decided to close
its door during the balance of the meetings, and
with his wife and daughters and flock to come to
our assistance. They brought with them their
musical instruments, and took charge of the music
and were a blessing to all.
When it was time to close the meetings, many
business people and Christian workers offered tc>
rent the big auditorium, seating thousands of
people, if we would stay another week. We had
promised Viola, Del., however, and closed on the
176

MEETING IN VIRGINIA AND GOSPEL AUTO NEWS
Sunday night with thousands of people hungering
after God, the long altar benches were filled and
refilled.
Virginia is a wonderful field; we trust that we
may again visit this beautiful state with its mountains and valleys, and hospitable homes.
GOSPEL AUTO NEWS (July, 1918.)
"Never did valiant warrior return with a more
conquering tread, or more loyal heart throbbing
within, nor more deserving of this public tribute
than our faithful 'Pentecostal Gospel Car'."
From the northernmost town in Maine, by the
Canadian border to the southernmost city in the

entire United States of America, undaunted by
mountain or valley, it has steadily and safely carried not only the messengers but the message, and
has been indeed and in truth a Flaming Evangel,
declaring in letters of gold, that gleam oft-times
into the amazed eyes of the onlookers with a.s
startling an effect as did the handwriting on the
wall in Belshazzar's palace long ago.
Thousands of persons and vehicles have streamed
by the side of the Gospel Car, but free from the
man-fearing spirit, and impervious to criticism,
instant in season and out of season, the Gospel Car
has never hidden its light beneath the bushel,
whether the gay bridal party dashed by with lilt
of laughter and fragrant orange blossoms, or
whether funeral procession, with sombre-plumed
hearse, and black-garbed mourners, whether the
dancing children rollicked by, or the aged man
feebly leaning on his cane, it has solemnly inquired of one and all, "Where will you spend
eternity?" declaring that "Judgment day is coming," and exhorting them to "Get Right With
God."
Often, as we slow up amidst dense city traffic,
177

THIS IS THAT
it would seem to one uninitiated in Gospel Auto
life as though many of the usually sedate pedestrians on the sidewalk, heretofore quietly pursuing
their daily routine, had suddenly and involuntarily
been transformed into fiery street preachers, who,
startled out of themselves, demanded from one
and all, in tones Avhich electrify their fellow citizens, "Where will you spend eternity?" Those
within hearing distance of the voice look up aghast
into the speaker's gaze, they themselves see the car
and take up the great question, "\Yhere?''

Sometimes when we leave the car on some errand, we find on returning that a crowd has gathered about the faithful car w^hich is holding its
own street meeting and preaching all by itself;
and who can say with what results for eternity?
No member of our party takes a more active part
or renders more efficient and obedient service in
every branch of the service than does the Gospel
Car. Are there a thousand tracts to be distributed through the byways and hedges, or placed
in the B. F. D. boxes? The Gospel Car is ready.
Is there a street meeting to be held? There is one
preacher that can always be depended upon
Gospel Car.
Is there a pulpit needed? Down goes the top
and here is the car for a pulpit. Is there a stand
\ieeded? The windshield opens to hold Bible and
song book. An altar needed where the penitent
may weep his way to Calvary? The running-board
does good service, ever ready to receive the copious
tears of seeker and worker as they kneel together.
Is there an aged couple, or a mother who has
stood long hours to listen with babe in arms, to
be taken home? The Gospel car is ready. A
heavy burden to be carried? an errand to be run?
street megaphone messages to be resounded? The
Gospel Car is ready. Is there -need of a table upon
which to spread the modest evening meal prepared
178

MEETING IN VIRGINIA AND GOSPEL AUTO NEWS
on the campfire by the way? dishes, or a can of
food needed? The Gospel Car supplies the need.
Is there a need of bed and bedding for the weary
traveler? The Gospel Car carries one folding bed
upon its running-board, and another is formed by

the front seat, which gently lays back upon its
hinges, uniting front and back seats into a comparatively comfortable bed. When prayers an.d
(good-nights) have been said by the flickering^ of
the campfire, the Gospel Car affords protection and
rest under the whispering pines. When the editor,
hardpressed on every hand, seeks quiet and rest
with Bible or typewriter, it is the Gospel Car
that bears her away to some quiet spot apart from

the throng.

THE DYING BRIDE.

Meetings over, the last lights extinguished in the
camp, are the duties of the Gospel Car ended'?
May she rest? No ! Quick footsteps and an urgent
message implores us to come at once to the dying
bed of a young bride, who, but a few hours previous, had listened to our message and had later
been suddenly stricken and was passing away. It
is miles away, on a dark and perilous country
road. How can we get there in time? The Gospel Car is ready, and speeds a swift messenger of
mercy, never pausing until she stands by the
humble cottage door, where the midnight lights
and shadowy forms bespeak the presence of the
death angel, whose pinions are even now spread
to bear away the slender form of the fair young
bride.
Through the hours of waiting, wherein the dying and living alike clung to our hands and words
for strength and consolation, until the last goodbye was spoken and the sweet voice trailed off into
silence with the words: "Meet me in heaven!" and
the last breath fluttered gently away; and on

179

THIS IS THAT
through the hours of morning, while the sorrowing
parents were comforted, and the hovering angels
rejoiced as the young husband kneeled by the still
form of his loved one and gave his heart to Jesus,
the Gospel Car stood silently beneath the dews of
the light, gleaming softly in the starlight exhorting
each neighbor as they reverently left the house
with uncovered heads, to remember that for them,
too, the "Judgment day is coming: get right with
God."
And when again the Gospel Car had brought me
back to the home, this time to preach the funeral
sermon, as I looked into the sweet face now reposing in the white, flower-wreathed casket, I could
catch the echo of her Avords as she smiled into my
face and said:
"Sister McPherson, I'm glad you are here, and
I'll meet you in Heaven. "
Then on behind the sure-footed horses that drew
the hearse and carriages over stony mountain
passes (considered too difficult for the other cars)
and hills so steep that the nose of the car pointed
heavenward, with a sheer cliff above and a precipice yawning beneath; then down into valleys
where we found swollen mountain streams, where
the water came over the running-board of the
car till someone cried out:
"Surely we can go no further!" But NO, the
Gospel Car, with a determined roar from her engines and a quick shift of her gears, emerged from
her plunge dripping, panting, but triumphant.
When the little form had been laid at rest beneath the pines on the mountain to'p, in the sure

and certain hope of a glorious resurrection in that
land where tears are wiped away, the Gospel Car,
having surmounted all difficulties (sometimes axledeep in mud, again over jagged rocks which cruelly
gashed its tires, tested and threatened on every
hand), through it all kept up on the return trip
180

MEETING IN VIRGINIA AND GOSPEL AUTO NEWS
till we reached our destination and her work was
done, then with a long, expiring sigh, one tired tire
sank slowly to the ground. Nevertheless (bathe
and rub it as we will), like all other true warriors
of steel, the Gospel Car bears its honorable scars
of battle, without which no hero is truly decorated.
Gazing upon mark scar of battle, we recall with
joyous hearts each scene these scars portray.
Through the many miles of travel the engine has
never given us one moment's trouble, yet many
a time tires have been patched and repatched,
mended and reinforced until a cheery letter accompanied by a donation meets the pressing need, specifying that this offering was for Gospel Auto
Work.
LIVES SAVED BY THE GOSPEL CAR.
"Dear Sister McPherson:
"Praise God for sending you and your Gospel
Car to our town; if you had not come here, my
brother, his wife and sister-in-law would probably
have been blown into hell, as my brother had resolved to shoot both them and himself; but while
he was on the piazza he saw God's car go by, and
he read: 'Where will y-o-u spend eternity?' It
held and gripped him. He went in and told his
wife (a very wicked woman a saloon-keeper's
daughter). She Too-poohed !' and hardened her

heart, although she knew him to be desperate.
Only a very short time before they found him in
the cellar basement, gas turned on at two o'clock
in the morning, unconscious; in five minutes more
would have been past all earthly help, the doctor
said.
"My brother was wonderfully convicted and has
since been saved, and is now seeking the baptism
of the Holy Spirit. It pays to pray. After fiftyfive years of prayer by Mother, he has at last
yielded to God. Bless His Name !" c. A. s.
181

THIS IS THAT
VIOLA, DELAWARE
We were obliged to drive night and day to make
our appointment in time. We found the saints full
of faith and good works, and the meetings throughout were at a time of spiritual quickening and upbuilding. The building was crowded as never before with an earnest throng, listening eagerly to
the unfolding of the divine plan of the ages for the
salvation of mankind, and the conviction was
great; one Catholic brother ran from the building,
declaring he would have to go to the altar if he
remained longer.
The meeting over, we started for Philadelphia
and New York, driving all night, reaching Philadelphia before dawn. We did not pause, but
pressed on to Atlantic Beach, where we rested on
the sand for an hour, contemplating the greatness
of the handiwork of God. Again pressing on to
Long Branch to meet some of the dear saints and
thence to New York, before we slept.

182

CHAPTER XVIII.
NATION WIDE CAMP, PHILADELPHIA.
"It came even to pass, as the trumpeters and singers as
one, to make one sound to be heard in praising and thanking
the Lord . . . that then the house was filled with a cloud,
even the house of the Lord, so that the priests could not stand
to minister by reason of the cloud for the glory of the Lord
had filled the house." II Chron..5:13, 14.
In the Fall of 1917, when we were passing
through Philadelphia en route for Florida, it was
our privilege to spend two days with the dear
saints there and to attend meetings then being
held in a large tent. The Lord graciously poured
out His Spirit upon one and all, and when scores
of saints begged us to come back for a series of
meetings, the Lord witnessed in our hearts that
this was of Him, and after much prayer and correspondence, a Nation Wide Camp Meeting was
planned. Father told me to pray earnestly for
money to buy a big Tabernacle tent which would
be large enough to accommodate the people. A
notice was inserted in the Bridal Call. Friends
rallied and offerings came.
The problem was: Where was the tent? The
government had commandeered the large tent-making concerns, and even though the Lord assured us
that He had the right tent for us, and would deliver on time, I confess that we were anxious as
the date for the Nation Wide Camp Meeting approached.
Each time I went to the Lord He would say :
"It is all right. You shall have your tent," but
in the meantime my letters here and there to dif-

183

THIS IS THAT
ferent people brought no hopes. The only tent that
would at all fit my requirements was in New York
City and was held at thirty-five hundred dollars,
and this was out of the question. Sometimes the
enemy would whisper :
"You have taken people's money for the tent,
suppose you don't get that big tent, what are you
going to say to them?" But Jesus said:
"Let not your heart be troubled."
After two years' experience, I had my own
ideas of the kind of tent I wanted, its size,
shape, seating capacity, texture, and make: One
that would shed the rain, be mildew-proof, well
roped and guyed, arranged with block-and-tackle
system of lowering and raising. Where could such
a tent be purchased?
When we arrived in the city of our summer's,
work, there was the very tent of my dreams and
prayers, in an attic store-room of a downtown
building, all tied up in bags, poles and stakes
complete, ready for erection. Hallelujah! We
went to look at it, climbed the stairs, and as we
mounted towards the sky, our hearts mounted also
as the tent was described to us, its size and
material, ten ounce, U. S. Army duck, double fill
and double twist, double stitched, splendid ropes,
block and tackle, etc., which had never been
erected, worth twenty-five hundred dollars today,
and could be had at eighteen hundred cash, but I
felt that fifteen hundred dollars was all the Lord
wanted us to pay for that tent; and although at
first they \vould not accept this, as the man stood
in the door and read the sign, "Judgment day is
coming, get right with God," his face became

thoughtful and he said he would let us know later,
and of course Father opened the way.
This tent had been ordered and built for an evangelist whom God was using blessedly in His service. When the baptism of the Holy Spirit was
184

NATION WIDE CAMP, PHILADELPHIA.
preached, this evangelist refused the light, took
a stand against the outpouring of the Spirit, and
he became very ill for months.
The tent, which God meant for Pentecost, remained brand new in its bags at the tent-maker's
office, with the instructions that it was to be sold
only for religious purposes. The news came that
we could have it for fifteen hundred dollars,
and it was soon up and packed, with throngs of
people surrounding it drinking in the message of
salvation through the precious blood, the baptism
of the Holy Spirit, and the soon coming of Jesus.
Had this tent been purchased in any other city
it is very improbable that we would have been
able to have had it shipped because of the embargo
which at that time paralyzed freight all over the
country. And even if it could have been shipped
it would have been necessary to have had it sent
by express as the time was so short and the delivery charges would have been enormous, so our
heavenly Father planned it all out and had the
tent right in the very city where the meeting was
to be held.
GLORY OF GOD IN CITY OF TENTS.
The beautiful camp grounds were situated on
a hill, near the river, and were sheltered by high
shade trees. Bows and rows of small tents were

erected in squares around the great new Gospel
Tent with its snow white canvas.
The dining tents, dormitories, reading and rest
tents were erected and soon the grounds assumed
the appearance of a well-ordered camp. The leaders themselves rolled up their sleeves and helped
Avith a good will for the future comfort of others.
Heavy trucks were rolling up with great loads of
cots, beds, seats, dishes, camp equipment, but
'midst all the bustle and the preparation brothers
and sisters alike found time to shout and praise
185

THIS IS THAT

God. The trees echoed with the hallelujahs of the
saints. As the newcomers arrived they in turn
rolled up their sleeves and went to work. Even the
night before the camp meeting opened the glory
of God seemed to rest down upon the place as we
gathered around the big bonfire to play and sing
and worship the Lord for what He was about to
do in our midst.
Note: (The following is a report which appeared in the
September number of the Bridal Call, 1918.)
The picture of hundreds of saints standing upon
their feet with hands lifted toward Heaven, eyes
closed, and their upturned faces streaming with
tears as they sing, as it were, a new song, and
heavenly anthems voiced by the Holy Spirit
through their lips in wondrous harmonic chords
of love and thanksgiving, is a never-to-be-forgotten
sight, and resembles much the conception that I
have always had of what it must be to be in
Heaven before the throne of the Most High God.

Oh, if you could but hear them pray, pray as
never I have heard people pray before, each one
forgetting their neighbor, forgetting all else but
the Lord who answers prayer; praying out aloud
with all their might, hundreds of them at one
time, till no one voice can be distinguished in
the midst, for they are all blended in one mighty
heart throb of love and desire for God to have His
way, which quickly turns into -adoration, and
flows forth as a river of praise straight to the
throne of God. Needless to say, the answer usually comes before the prayer is finished.
The camp presents a very stirring and inspiring
scene every night. After supper in the dining tent;
the people move out to prepare for the evening
meeting. It is a common sight to see a little group
of two or three people kneeling down in the paths,
or under the trees, to present to God anything that
might be upon their hearts. Then as the evening
186

NATION WIDE CAMP, PHILADELPHIA.
shadows lengthen, lights are turned on in the great
Tabernacle Tent, and. the saints soon fill the shining interior. Soon the night air resounds with the
songs and the praise of hearts filled to overflowing
with the love of God. After meeting it is not an
uncommon thing to hear voices in supplication and
praise continued on in the tents.
The night preceding this writing witnessed a
scene that melted many a heart. One end of the
large ladies' dormitory tent was given over to a
children's meeting, and there the little tots were
used in a wonderful way by the Spirit. Many a
little one glorified God, speaking in other tongues.
A number of parents were there and their hearts
just welled with feeling as the Holy Spirit worked
upon the children. It was a meeting never to be

forgotten.
GOD LOCKS THE LION^S MOUTHS.
When the city of tents was first erected on this
beautiful hill, where earth and Heaven seem to
meet, we found that we were in a neighborhood
which was seventy-five per cent Roman Catholic,
with institutions and colleges near-by. Gangs of
boys patrolled the grounds day and night, keeping
watch on everything and everybody, feeling great
resentment at our invasion of the hill, which had
been their special property since they could first
remember. Then when the meetings opened and
the power of God began to fall, and there was
shouting, dancing and many prostrated, the whole
community was stirred to its depths. They had
never seen it after that fashion before.
The next night an enormous crowd filled th
tent and stood all around the outside. Every time
that there would be a manifestation of the Spirit,
they would burst forth into peals of laughter,
ridiculing and mocking. As an altar service was
attempted, the hoodlums thronged into the tent
187

THIS IS THAT
in a body, standing over the seekers, mocking and
jeering. The second Monday, night arrived with
the worst crowd that we had seen up to this time.
It seemed as if the people were wild with anger, and
many came with clubs and cudgels in their hands.
There were organized gangs with leaders, carrying
whistles, who gave signals to their men. Detectives
afterwards told us that it had been a pre-arranged
program to wipe every tent off the ground that
night, and open threats had been made to this end.
The devil had carefully laid his plans. A riot*

took place down in the center of the city that
night between the white and colored; there were
no policemen available to keep order at the camp
meeting grounds. Back and forth, to and fro, the
mob surged about the tents. Speaking was impossible, and all we could do was to sing and hang on
to God. "Rock of Ages, Cleft for Me," "Nearer.
My God, to Thee," "It is Well for My Soul,"
"Jesus, O How Sweet the Name," were among the
many hymns sung by the saints, as we all kept in
the spirit of prayer.
The meeting was dismissed early, without any
altar service. The crowd surged through the tent
and over the grounds, like a hive of hornets. One
policeman finally came on the grounds, but he was
unable to cope with the situation.
The Lord seemed to lay it on me to call an all
night of prayer, to settle this matter once and for
all. The saints readily agreed and gathered about
me. We began to pray one after another for the
salvation of these boys and men. We prayed for
a revival ; prayed for God to have His way.
From this time on there has been no trouble of
any kind with the outside people. The opposition
has melted away like snow before the summer sunshine.
This outside trouble brought us the support of
the different clergymen. One Baptist preacher
188

NATION WIDE CAMP, PHILADELPHIA.
stood on the platform and gave his word that he
would stand by us until the end. Another clergy ;
man of the Episcopal church said that he had told
his boys to be in good behavior, and that if they
felt a desire to go forward for salvation, to do so.

Church members, class leaders, and ministers
flock to us, and many have received the Holy Ghost
since the beginning of these meetings.
We also find there is a large number who
have no church home whatever, and many who
have never been to church. These are a surprised
and interested body of people upon whom God is
also moving mightily. Our former enemies as
well as our friends, are now asking for our literature, and great numbers of tracts and booklets are
being given away.
The policemen who are used to handling large
crowds, told us that there were between eight
and ten thousand people on the grounds Sunday
night, and I have never witnessed better order.
Two young ladies who came to mock, and said
it was a shame to keep people lying under the
power as we did, suddenly began to weep, crying
loudly for salvation, and inside of fifteen minutes
were on their backs under the power, speaking in
tongues and praising God. Another young lady
came to mock, and after the altar call had been
given some time, she was deeply under conviction
and approached the front. This power struck her
suddenly and left her prostrate on the straw in
front of the altar. She was saved, and in a very
short time began to speak in such a clear floAv of
tongues that many remarked about it, and then
she gave the interpretation and was filled with the
glory of God.
A man sprang out of the on-lookers, and demanded that his child should be given to him.
He was invited to lay his hands upon her if he
cared to take her, but fear filled his heart and
189

THIS IS THAT

he went away, declaring that he would find someone who would take her. True to his word, he
came back with the girPs aunt. She took the
child by the hand roughly, led her to a seat, where
she spoke sharply to her, and slapped her in the
face. At that instant the power of God struck the
aunt ? and sent her reeling to the floor. Who was
she that she could withstand God? The aunt left
the meeting with the hand of God upon her, supported by two of her friends, and the last that we
have heard about her is that she is very ill in bed.
A traveling salesman who witnessed the baptism of this young lady, came out with a declara ;
tion that now he had no doubt that this was the
power of God, and that he would begin seeking for
the same experience.
People of all denominations bring their sick to
be prayed for. One father brought his little child
emaciated and suffering from a weakness of the
body that did not permit of its walking. The
little one was prayed for, and when he was placed
upon his feet, the proud joy and happiness just
shone from the father's face, as the little one began
to take steps for the first time in months.
One child who was a pitiful sight to look upon,
with a terrible skin disease, and was covered with
sores, was instantly healed by the power of Jesus.
One young lady, in writing, says : "Saint Vitu^
dance and severe nervous trouble had tortured me
for many months. My face and eyes twitched so
that I was ashamed to sit in a meeting. I was
prayed for and the demon rebuked, so that I am
every whit whole no twitching, no nervous
trouble. Oh what a rest! What a relief! What
a Savior!"
One night a young Polish girl ran to the altar,
and it was but a short time when she sprang to
her feet, and with her face shining with glory,

exclaimed :
190

NATION WIDE CAMP, PHILADELPHIA.
"I am so happy, I have got it." Later she received her baptism and asked permission to talk
with her own people in their language about this
glorious Jesus she had just found. Then she
told in English the same story while the glory of
the Lord filled the tent. A woman who lived in the
neighborhood who had come to look on, fell under
the power just as she left the tent. A crowd of
onlookers quickly gathered, and her son took her
away, but the Lord had done the work, and she
exclaimed, as she was led away : "I have got it."
Sister Elizabeth Sisson, of New London, Conn.,
and Brother Cyrus B. Fockler, of Milwaukee, arrived shortly after the opening, and God has wonderfully used their messages in the meetings.
After one morning service, when nearly everyone had gone to the noon-time meal, a little girl
of twelve lay unnoticed in the straw. One brother,
however, discerned that she was giving messages
and interpreting them. He moved over to her,
and with one consent others followed, and in the,
silence that followed, she spake in tongues and
interpreted messages for nearly half an hour.
Messages of exhortation, warning and comfort,
beautiful in their construction and completeness,
flowed from her lips. She had called a meeting.
One man testified that God had given him 2
dream the night before in which the little children
were shocking the corn. Truly God is using the
little ones in this way.
Another little tot of six years, suddenly filled
with the power, began to dance in a pretty, child-

ish way. Sister McPherson, led by the Spirit,
placed the little one on the altar rail, and for
twenty minutes the little girl preached Jesus to
a multitude who had come to look upon God's
work. It was a sight never to be forgotten as
the sweet little face shone with the glory of God,
191

THIS IS THAT
and her childish voice called sinners to know this
Jesus whom she knew.
Two young ladies, one a Catholic, one a Methodist, sat scoffing, and pretending to be greatly
amused, in an endeavor to hide the real conviction that was in their hearts. Someone told me
I ought to speak to them, but all we did was pray.
They seemed to become more quiet after that, and
I had forgotten all about them until, while praying at the altar, someone came and said:
"Sister, there are two young ladies over there
who want to speak to you."
Making my way through the audience, I found
the same two girls with much changed countynances. All laughter was gone, their eyes were
red from weeping, and in response to my invitation :
"Oh, girls, don't you want to get right with
Jesus tonight? Won't you kneel down, confess
your sins, and give Him your heart?" They fell
off the chairs on their knees, and began to pray
and cry aloud:
"Lord, forgive me. God be merciful to me, a
sinner."
Being called to another part of the tent, I,
looked around for someone whom I might ask to

pray with these girls. Near to me, and looking
on was a Methodist class leader and Sunday School
Superintendent, with wiiom I had been talking but
a few moments ago, and who had come to investigate Pentecost and see whether there was anything in all this shouting and speaking in tongues.
"Brother, you come over and help pray for these
dear ones, that they may be saved," we asked.
Without hesitation they fell on their knees and
began praying for the sobbing young women.
How I wish I could make you see the sight that
met my eyes when next we returned to this side
of the tent!
192

NATION WIDE CAMP, PHILADELPHIA.
AVhile the two Methodist brothers had been
praying with their eyes shut, the power had come
down and the two young ladies had fallen prostrate under the power and were receiving the baptism of the Holy Spirit, and beginning to speak
with other tongues.
The little group, many of whom were sinners,
that stood round about the girls, were very much
impressed with the power and the vision which
the girl described, and as we sang about the precious blood which she described, even the Catholic
policeman lifted his hands and joined in the song
with us.
The Spirit impressed me to ask the Methodist
class leader to close in prayer. In his humble
prayer, he said :
"Oh, Lord, Jesus, if this is new light for me
in these last days, please reveal it to me and baptize me, for Jesus' sake, Amen."

I had just turned to go into the big tent for my
Bible, preparatory to leaving for my own tent,
when something fell with a thud and a shout to
the ground behind me, and all the people began
to run and shout. Hastening back to see what it
was, I found this same Methodist class leader lying
on his back under the power no, I should hardly
say on his back, either, for he was really just on
his head and his heels, his body raised up from
the ground by the power and his feet going round
and round.
Before we could reach him he was shouting in
tongues and praising the Lord as the Spirit gave
utterance. After a time he bounded to his feet
and went around the tent leaping and praising
God.
The next night he brought nearly a dozen from
his own church, and said that his son who was
studying to be a missionary to South America,
was going to seek the baptism.
193

THIS IS THAT
NOTES FROM REPORT BY SISTER P. BENT.
"Sunday night the crowd was greater than we
have ever seen. There must have been thousands
without exaggeration swarming the grounds. The
tent was so packed that every seat was filled;
people were in the aisles, sitting on the platform
floor, and stood several deep around the Tabernacle outside the canvas.
"Sister McPherson had a mighty message from
God, fresh from the throne, in which she gave us
a short glimpse of the Bible from cover to cover,
bringing out in great beauty and tenderness the
life and death of our dear Savior, Jesus Christ.

"The old Gospel story was not told in vain, but
again brought scores to the feet of the Redeemer.
Yes, the space between the platform and congregation was so crowded with men and women seeking
the Lord that there was hardly room to put our
two feet in any one spot at a time. O, it was
blessed to see all kinds and colors at the feet of
the same Jesus. We shall never forget that lovely
sight. What a wondrous salvation we have to offer
to this sad, sorrowing, sinful world of lost and
dissatisfied men and women.
"Monday the Spirit was so mightily demonstrated that it was impossible to preach. Several
times Brother Fockler endeavored to give out the
Word, but there was message after message in
tongues, with interpretation following. The Spirit
then fell so mightily in baptizing and anointing
that nothing so powerful had been seen since the
beginning of the Camp.
"At the evening meeting very much the same
thing was repeated, when scores had hands laid
on them for service, and went down under the
power; but previous to that Sister McPherson gave
forth one of the most convicting sermons we have
ever heard her preach. It was given to her to so
vividly show the sinner the meaning of an end194

NATION WIDE CAMP, PHILADELPHIA. i
less eternity of despair, where there would .never
again be the least gleam of hope to brighten the
darkness, that many were made to feel the necessity of being prepared to stand before God.
"O, how they again flocked to the altar, big,
sound-minded men and women, realizing the awfulness of eternity, and praise God, many must have

found the Savior from sin as the saving power
fell all around us."
No coaxing was necessary to get the sinners to
come to the altar. Tt was not an uncommon sight
to see strong men literally running up the aisle
with tears rolling down their faces, throwing themselves at the feet of Jesus and sobbing for mercy.
There are saints here who were born in Italy, Russia, Lithuania, Germany, Sweden, Poland, Finland,
Holland, Canada, Ireland, England, and Egypt.
All have come to glorify the name of Jesus.
TESTIMONY.
"I have been brought up in the Catholic church,
and when I heard that a city of tents was beingerected upon the hill near our home, and that the
people there shouted, danced, fell under the power,
spoke in tongues, etc., I ran all the way to the
tabernacle to see what it all meant.
"When I came to the foot of the hill I looked
up through the trees, and saw the tents all lighted
up, the brass band was playing; the cornets, trombone, piccolo, piano, bass and snare drum and tambourines were all playing a new song I had never
heard. This song I now sing, 'Victory.' When I
reached the top of the hill I could see over the
heads of the crowd many people dancing and jumping on the platform and in the audience. At the
end of the song they all stood on their feet and
shouted and shouted and sang the most strange
music, which I have since learned was the heavenly
anthem sung in the Spirit.
195

THIS IS THAT
"I could not get very near the tent on account of
the great crowd, so I asked some one near me :

"'What does it all mean? Are these people
crazy? What are they dancing and shouting over?'
"The gentleman nodded assent and said yes, he
thought they must be all crazy, for such a meeting and such noise he never did hear the equal of
in his life. I could have understood it if one or
two were crazy, but how could so many be out of
their minds? There must have been fifty dancing
and five hundred shouting.
"Just then I had an opportunity to press closer
and an amazing sight met my eyes. Clear across
the width of the tent in front of the altar, and on
the platform I saw men on one side of the tent
and women on the other side, slain prostrate under
this mighty power.
"A young lady near me was crying, great tears
rolling down her face, saying:
" <O ! Jesus, save me ; forgive the past and I will
follow thee forever.' In a few moments I saw her
face become filled with joy, and she fell to the
straw and was soon speaking in tongues, strange
languages, but O ! so clean and plain. This was
going on all about in the front of the tent, weeping,
singing, shouting, dancing, while I looked on dumfounded. Then from the end of the platform where
the sick were being prayed for came several people,
dancing and shouting that they were healed. ,
"One man who had been lame jumped so high,
well I never saw anyone jump so in my life, shouting and praising God. At midnight the meeting
was still going on, but I had to tear myself away.
"The next night found me there again, and I
cannot stay away; I have been saved and baptized
with the Holy Spirit now, and am O ! so happy.
I am laughed at I know, but I am laughing, too,
I'm so happy."

"For years I have been an earnest Christian
196

NATION WIDE CAMP, PHILADELPHIA.
and church member, but always felt a -lack and
longing for more power in my life. When this
camp meeting came to our neighborhood I heard
the testimonies and preaching on the Holy Spirit,
and the Bible evidence, speaking with tongues. I
knew this was what I needed, the Comforter. I
went to the altar and began to seek.
"The sister in charge came to me and told me to
enter through the gates of praise, and that the
day I sought Him with my whole heart He would
be found of me. I began to praise the Lord with
all my heart, and as she laid her hands upon me
and prayed she passed on, but I fell to the floor
under the power and saw a great angel with wide
spread wings that seemed to reach to the ends of
the earth. Then I saw Jesus hanging on the cross
and His blood streaming down. I received the
Holy Ghost, and He spoke the praises of Jesus in
other tongues. Hallelujah! I am so happy I
have found my long- felt need.
"For years I have suffered with my eyes; have
worn heavy glasses, but still had those piercing
pains and failing sight. I was prayed for in this
tent three days ago, was perfectly healed, have
thrown my glasses away, case and all, and can
read the finest print. I give Jesus all the glory."

197

CHAPTER XIX.

MEETINGS FROM MASS. TO NEW YORK.
"In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening
withhold not thine hand . . . for verily I say unto you,
ye shall not have gone over the cities of Israel till the Son
of man be come." Ecc. 11:6; Matt. 10:23.
For months the Lord had been burning the message on my heart:
"Go out quickly into the highways and the
hedges go into the out-of-the-way places, and declare that Jesus is coming soon."
California rang in my ears, and the Lord had
been speaking to us for some time about making
a trans-continental, tract distributing-Gospel auto
tour/ The Lord had led us so definitely in the past
that we were made to know that it was His voice.
My husband, who had attended the latter part of
the Nation Wide Camp Meeting, had gone to Florida again, and it seemed a great undertaking for
me to consider driving a car, which had been used
as much as ours, myself on such a long trip.
Putting the Lord to the test, I asked Him, if it
was His will for me to make this trip to help me
to get a new and more powerful car. The committee who had handled all the financial end of the
camp meeting said that though the offerings had
been good, expenses were so high that there was
very little left to divide amongst the numerous
workers, so that by the time our own expenses
were paid there would be nothing toward the car.
When I mentioned it to Mother she said : "Well,
ask the Lord to help you sell the old car at a good
figure, and I will pay the balance."
Needless to say, I lost no time in going down
the street to see about it. Inside of half an hour
199

THIS IS THAT
I had sold the old car for almost as much as I had
paid for it in the beginning, and in a few hours
there was a new Gospel Car being lettered with six
inch golden letters saying : " Jesus is coming soon,
get ready/ 7 and "Where will you spend eternity?"
Before setting out for California a chain of
meetings was held from Massachusetts and Con r
necticut to New York.
LONG HILL, CONN.,
where a tent had been erected and advertisements
issued for a week-end meeting. Saints gathered
in from the towns around about and the Lord
bountifully poured out His Spirit upon us. Some
were saved and several received the baptism.
Amongst the number was one young man who
had been seeking for years.
MONTWAIT CAMP
Here we were joined by our dear Sister, Elizabeth Sisson, who had worked so faithfully through
the Nation Wide Camp Meeting at Philadelphia,
and she traveled with us throughout this entire
chain of meetings, blessedly used of the Lord.
The glory of the Lord came down, saints were
there from Philadelphia, New York, Boston, Connecticut, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, and many
were saved and baptized with the Holy Spirit,
with the Bible evidence, speaking with other
tongues.
WORCESTER, MASS.
A three day convention was held at the Pentecostal Mission of which Elder H. T. Carpenter was

in charge, and as the saints who flocked in from
out of town lifted their voices in praise with the
saints of Worcester the glory of the Lord came
down and rested upon the people until they danced
and shouted and sang under the power of the
Spirit, The Lord saved sinners and baptized
believers.
200

MEETINGS FROM MASS. TO NEW YORK
UNITY HALL, HARTFORD, CONN.
The saints with their pastor, Brother N. G. Neilson, had engaged one of the most beautiful halls in
the city, seating some seven hundred. The Lord
had given Brother Neilson the promise that He
would pour out His Spirit in this meeting, and
praise His name, He kept His word. God blessedly poured out His Spirit, and at some meetings
four or five were baptized and a like number saved.
HAELEM CASINO, NEW YORK CITY.
(REPORT)
In New York we found that Brother and Sister
Vondrann's faith had overstepped the limitations
of their assembly hall, and they had rented the
large Harlem Casino for the five principal days of
the Convention. Brother Vondrann entertained
us in the Hotel which is located at 115th Street
and Manhattan Avenue. The Mt. Olivet Assembly
Hall is located on the ground floor of this building, and we found was formerly used as a dance
hall and card room. When they had given their
hearts to Jesus this room was turned over for His
dear service for the salvation of souls and baptism
of believers. Hallelujah!
From the first meeting the glory of the Lord

swept down and filled the Assembly Hall. Brother
and Sister Vondrann entertained the saints on the
free-will offering plan, with a beautiful and simple
faith. They later assured us in a testimony, after
all expenses for rental of Casino, etc., had been
met, that when they opened the Convention they
had exactly the sum of six dollars and a half in
the treasury.
There could not have been a better location for
a Pentecostal Convention in New York City than
the Harlem Casino, which is easy of access by
subway, elevated, surface cars and busses. The
hall seated some seven hundred people. Sunday
201

THIS IS THAT
afternoon, October 6th, when the meetings opened
in the Casino, practically every seat was filled and
extra chairs were brought in, while the glory of
God fell upon each saint.
We had invitations to churches in the city, and
spoke at the business men's noonday meeting at
John Street Methodist Episcopal church daily.
They gave us liberty to preach the baptism of the
Holy Ghost with the Bible evidence, speaking in
tongues, and as this meeting was largely attended
by Christian workers and ministers, a wide area
was reached, and these meetings were truly as a
stone dropped in calm waters, sending ripples far
and wide in all directions.
Amongst the number receiving the baptism on
Sunday afternoon was Mrs. Emma M. Whittemore
of the "Door of Hope' 7 work, well known the world
over as a blessed child of God and earnest Christian worker of years' standing. Truly God is doing
great and glorious things these last days.

Different nights ten and twelve, one night fourteen, came forward for salvation.
One of the crowning joys of the New York convention came when the wife of Pastor W. K. Bouton (who had been seeking earnestly for two years,
ever since the power fell at Corona), fell under the
power on the platform and came through to her
baptism. It seemed that our hearts would almost
break with joy as we knelt beside both Brother
and Sister Bouton when they received the blessed
Holy Spirit. Brother Bouton just leaped and
danced for joy. All glory to Jesus !
One Avoman who had been suffering from rheumatism 'was healed instantly and danced like a
young girl. Two were healed of this awful epidemic which is going round. Many were healed
from other troubles and afflictions, for which we
give Jesus all the glory and praise. There were no
202

MEETINGS FROM MASS. TO NEW YORK
numbers kept of those saved or baptized, but we
know that they were many, praise the Lord.
Thursday, October 10th, being the last night of
the meeting, it had been arranged to have the
young folks from the different Pentecostal assemblies within a radius of thirty miles represented in
a large mass meeting.
Brother Kobert Brown, of 42nd St., was chairman for this part of the service. The following
assemblies were represented by a song or an "on
fire" testimony: Glad Tidings Hall, 42nd St.;
Beulah Heights Assembly of New Jersey, Sister
Kobinson's Mission of Brooklyn, The Lighthouse
Pentecostal Assembly of Brooklyn, Bethel Assembly, Tottenville, New Kochelle, West New

Brighton, Asbury Park and Philadelphia.
Brother Vondrann, representing Mt. Olivet, said :
"When we started our work two years ago, the
Lord baptized my wife and myself, and we turned
the little hall which had been used as a dancinghall into the Lords' work. .*,. lv Sister McPherson leaves us tomorrow, but the Lord will remain.
"We started this convention with $6.50, but the
first night of the convention brought in $182.00,
and my expenses were $181.00. Many thought the
work could not live in the locality where our assembly had been opened, but we thank God that
many of our guests have been saved and baptized
in our hotel. I praise God for the work wrought
during this convention, and for the many souls
saved and baptized."
Pastor W. K. Boutou, representing Corona, N.
Y., said:
"There has been a continuous revival in our
Corona Church since 1916. You often hear people
say that Pentecostal people are narrow-minded.
That is not true, for wherever there is the baptism
you will find a people that are seeking the salvation of souls. I want to say that Ave thank God
203

THIS IS THAT
He ever sent Sister McPherson to Corona. It is
our desire to ever lift up the blood-stained banner
of the cross. It is still floating at the mast i i
spite of all opposition. Though Satan has emptied
as it were, the whole battery of hell, God's work is
still going on."
Brother Brown, in his closing remarks, said :

"I can speak for all the assemblies and say that
our hearts are glad when the Evangelist comes
along. God has set them in the church, and I am
sure that all of the assemblies here are glad that
our Sister has come. I pray that God Almighty
will help every man, woman, and child that they
may get ready to meet Jesus tonight."
At the close of the sermon many sinners arose
to their feet and leaving their seats went to the
altar and surrendered to Jesus. A double row of
seekers lined the entire front of the hall, several
received the baptism and others Avere healed. "The
New York Convention will be a bright spot to be
treasured and remembered until Jesus comes, for
its many bright conversions, souls baptized, and
precious fellowship of the saints."
NEW ROCHELLE, X. Y.
During the eight days Ave Avere there not one
discordant note, or one unkind Avord or criticism,
or tale-bearing did Ave meet, just Jesus and His
praises seemed to occupy everyone. Before the
first day was well opened every seat Avas full and
saints Avere sitting on the floor of the platform and
standing in the aisles, but no one minded in the
least, and the power came doAA T n in streams as they
sang the heavenly anthem and played in the
Spirit, etc.
As the meetings progressed many were saved
and baptized, many bodies were healed and the
last day found the church packed to the doors
again and eA T en the ante-room filled.
204

MEETINGS FROM MASS. TO NEW YORK
The influenza epidemic was raging in this city
as elsewhere, but the Lord was marvelously good

to us and did not permit us to be hindered for a
moment in proclaiming the message. Churches
were closed up in cities just after we had left,
opened in other towns just before we got there, but
not a meeting was closed at a time when it would
hinder the carrying out of the program which the
Holy Spirit had mapped out for us.
In New Eochelle I was stricken with this disease
Saturday night, but the Lord kept me up for the
three services on Sunday. Sunday night I was
taken with violent chills followed by high fever,
but in answer to the prayers of the saints and
a determined rising up in simple faith, the Lord
enabled me to complete the week's meetings so that
I lost only one whole meeting.
I went through a severe test, however, when my
little daughter took the epidemic which quickly
turned into double pneumonia. For two days it
seemed the dear little life which meant so much
to me must pass on and be with Jesus.
Saints gathered to pray for her, and I was
obliged to keep on preaching in spite of the lump
in my throat and the weight on my heart. She
had come to me in the Harlem Casino and
whispered :
"Mamma, may I please give my testimony tonight?" I told her, "Yes," and she stood on the
platform and testified, saying:
"I thank the Lord for ever saving me and washing me in the blood, putting upon me the white
robes of righteousness. Two years ago He baptized me with the Holy Ghost, spoke through me inother tongues, and I am going all the way through
with Jesus till I meet Him in the clouds."
Staying in the furnished rooms without heat or
home comforts, I yearned for a little home where
205

THIS IS THAT
I could care for her properly, and I remembered
how before becoming unconscious she had said :
"Oh, Mamma, I do wish we had a little home
where I could go to school." I had said:
"Darling, would you want Mamma to leave work
and try to get a little home together?" She said:
"Oh, no, Mamma, I don't want you to leave the
work; I will try to teach myself." Dear little
lamb !
One afternoon someone met me at the top of the
stairs and whispered that Eoberta was very low.
I could not bear to stay and look upon her; I fell
upon the floor and prayed God to spare her life,
and the Lord gave me assurance that He would
not only raise her up but also poured balm upon
my troubled heart by saying:
"I will give you a little home a nest for your
babies out in Los Angeles, California, where they
can play and be happy and go to school and have
the home surroundings of other children. You
fixed a home once before out of My will, and it was
taken away; now I will give you a home in My
will."
He showed me Abraham withholding not his
only son, Isaac, laying him upon the altar of sacrifice and being spared the agony of seeing him die;
then He showed me that I had yielded up not only
one but my two children, had traveled these many
months with them from city to city, and town to
town, having no home or bed to tuck them into,
and that, just as He spared Abraham his Isaac, He
would spare me my two children and cause me to
joy in His tender care.

It was all so real to me that I could almost see
the little bungalow, floors, garden and all.
Brothers Brown and Thompson laid hands upon
Roberta, prayed for her, and the Lord touched her
body. She soon opened her eyes, and though very
weak, knew us all and was able to smile again. I
206

MEETINGS FROM MASS. TO NEW YORK
kneeled down and putting my lips close to her,
ear whispered:
"Oh, Roberta, God has told Mamma that He is
going to give us a little home, where you can have
flowers and roses and go to school."
Her face lighted and she answered back in a
thin little voice: "Mamma, can I have a canary,
too?" And little Rolf, who was listening, said:
"Can I have some rose bushes and a garden?"
Through all the weeks that followed and the
four thousand mile drive, the little children talked
and planned what they would do when God gave
them the little bungalow. Sometimes the enemy
sought to test me, and said :
"Now, it is an awful thing for you to build these
children's hopes up like this. What if you should
be disappointed?" But Father does not disappoint nor break His Word. Praise His name !

207

CHAPTER XX.
THE TKANS-CONTINENTAL GOSPEL TOUR.
"And the Lord said unto the servant, Go out into the highways and hedges, and compel them to come in, that my house
may be filled." Lu. 14:23.
Pastor S. A. Jamieson of Tulsa, Okla., had been
writing us regarding our going to Tulsa to conduct
an evangelistic campaign and the Lord had given
us a definite witness that we were to go.
Just as we were about to start out, however, in
the Gospel Car, a telegram arrived, saying:
"Postpone coming. All churches closed and it
is not safe for you to be abroad in the land."
Going to the Lord about the matter, He spoke
plainly to me :
"Fear not, do not lose a single day. Go at once,
and the day you arrive the ban will be lifted and
the churches will be open."
(NOTES FROM THE LOG.)
At nine o'clock this morning the last snap was
closed, the last strap fastened, the baggage, and
the Gosp-el, testimonies and tracts in place, the last
"Good-byes" and "God bless you's" said, and the
motor purred softly, (every greasecup had been
filled, the tires tested and the gasoline tank filled ) ,
and the car rolled away as quietly and efficiently
as though it knew that we had been preparing for
this trip for days, and that the hands of many
saints had been laid upon it in solemn prayer and
dedication. It seemed to realize what was expected
of it on the long trip ahead, and importance of its
mission, that of being a worthy herald of the great
message of love. It seemed as though both our
209

THIS IS THAT
hearts were beating in unison with the thought of
the great opportunity which had come into its life
and mine.
From our starting point at 115th Street, we
went along 7th Avenue to 10th Street, and from
thence turned into Riverside Drive. A big policeman, who was leisurely directing the traffic, caught
sight of the Gospel Car, and said in a loud voice:
"'Where will you spend Eternity?' Well!!
what do you know about that?' 7 And as we smiled
to ourselves we could not help thinking that if he
were going to preach to fashionable Riverside
Drive, he could not have selected a better text.
Crossing to Staten Island, thence to New Jersey, we gave out our tracts on the boats, at the
ticket offices and to the passers-by.
Five hours' run brought us to Philadelphia,
where we rejoiced at meeting the dear saints again.
After attending to freight to be shipped to California, we crossed to Camden, N. J., Avhere Sister
Dr. Sharp, had her beautiful bungalow open and
warmed to receive us.
After the illness of my little daughter, Roberta^
and myself, and the hundred-mile drive of the day,
the warmth and the light and love and hospitality
extended to us in this home made it a veritable
haven of rest.
GETTYSBURG, PA., OCT. 26.
Glory to Jesus! Gospel Car has left a trail of
tracts one hundred and -twenty miles long. How
hungry the people are! The searching questions
regarding salvation and our teaching, that they

ask, reveal the longing in their hearts. At Lancaster, by congested traffic, the Lord held us ten
minutes in the main street, during which time
scores of men and women pressed about the car,
reading the signs and asking for literature.
210

THE TRANS-CONTINENTAL GOSPEL TOUR
On through Mountville, York and New Oxford,
passing the famous battlefields and reached Gettysburg in time to find the streets filled with soldiers
who were off duty, and had a golden opportunity for tract distribution. We are now camping by the roadside, near the Allegheny Mountains.
PITTSBURG, PA., OCT. 27.
The tracts which we have been constantly distributing today reach back as a white thread for
one hundred . seventy-five miles. We have been
climbing the Allegheny Mountains all day. At
noon we reached Tuscarora Summit, at an altitude
of 2240 feet, and are now outside of Pittsburgh.
We have pitched our camp by the side of the main
highway, on the property of Mr. Carnegie, the.
great steel magnate, and though doubtless he is
unaware that he has guests tonight, the Lord
directed us to this spot to camp. Today being
Sunday we have had the most wonderful opportunity of distributing our literature to church
members and thoughtful, energetic Christian people. No engine trouble, no tire trouble.
CLAYSVILLE, PA., OCT. 28.
Not nearly so much mileage today, but bless
the Lord, we have been very busy for Him. You
remember that the Lord led us to camp right
by the main highway, instead of seeking a more
secluded spot. Bless the Lord ! As we were breaking camp this morning, we heard a rumbling that
sounded like the coming of an army, and lifting

our eyes we saw great long lines of camouflaged
government auto trucks coming down the road,
laden with soldiers and material. With "Gospels"
and tracts I ran to the road. The Lord put it in
their hearts, too, for without exception, every car
paused and the soldiers reached for the Gospels
and tracts, thanking us and promising to read
211

THIS IS THAT
them, and suiting the action to the Avord, began at
once to read aloud to their companions.
In Pittsburgh we have been busy for the Master.
Have had bad road, mud and detours today, and
ahead of us tomorrow, but the Lord has taken
wonderful care of us, and no accident has resulted.
Passing through Cecil and Claysville, through
the great coal-mining section, just as the men
were coming up out of the dark underground,
their faces besmeared with coal and grime, the
electric lights which they had used t in their toil
below still burning in their caps, we were privileged to speak and witness for Jesus, leaving them
the tracts and literature.
COLUMBUS, OHIO, OCT. 29.
This morning we started out over the very bad
roads which the residents of neighboring towns
had warned us of, lost our way, and came on to a
very dangerous mountain pass. One place there
was just room for the Avheels of the car to pass. A
sheer cliff, hundreds of feet deep, yawned below us
and rocks hung out above us, but angels seemed
to hold the car to the road even though it was wet
and slippery. We stopped to inquire of a man the
way. He set us right. The Lord gave us the witness that He had sent us this road to reach this

man, for when we gave him our message and lit-*
erature, he brightened and told us of their church
on the hill and that the parson would be powerful
glad "to know of the Latter Rain." The Lord
took us through all the mire and the mud without
trouble or skidding where dozens of cars had been
stuck in the mud and had been hauled out with
horses at great expense and labor. We feel perfectly conscious all the time of a guard of angels
that are traveling beside the car, protecting it.
On to Wheeling, W. Va., and then to Zanesville,
Ohio, and tonight we are camping by the roadside
212

THE TRANS-CONTINENTAL GOSPEL TOUR
in a beautiful sheltered spot outside of Columbus,
O. Usually the little brooks and streams serve as
our wash-basins, but here we have two barrels of
rain water, which stand beside a closed summer
cottage. We are trusting to be refreshed and
rested.
INDIANAPOLIS, IND., OCT. 30-31st.
For years I have been longing to meet Sister
Etter, and have been talking about it more in recent months. I have longed to hear her preach and
be at her meetings. AVe have inquired of those who
have read the newspapers, however, and they say
that the ban is not lifted.
Blessed be the name of the Lord forever and forever. Oh, how good He is to give us the desires of
our hearts. We have traveled some two hundred
miles today, and still found time to distribute the
literature to many people, also leaving it in the
R. F. D. mail boxes.
Through Springfield, O., thence to Richmond,

Ind., and we are now in a comfortable room in
Indianapolis. Hallelujah! What a luxury it
seems ! How good God is ! Let me tell you the
marvelous thing He has done. Well, there was a
special meeting of the officials of Indianapolis
yesterday, and they decided to lift the ban at midnight tonight, this being just an hour and a half
after we arrived. Tomorrow Mrs. Etter's tabernacle will be open and I will have the desire of my
heart. Glory !
A day of rest and praise. Called upon Mrs.
Etter, and attended the meeting in her tabernacle
tonight. We rejoiced and praised the Lord together. The power of God fell; even though there
were only a very few at the meeting, the Lord was
there showering His blessings upon us. Tomorrow,
we proceed on our journey. The command of the
Master to go into the highways and hedges is being
213

THIS IS THAT
literally fulfilled. From New York to Philadelphia
we followed the "Lincoln Highway," from Philadelphia to Indianapolis the "National Highway";
tomorrow we turn into "Pike's Peak Ocean to
Ocean Highway/ 7 thence into the "Big Four Highway" for Kansas City.
TUSCOLA, NOV. 1.
Have had a glorious day for Jesus, witnessed
and gave out literature for one hundred and
twenty miles. We are now passing through prairie
farms and the great wheat section. We are now
camping under the trees. It is very cold and
frosty, but God is protecting each member of the
party, that none shall suffer or take cold.
SPRINGFIELD, ILL., NOV. 2.

Only eighty-seven miles today, for shortly after
noon we reached Springfield and the home of our
dear Sister Osten, who in loving hospitality held
us for the balance of the day; meetings in her
parlor tonight, and will send us on our way in the
morning refreshed, rested and fed, our lunch box
packed with victuals for the journey. Hallelujah !
We are burdened for this beautiful city, the
capital of the state, with no Pentecostal Assembly
and only these dear ones holding up a little gleam
of light in their parlor. They tell us they know of
no assembly for a radius of one hundred miles.
How we long to stop over to tell the people the
burning message of the hour.
BARRY, ILL., NOV. 3.
Just eighty-three miles today, but Oh, the opportunity for distributing Gospels and tracts, and
witnessing for the Lord has been glorious. Several
young men, who received the Gospels eagerly, told
us that they had never had a Bible in their lives.
Today a long funeral procession passed the Gos214

THE TRANS-CONTINENTAL GOSPEL TOUR
pel Car, and almost all, from the driver of the
hearse to the mourners lifted heavy black vails
and pressed close to the windows, read aloud,
"Jesus is coming soon, get ready."
We are camping tonight by a wonderful spring
of water that flows ceaselessly from a great high
rock. Farmers come from miles around, bringing

their tanks and vats to be filled from its flow.
Questioning them as we gave out tracts, we learn
that all of their cisterns are dry from the long
drought and this water from the rock is their only
supply. What a privilege to witness for Jesus, the
rock from whose riven side flows the water of life
that never runs dry.
MACON, MO., NOV. 4.
The Gospel Car has witnessed and given out literature today for one hundred miles. Oh ! that you
could see the expressions in the people's faces.
Some look with horror, startled fear, some, with
skepticism, spit on the sidewalk and say they "do
not believe it." On others belief is written and
eager longing to hear more about it. Some say,
"Well, this is just exactly what I have been thinking, that this war, and all these plagues must be a
sign of the coming of the Lord. Lady, give us some
literature."
Crossing the Mississippi River into Hannibal,
people from almost every walk of life gathered
about the car, insomuch that as we stopped for
dinner, one of the party stayed in the car to dispense literature and witness and answer questions.
A saloon-keeper, a policeman, a traveling salesman, storekeepers, church members, a holiness
lady, and many others, gathered about to ask questions and receive literature. The saloon-keeper
was much in earnest and we are praying for his
salvation. Eternity alone will reveal the fruitbearing of the seed sown on this trip. Hallelujah !
215

THIS IS THAT
Traveled until late and the night being raw and
cold we paused on a lonely square, wondering
where to sleep. A gentleman seeing the car volun-

teered information, and we learned this was the
Mayor of the town. So sorry we forgot to give
him the literature.
BKAYMER, MO., NOV. 5,
At the restaurant this morning, watching at the
window the people who walked around the car,
commenting upon its signs and wondering "What
meanefh this," one dear old colored brother was
so interested that he couldn't leave the car until
we returned, and was delighted with the Bridal
Call and papers, saying :
"Ah's often he'ad of.dese heah Pentecos' people,
but Ah's nevah saw any befo'. Ah sho ? am glad
to get dez heah papahs." ,
As we were about to leave the mayor came up
again. Surely the Lord sent him to get his papers.
He helped to tie a rope and spoke encouragingly
of our work, and received the literature we gave
him, gladly. Oh ! Lord, work wonders in these
dear hearts, we pray Thee.
Hoped to have made more mileage today, but are
detained here in Braymer for some adjustments on
the car.
OLATHE, KAN., NOV. 6.
We realized this morning that "all things work
together for good to them that love the Lord and
are the called according to His purpose." Our
delay of yesterday caused us to pass through the
little town of Polo, Mo., by daylight, whereas we
would otherwise have passed through unobserved in
the darkness. As we passed through this town,
we turned and drew up at the filling station. The
people trooped after us down the streets, came out
of the stores and houses, and crowding around the
car, almost made us gasp. They kept us busy giv216

THE TRANS-CONTINENTAL GOSPEL TOUR

ing out literature and answering their many questions about Jesus and our teaching.
One young man said that his mother saw the
signs on the car out of the window and told him
to run until he caught that car, and bring her some
of those tracts that we were dropping by the wayside, and asked us to give him one of every kind
we had.
NoAvhere on our trip have we met with a more
enthusiastic welcome. So eager were the people
here that the}^ seemed ready to search the whole
car, and dissect all the pockets in the doors, and
the boxes before they would be denied. Cries of
"These are the Pentecostal people that speak in
tongues. I have heard about them and I Avant to
read about them," came from every side of the car.
One dear lady with quivering face, listened as
we were praising the Lord, and then, catching hold
of my hand, said :
"Oh, tell me how to get the baptism. I have
read the Pentecostal literature before." She knew
of Sister Sisson, Sister Etter and others, but asked
if Brother Simpson upheld this way of receiving
the Holy Ghost. She went away laden with literature, exclaiming:
"Oh, what a feast I am going to have today! I
am going to sit down and read every word."
One man came running up to the car, telling us
he wanted some of these papers for a boy who was
going to Avar the next day and Avas not saved.

On to Kansas City, Mo., thence on to Olathe,
Kan., Avhere we are spending the night.

OLATHE, KAN., NOV. 7.
Detained by rain today, but have had a quiet
time of prayer and spiritual refreshing.
217

THIS IS THAT
IOLA, KAN., NOV. 8.
Have made one hundred seven miles today
through muddy roads. Great interest is manifested
in the Gospel Car; the editor of the daily paper
asked an interview that he might write it for his
paper, and gladly received the tracts, Bridal Call
and booklets, assuring us that he Avould be quite an
authority on the subject by the time he had read
them all, but promising to do so, nevertheless.
OOLOGAH, OKLA., NOV. 9.
One hundred and nineteen miles' traveling lands
in Oologah, Okla. We are passing through great
stretches of prairie country filled with oil Avells,
and nearing our destination, we are tarrying for
the night instead of pressing on to Tulsa, because
of the swollen condition of the river, which is
flowing over the road we must take. The Lord has
promised, however, that when we pass through the
waters He will be with us, and through the rivers
they shall not overflow us.
TULSA, OKLAHOMA, SUNDAY, NOV. 10.
Hallelujah! The Lord took us through the
swollen river bottom without mishap. Surely He

has given His angels charge over us to bear us up
lest even our tires dash their feet against a stone.
In all these fifteen hundred miles we have had but
two slight punctures and no engine trouble. The
Lord surely tempered the wind to the shorn lambs.
Although the water was flowing over the road
and had filled the gullies either side and we could
not see which was the road and which was the
ditch, the Lord kept us right in the middle of the
road for about one-eighth of a mile until the car
emerged, dripping but triumphant, at the other
side. (May he ever keep us thus in the middle of
the King's Highway, through the waters of life.)
218

THE TRANS-CONTINENTAL GOSPEL TOUR
At noon, looking across the great stretches of
prairie, the city of Tulsa came into view, and as we
saw the skyline, the buildings and payed streets,
after wading through the slough of despond, we
shouted and praised the Lord, for it seemed that
must be the way it will be when a soul is n earing
Heaven, coining up the last lap of the journey
the beautiful city, with its walls of jasper looming
just before, no more stones, mud, deep ruts or
ditches to be avoided, but smooth streets that are
paved with gold; no more camping by the way in
darkness, for there will be an eternal day.
ARRIVE DAY CHURCHES RE-OPEN.
Sabbath morning, as we were driving into the
streets of the city, the first service was being held
in the Assembly of God Tabernacle. Hallelujah!
Hungry, tired and dusty, after having personally
driven and cared for the large Gospel Car, we had
but little time for refreshments when meeting hour
arrived.

The large tabernacle was well filled, both with
people and the glory of the Lord. We found here
a strong Pentecostal Assembly, deeply taught and
rooted in the Word, clean and free from error, free
in the Spirit, and filled with love.
PRAYER PRECEDES REVIVAL.
For many weeks, the Tulsa saints were praying
definitely for the coming revival. Days of fasting
and prayer were observed. With such prayers it
was no wonder the Lord brought us through in
safety, no wonder the ban was lifted according to
the promise God gave me, no wonder seventeen
men and women who know not God lifted their
hands for prayers and that sinners began coming
to the altar from the first night, no wonder the
Latter Rain came down in such showers, no wonder sick were healed and some were raised up
from death's door, no wonder our tired bodies
219

THIS IS THAT
were rested and refreshed so that we could keep
going day and night with scarcely a moment
to ourselves. Why, it was as though we had
come in contact with a live wire, the faith and
hunger and prayers of these dear people. The
meetings grew in power and we preached to overflow audiences. Sinners and saints flocked to the
altar seeking salvation and the baptism of the
Spirit.
SICK HEALED.
The epidemic still raging, and many having been
weakened and afflicted, we stood hours at a time
praying for the sick, and Jesus helped those who
came to Him. Praise His name. One man, crippled with rheumatism, insomuch that he could not

move without acute pain, walked, ran, danced, and
finally danced and leaped, perfectly healed. A
man with severe stomach trouble and a sister with
running sores, internal troubles, were healed, also
influenza, heart trouble, etc.
We were called into houses where poor people
were lying so low their eyes seemed glassy, and
the rattle in their throats, but the Lord marvelously raised them up. Bless His name!
THE SPIRIT TAKES CONTROL.
At times it was impossible to lead the meeting
as the place was swept with the praise of the
Lord. We witnessed one of the most extraordinary
communion services; such melting, such breaking
down with tears, such exalting of the blood, messages in tongues and interpretation as the bread
and the wine were administered, then the Holy
laughter and the shouts of praise as the coming of
the Lord w r as preached and that day when we
would drink anew with Him the wine in His
Father's Kingdom were brought forth.
The heavenly anthem and the playing under the
power of the Holy Spirit were like unto II Chron.
5 : 13, 14.
220

THE GREAT TEMPLE AUDITORIUM
(which was engaged by the Victoria Hall Assembly for our
larger meetings)

TEMPLE AUDITORIUM ROSTRUM, LOS ANGELES

THE TRANS-CONTINENTAL GOSPEL TOUR
Ofttimes, just before, during or after the preaching of the Word, the Spirit would break forth with
the most stirring, searching and encouraging messages in tongues and interpretation. The people
would leap to their feet as one, and throwing up
their hands, shout His praises until it seemed that
the very heavens rang.
FIRE FALLS.
During altar service one night the power fell in
a wonderful way upon several of the young men;
one, with his face transfigured with the glory of
God, cried in tones that went through every heart,
"Jesus is coming soon," and another, also in the
Spirit, cried:
"Get ready; get ready; get ready!"
Then came a message in the Spirit warning the
people that the time was short, the work yet to be
done enormous, that self-sacrificing thoroughly consecrated laborers were needed today as never before. The Lord then called many to consecrate and
dedicate themselves anew to do His bidding. The
power fell, and some who prayed for the enduement of power, the workers laid hands upon them,
over fifty fell prostrate under the power. Strong
men went down like straws.
To many the Lord revealed Himself and His
love in a way they had never known, others saw
visions of harvest fields with their need of reapers,
others saw Jesus with bleeding hands and feet,
and caught a greater revelation of the heart that
broke with love and compassion for the lost, others
saw great curtains drawn back in the heavens and
Jesus stood revealed before them. Some heard
wondrous music, while still others cried out to God

as He searched their hearts and showed them
things with which He was not pleased, the piano
was played under the power and the heavenly
music flowed forth in a stream of melody; saints
221

THIS IS THAT
rose and flocked around the piano, the song was
caught up sometimes bursts of melody, sometimes
in softest, most sacred tones, declaring the holiness and majesty of the Most High God, swelling
until the whole building trembled with the majesty
of the trumphant song. We seemed to see the Victorious King leading his triumphant armies, battalion after battalion, banners flying, armor gleaming. When the last quivering note died away a
hush fell upon all. It seemed impossible to move
or speak, and we were loath to open our eyes or
come back to earth again. The saints dispersed
on tip-toes. We had been in the presence of the
Omnipotent King of Kings.
GOSPEL CAR WHEELS FLY FOR JESUS.
The Gospel Car led a busy life in Tulsa. There
were ceaseless calls for visiting among epidemic
victims day and night. Wherever it went its signs
attracted much attention on the streets. The
Sunday newspaper printed the picture of the car
with its golden sign, "Jesus Is Coming" showing
plainly on the head of the paper. There were days
of tract distribution, when the seven-passenger car,
filled with workers, tracts and handbills, visited
neighboring towns and villages, placarding every
available window and post with the notices of the
meetings and the soon coming of Jesus. Tracts
were left in the mail boxes at the farm houses and
at the big oil wells, etc.
The Gospel Car also attended noon-day meetings

and preached its sermon faithfully at the Tulsa
Iron Works while we preached within the foundry
to the working men and iron moulders of Jesus
and His love, meeting some of these men at the
revival meetings, we later had the joy of seeing
them give their hearts to Jesus.
Perhaps the most important work of the Gospel
Car in Tulsa was street meetings. Having secured
222

THE TRANS-CONTINENTAL GOSPEL TOUR
one of the best corners in the city, the top of the
auto was put down, and singers, with their musical
instruments, filled the car; how those dear ones
did sing and testify of Jesus. Illustrated charts
were hung from a stand, these charts drew crowds
from all about.
Such respect I never witnessed in a street meeting; men removed their hats and stood with bowed
heads, and women with tears in their eyes. Then
came a call for all who were tired of sin and
wanted Jesus for their Saviour to lift their hands
for prayer. The first night eighteen, the second
night twenty-nine raised their hands, indicating
that they wanted Jesus as their Saviour.
Then came a call to step out and kneel upon the
sidewalk by "our penitent form," the runningboard, and publicly, before their fellow citizens,
surrender to Jesus. Tears were on the faces of
many. Two ladies stepped out of the crowd and
knelt, their tears splashed on the running-board,
as our tears of joy over repentant sinners mingled
with theirs. At the close of the last meeting several hundred saints marched out of the tabernacle
to the street and formed in circles about the car.
As they sang and prayed the Spirit fell. There
were tongues and interpretation as the saints laid

their hands upon the car, asking God to protect it
and its occupants, and to send a guard of angels
with it to keep it from all danger, and prayed that
it might ever be a messenger of life and never of
death. These dear ones also dropped their offerings toward gas, oil and tracts, inside the car.
God bless them !
TRANSCONTINENTAL TOUR
CONTINUED.
Leaving Tulsa the Gospel Car turned south bj,
southwest for Oklahoma City, where we expected
to hold a meeting that night. Saints who had been
223

THlS IS THAT
at Tulsa had gone ahead of us on the train to arrange this meeting. While hastening along we
found time to distribute tracts through the huge
fields of oil wells and in each village and town.
HELD UP AND WAYLAID.
Hurrying along, trying to make every minute
count, Ave were obliged to draw up at a fillingstation, in the little town of Stroud. As we stopped
a man sprang from a doorway and leaped towarcj.
the car, shouting: "Praise the Lord." Others
came running. In another moment the car was
encircled with earnest saints praising the Lord and
telling us that they had driven from nine to fifteen
miles, having learned that this town being on the
highway, we must pass through it today. They
had picketed themselves at various corners and
doorways, and had waited all day since early
morning to ask us to their ten-mile distant mission
at Kendrick, for a meeting. We shook our heads
and told them that this was impossible, as we had
promised to be in Oklahoma City Mission that

night, and offering them tracts and literature instead. But they held onto the car and one sister's
eyes filled with tears, and she trembled with the
intensity of her eagerness and hunger. Keridrick was a little place and off the beaten
track, and no evangelist or Pentecostal workers
ever came that way, and they were not going to let
us go by without coming if they could possibly
help it.
Our arguments that we must keep our first promise gradually weakened under the steady fire of
their pleadings, until we consented to telephone
and call up Oklahoma City as a test, that if the
saints there were willing, we should stay.
The Oklahoma City saints replied that Tuesday
would be just as good, that they would have more
time and could get a larger crowd together. While
224

THE TRANS-CONTINENTAL GOSPEL TOUlt
I was 'phoning, the saints were lined up praying.
How their faces brightened as the Gospel Car was
turned from the highway and out through the
country ten miles away, where a hot supper was
steaming on the table and preparations for our
comfort had been made !
It was only a little village, but this seemed to
be the largest building in it, and even before we
got there we could see the lights shining inside and
out and people standing outside looking in through
the door. The seats were filled and some standing
in the back as we sang and praised the Lord together. After a simple message an altar call was
given, and one dear sister received the baptism of
the Holy Ghost, speaking in a clear, beautiful
language.

Next morning we pressed on to Oklahoma City,
having left a goodly supply of tracts and Bridal
Calls. As we traveled we were talking of and marveling at the great need of workers throughout the
country and in the out-of-the-way places.
OKLAHOMA CITY.
The saints were ready and waiting for us. The
Lord gave us a precious meeting, pouring out His
spirit upon us without measure, and another dear
sister received the baptism of the Holy Spirit that
night. There were many calls for us to remain,
holding meetings amongst the Indians; roundhouses were offered us free of rent, but the season
was late and the weather getting cold, great snow
storms had been reported farther ahead in the
mountains and we hastened on our way.
Our first point of compass was Amarillo, the last
town in Oklahoma. From Amarillo to Tucumcari,
New Mexico, and thence on to Santa Rosa. As we
journeyed, Sister B and my dear mother gave
out tracts through fields of cotton to the gangs of
road workers, bridge builders, farmers, tent en225

THIS IS THAT
cainpinents by the way, and to the white-topped
caravans as they lumbered slowly on their way.
Although there had been a heavy snow storm
just a week before, and roads were heavy, we got
along without any difficulty until after we had left
Tucumcari. Here the roads leading to Santa Rosa
became more and more dangerous, mud, snow, deep
gulches, and steep mountain passes. Had w r e
stopped to inquire about roads ahead (we after-

wards learned), drivers would have told us this
road was impassable in wet weather.
Miles and miles we traveled, where the only sign
of life was an occasional prairie-dog or rolling
tumble-weed. Deeper, ever deeper the wheels cut
in the soft mud till it was flying clear over the top
of the car. I got out and put the skid-chains on,
and on we went. Santa Rosa was only nine miles
away, and our eyes were constantly on the speedometer, as we sighed with relief each new mile we
covered.
Darkness had now overtaken us, but with the
good lights of the car we crept on in low gear, the
two sisters walking, Roberta and Rolf, my two
children, asking how they could help me drive.
The wind was sweeping over the prairie in icy
blasts when the car at last settled down to the
fenders.
Our first thought was to search for lumber to
jack the car up on, but not a tree had we passed
for a hundred miles. Sister B and myself at
last set off over the plains to search for help, and
the Lord directed us to the home of a Mexican,
who came with team and labored till two a. m.
without avail. It dawned upon us at last that the
Lord did not want us to go on that night, and
though we have always taught and believed that
ALL THINGS work together for good to those
who loved the Lord and were called according to
226

THE TRANS-CONTINENTAL GOSPEL TOUR
His purpose, we could hardly see that this was one
of the "all things."

The two sisters spent the night in the two-miles
distant Mexican adobe house, I and the children
(now asleep) in the car. I spent the night in
prayer, and just at daybreak came the Mexicans in
their wagon with more boards, and the first time
trying we were out of the mud and on our way.
We had not gone more than a mile when we
saw God's reason for holdng us back; deep washouts and gulches had to be crossed, where only
good light, and careful driving could have saved
the car and its passengers. But the Lord was with
us and the guard of angels Avas never more real to
us, and though water came over the fenders at
times, we never had to stop again.
SANTA ROSA.
Beaching the town, cold, hungry, wet and
muddy, the Lord had a blessed surprise for us.
As we reached the square a young couple rushed
across the street crying :
"Praise the Lord ! Won't you come right to our
house? O, we are so glad to see some Pentecostal
saints, haven't met any for over two years! Come
and stay a week, can't you?"
How wonderful, here in a wilderness, where we
never would have expected to meet a soul who had
received the Holy Spirit, They welcomed, fed
and warmed us, washed our muddy car, gave
us dry clothes while ours were washed. Even the
sister's shoes fitted our feet, and her children's,
clothes fitted the little ones. How we sang and
prayed and the power fell; their hearts were
starved, they needed us and we needed them, and
we all needed the Lord, and He satisfied the
need. Hallelujah !
From Santa Rosa we journeyed across the state
of New Mexico, via Socorro. We had expected to
227

THIS IS THAT
go by the northern route, over the Datl mountains,
but found the passes so full of snow that we turned
down on the southern trail to Deming, N. Mex.,
thence to Tucson, and on to Phoenix, Ariz.
Many miles of desert with no signs of life; the
giant cactus towered above the car and occasional
coyotes skulked in the distance. Houses were
sixty and eighty miles apart, and so our kind
and thoughtful Father sent us through this longstretch of road with three other automobiles,
making the party of four in all, the other cars
being seasoned travelers with kind-hearted men
and women who offered assistance and encouragement all the way, one of them even driving the
car for two days to rest my arms.
From Phoenix we were advised to go north to
Needles, Cal., thus striking the old National trail
again and avoiding the deep sand of Yuma and
other southern points. This stretch of sand and
stone took us over the last of our poor roads, for at
Needles we struck a boulevard which ran through
the desert to the top of the mountains, through
the mountain passes leading on down the long
grade, where we were able to coast for many miles
through the winding grades and beautiful scenery,
until we came to San Bernardino, Cal.
After the prairies, plains, deserts and mountains
this was like a neAV world. For a week past we
had been passing through great mining sections
where the mountains were yielding gold, silver,
amalgam, zinc, iron, copper and other minerals,
but now all this was past and we were in the land
where thousands of acres were filled with beautiful
fruit trees, oranges, lemons, grapefruit, etc., hanging in abundance.

We hastened on to Eialto, Upland, Glendora,
and Arcadia to Pasadena, and from Pasadena to
Los Angeles, arriving Saturday noon, finding the
saints prepared and waiting to welcome us. Every
228

THE TRANS-CONTINENTAL GOSPEL TOUR
arrangement for our comfort and accommodation
had been made by these precious children of the
Lord, and Sunday the revival meeting opened.
We were able to luxuriate in the surroundings
of home comforts after our long journey and
tract-distributing trip for Jesus, but as we looked
upon the beautiful country, the welcoming glow in
tfhe faces of the saints, and attended the first meeting, where the power fell in showers, we could
lift our hands and say truly,
"The toils of the road seem nothing since reaching the end of the way."

229

M
H
H-

si

o;
<2
P

CHAPTER XXI.
MIGHTY DOWNPOUR AT LOS ANGELES.
"Shout; for the Lord hath given you the city." Jos. 6:16.
*NOTE : ( The following account of meetings is
taken from a report written for the Pentecostal
papers during the Los Angeles revival.)
THIS IS A REAL REVIVAL.
A real revival spirit fills the people. It sprang,
as all other revivals have, from the sure deep
roots of much travailing prayer and intercession
before the Lord, and it came suddenly as God's
answers usually do. As the saints were praying
here, and asking of the Lord great things, the
Lord was answering.
"Yes, Yes, My children, Yes. I will take the
iceak to confound mighty, and things which are not
to bring to naught things that arc. I will take a
worm to thrash a mountain."
True to His word, the Lord spoke to this weak
little worm of the dust who feels the weakest of
God's children, and burned into my heart the call
to Los Angeles. The call was so strongly impressed
upon me that we set forth and a band of angels
seemed to accompany us all the way, lifting us over
the stony places, upholding us through the swollen
streams and bringing us safely to our journey's
end. But for this revival we wish to give Father,
Son and Holy Spirit all the Glory. Paul may
plant, Apollos may water, but 'tis God who giveth

the increase.
Christmas week was a week of preparation.
Crowds grew steadily and by the end of the week
231

THIS IS THAT
the people were not able to get into the hall;
prayer room filled, rostrum, seats and stairway
filled, and scores being turned away. Such weeping
and singing and dancing!
The windows of Heaven were opened; sinners
were saved, believers baptized with the Holy Ghost,
ofttimes from twelve to twenty in a single meeting.
The shouting and the heavenly singing of the
people, with its attendant cloud of glory, so
filled the tabernacle that at times the priests and
the Lord's ministers could not minister.
People complained that they were not able to get
into the building, large as it was, so
THE TEMPLE AUDITORIUM
with its rows of galleries, besides the pit and
great rostrum, (seating some three thousand five
hundred people), was rented for the larger Sunday
meetings without a moment's hesitation, even
though the price was one hundred dollars for every
three hours. Pastor Fisher and Brother Blake,
with their band of workers, did not count any
price or trouble too great, but threw themselves
heart and soul into the work.
NEW YEAR'S EVE,,
while the world was jubilating outside with their
noise-making devices, the Lord had a few noisemaking devices within who were having a R-E-A-L
jubilee, and Victoria Hall was packed to its doors.

The Lord led me to preach that night on the
valley of dry bones, and point the way for each
dried-up soul to get back to the place of power and
blessing. When the call for the altar service was
given the prayer room was filled to overflowing,
the rostrum, the entire altar (and even though the
seats were moved back to make room) all round
the building and in the aisles scores were praying
for salvation, believers receiving the Baptism of the
232

MIGHTY DOWNPOUR AT LOS ANGELES
Holy Ghost, sick healed and such dancing and rejoicing as the lost came home!
It was estimated that over one hundred were
slain under the power on this one night alone.
With much weeping, many confessions were made;
differences melted away as the saints threw their
arms about each other; tears of love and praise
were mingled.
Many who had lost their first love came to be
prayed for that they might be so charged with
the power that they might be workers for Him
in the coming revival. As the workers were
prayed for they fell, one to the right, another to
the left, and some lay for hours under the power
as God dealt and spoke with them. They forgot
the music, and the shouting, forgot the hall in
which they lay, and were caught up like Paul of
old into the third Heaven. Many of them had
visions; some saw the harvest fields white, heavy
heads drooping low for the gleaner's hand, and
heard the great call for reapers to stop fighting
each other with their sharp sickles and go out
into the field and gather in the grain, because
Jesus is coming soon.
Others saw visions of souls going down into

eternal perdition without God and without hope,
and heard their cries and shrieks as the Lord
bade them go rescue the perishing and snatch the
sinners as brands from the burning. One saw
the Lord walking through the orchards with His
axe in His hand, cutting down fruitless trees by
the root, casting them into the fire, and transplanting fruitful trees to their places, and gave a
message in the Spirit.
God spoke and revealed Himself to others in a
marvelous way until they declared that they saw
into the depths of His great heart of love and
compassion until their own souls throbbed with
His as never before with yearning for the lost.
233

THIS iS THAT
Strong men and women wept like children; a
broken, contrite mellow spirit seemed to fill
everybody.
Just as the midnight hour was approaching,
someone went to the piano in the Spirit and
played "Victory Ahead/' and saints joined in and
marched round and round the building in such
numbers that the aisles were choked as they took
the place for God; All joined hands, forming one
unbroken circle about the entire hall and prayed
with such fervor and zeal that it seemed the very
heavens dropped fatness and honey. Missionaries,
evangelists, ministers and Christian workers heard
of this great outpouring hundreds of miles away
and came by train and boat that they might themselves be revived and be a blessing to others.
In all the month's meetings held under the
auspices of Pastor Fisher in Victoria Hall and
the Temple Auditorium, not one drop of rain fell
outside, even though it was the rainy season, no

jar was felt, and no lack of unity or love was displayed. The Spirit took absolute control of the
meetings.
As the Sunday afternoon services in the great
Auditorium were dismissed, the audiences flocked
to Victoria Hall, many of them not waiting for
supper, so that by five o'clock every seat was
taken ; by six o'clock there was scarcely any standing room left, and by seven o'clock hundreds were
being turned away from the door, some weeping
with disappointment because they could not get
in. There were messages in tongues and interpretation; there was heavenly singing and music in
the Spirit, Often before preaching, several have
received the baptism in the overflow meeting held
in the prayer room, while during the sermon
others come through, speaking in tongues and
magnifying God.

234

MIGHTY DOWNPOUR AT LOS ANGELES
This revival is truly not man-made or womanmade, but has come down from the Father of
lights, for whether the message comes forth in
burning inspiration of the Holy Ghost or is given
in just a few simple, plain words explaining salvation, the baptism of the Spirit and the coming of
the Lord; or whether there is no preaching at all ?
results are just the same, scores come to the altar
and believers receive the Holy Ghost.
It is impossible to describe the many wonderful
cases wherein we have seen our God work. A
husband and wife who have not lived with each
other for seven years, both got saved and ran and
threw their arms around each other; she received
the baptism. Another couple who hadn't spoken

for several years got back to the Lord, and the
little girl came with such joy to tell how papa
and mamma were going to have a happy home.
Another fine-looking man came, crying like a
baby, asking us to pray for him, he wanted to be
saved. We prayed for him, his face was bathed in
tears, and in less than fifteen minutes the man
was under the power, speaking in other tongues.
A young lady, a beautiful violin player, came to
assist in the music, was gloriously saved, and lay
stretched out under the power of the Lord, very
near her baptism. Many who were here say they
have traveled the world over the last twelve years,
since the latter rain began to fall, and that they
have seen great revivals, but all declare that they
never saw a revival like this, and all agree that it
outshines even the wonderful days of old Azuza
St., of which they all speak with rapt faces;
such a unity and melting together of workers,
such a laying aside of quibbles and hairsplitting
doctrines, such a going out together for poor, lost
sinners, God cannot help but bless.

235

THIS IS THAT
BETHEL TEMPLE
G. N. ELDRIDGE, PASTOR.
Sunday afternoon, January 19th, after the close
of the meeting in the Temple Auditorium, meetings opened in the beautiful Bethel Temple, the
entire orchestra came from Victoria Hall with
violins, cornets, a guitar, etc., and half an hour
before meeting was opened people were being sent
back to the overfloAv meetings or down to the

basement, where an earnest prayer meeting was
in progress. The heavenly singing rose, swelled
to a cloud of glory and a mantle of adoration
enfolded the people. One after another people
from the age of six to the old man who boasted of
his seventy-eighth birthday, sprang to their feet
with quick, burning, definite testimonies.
After a simple message from the Word and an
earnest altar call, sinners and believers were on
their way together to the basement, where seats
had been removed and the great floor cleared for a
prayer and tarrying meeting. Ere long the floor
was covered with the slain of the Lord and many
workers, evangelists and missionaries were passing
from one to the other, praying with and rejoicing
over those who were coming through to their
baptism.
After the week at Bethel Temple we again took
up the revival meetings in Victoria Hall. The
seats were filled long before meeting, then people
stood wedged tightly for hours. Ushers struggled
to keep the aisles open to conform with the fire
laws; children and younger people sat on the
floor in front of the altar, even on the platform itself, and every available foot of space
was taken until the speaker found it hard to
move to and fro without stepping upon some
one. They raised the windows and stood on the
window-sills; seats were put on the elevation that
covers the baptistry, many stood in the halls and
236

MIGHTY DOWNPOUR AT LOS ANGELES
the corridors ; overflow meetings were held in other
parts of the building, one in the prayer-room,
where the singing and praising would be echoed
in to us in the larger hall as believers received
the baptism. One night eleven received the baptism

during the preaching. Pastor Fisher had thrown
open his office suite of four rooms for an overflow
meeting. Here many were filled with the Holy
Spirit, others were in earnest prayer before God
for conviction to rest upon the entire audience
of the larger service.
The floors of the prayer room were filled; they
fell on the platform where the sick were prayed
for; many sinners who came up the aisles for salvation and lined and relined the altar across the
front were saved and struck down under the power
of God as soon as they reached their knees. One
night it was thought remarkable by many of the
workers who were looking on, to see eleven out of
one group of twelve which had come to the altar
for salvation, not only saved, but baptized with
the Holy Spirit.
The singing of the heavenly choir, the messages
in tongues, and interpretation, were indescribable.
Such a sweet spirit of unity and love prevailed,
such a mantle of worship and adoration fell upon
and enveloped the people that many times it was
impossible to preach; even testimonies would be
drowned out by the bursts of praise and song
which would sweep from the pulpit to the
door. Again the audience would arise and with
uplifted hands praise and worship the glorious
One who had caused the desert to blossom as a
rose, and pools to spring forth in the wilderness,
and give floods in the dry land; Hallelujah!
The messages in tongues and interpretation also
vividly described the coming of the Lord, the
approaching darkness sweeping o'er the land, the
rising up of the beast out of the sea, the great red
237

THIS IS THAT

hand over the horizon, ascending in the sky, reaching over the earth, and gripping it so tightly that
blood oozed forth between its fingers.
Ofttimes the messages were more than the sin>
ners could bear, and as the sufferings of the Lord
were described sobs would be heard, men and
women from many parts of the building rose and
came to the altar for salvation. Although no
effort was made to keep track of the number
saved or baptized in these meetings, we know the
angels rejoiced one night at the spectacle of forty
men and women coming to the altar for this glorious salvation. An entire Catholic family were
saved the same night.
Two women who came in drunk and were saved
at one o'clock in the morning, praised God each
meeting for having been saved from a life of sin
and shame, and filled with the Holy Spirit. Needless to say, every one who received the Holy
Spirit spoke in other tongues as the Spirit gave
utterance, even the man who had been born deaf
and dumb.
He came to meeting day after day writing with
pencil and pad. He sought the baptism of the
Holy Spirit and of course in order to baptize him
the Lord must enable him to speak. After seeking
five nights, the Holy Spirit suddenly came to His
temple. It would be hard to describe the shouting
and the joy of those who gathered round him as
he received the Holy Spirit and came through
speaking with other tongues in an audible voice.
When he rose from under the power the voice had
not left him. Bless God! We praise God for
many cases of healing and deliverance. All
through the meetings praise has been given to
the Father and to His Son Jesus Christ, and to
the Holy Spirit. No man or woman has either
taken or been given the glory, for all has been so
manifestly done by God through weak vessels
of clay.

238

CHAPTER XXII.
"THE HOUSE THAT GOD BUILT."
"Yea, the sparrow hath found an house, and the swallow
a nest for herself, where she may lay her young." Ps. 84:2.
During the week at Bethel Temple the Lord
had spoken this command with the promise:
"Go to Victoria Hall Sunday night. I am going
to do something wonderful in Victoria Hall Sunday night." And Oh, He did keep His word!
All this time the Lord had continued to assure
me that He would provide for me a little home for
the children. He spoke to other people throughout the city on the same lines insomuch that they
were calling me up on the telephone with the
word that God had been showing them that the
little children should have a home and place to go
to school.
Now this particular Sunday night of our return
to Victoria Hall, the place was packed to the doors
with people when a young lady sprang to her
feet, saying,
"The Lord shows me that I am to give a lot to
Mrs. McPherson. I have four lots of land and do
not need them all. I am not called to preach the
Gospel, while she is, and by giving the land that
the little ones may have a home and she may be
free to come and go in the Lord's work, I will
share in her reward." A brother sprang to his
feet, saying:
"Yes, and I will help dig the cellar." Others
chimed in with : "Yes, I will help lay the foundation," "I will do the lathing," "I will do the

plastering," "I will furnish the dining room," and
239

THIS IS THAT
so it went on until even the little canary bird was
promised.
A lady promised rose bushes. Now the canary
and the rose bushes touched niy heart and caused
me to shout more than all else, for small as the
incidents may seem, I could see God, for the
canary and the rose bushes were the two things
the children had asked for beyond all else. The
Heavenly Father had not forgotten.
When all was arranged a day of dedication and
earth-turning was set, and after singing and
prayer the saints formed a long line and marched
round the lot single file, asking the Lord for the
needed means with which to erect the little home.
Away back yonder, when out of the will of God,
how I had struggled to get a little rente'd flat
furnished, and what misery I had gone through,
but now God is Himself planning a home which
would be our own, a home given and built by the
saints, where every tap of the hammer drove
nails of love into the building and into our hearts.
Perhaps none of my readers who have always had
a home for their little ones, a pillow of their own
at night, could enter in with me into this wonderful joy in their behalf.
Brother Blake was a builder by trade, and he
undertook to oversee the erection of the little home.
Soon the brothers were digging the cellar and doing the work either entirely free or at a very low
figure. One brother who offered his services was
tested by the enemy, who said to him :

"Now you know you should be working somewhere where you could earn a good day's pay to
take home to the wife and family."
He knew God had spoken to him, hoAvever, and
toiled away at the foundation. On his way home
one night it began to rain, and right at his feet
lay fifteen dollars. God had richly paid him for
his two days' labor. Hallelujah!
240

"THE HOUSE THAT GOD BUILT"
This is just one instance out of many where
God has blessed every undertaking about this
little home. It Avas a wonderful thing, also, that
the lot of land, just on the suburbs of Los Angeles,
while away from the influence of the city, should
be just across the street from a fine school. Let
everybody that reads say "Glory." We ourselves
are so full of thankfulness and praise we can cry
with David,
"Oh, where, my soul, shall I begin to praise the
name of Jesus?"

241

CHAPTEE XXIII.
LOS ANGELES TO SAN FRANCISCO.
"The plowman shall overtake the reaper, and the treader
of grapes him that soweth seed; and the mountains shall
drop sweet wine, and all the hills shall melt." Amos 9:13.
Leaving Los Angeles at noon, via the San

Fernando Valley, we passed through the citrus
and olive ranches, through the Newhall Tunnel
and on to Saugus with its great fields of oil wells
nestling at the foot of the mountains, losing no
opportunity with tracts and literature.
From Saugus we climbed the mountain grades
of the San Francisquito Canyon, skirted the edge
of the great lonely Mojave Desert spread like a
vast, silent emptiness far away into the blue
distance. Then up and up the mighty Tejon Pass
with its rocky cliffs and precipices (Mt. Whitney
in the distance). From the snowy summit we
dropped to plains whereon a straight road
stretched before us like a long, shining ribbon.
Speeding over this highway, sunset found us in
the town of Bakersfield.
There was no Pentecostal work in Bakersfield,
so we decided to spend the night there. We distributed tracts, and also held an open-air meeting
at one of the principal corners, from the Gospel
Car. Here we found special need for the little
Gospels, Avhich we gave freely.
On the journey toward Oakland and San Francisco, a blinding rain made driving not only difficult but dangerous. Hurrying along with side
curtains buttoned securely and the windshield
misty with the falling torrents, we failed to see an
243

THIS IS THAT
approaching- freight train until within twenty feet
of the track. The train was going too fast to stop,
and had I slammed on the brakes the car would
have skidded ahead into the train. Quick as a
flash the Lord gave me presence of mind to whirl
the car to the left and up the side of the track,
thus avoiding the train and coming to a stop

without injury. Hallelujah!
We prayed for dry weather; soon the sky
cleared, and as Ave crossed the bay on the ferry
from Oakland to San Francisco the sun smiled
down upon us from a clear blue sky, as a promise
that the Lord would send down upon us the
showers of blessing and the sunshine of His love
whilst in this city.
Brother and Sister Robert J. Craig, with their
workers, were waiting to welcome the Gospel Car
and its seven rejoicing passengers.
GLAD TIDINGS HALL
From the first meeting to the last the glory of
God rested upon the people. The manifestations
of the Spirit's power increased daily, hungry
souls came from far and near and were filled with
good things from Father's table. Crowds increased daily, and even though an extra gallery
was built, the last meeting found the crowds
standing clear out onto the sidewalk.
The way in which sinners rose to their feet in
response to the altar call and came from the
galleries and from various parts of the hall to the
altar was a sight to warm the heart of any soulwinner. At the close of each preaching service
the long prayer room would quickly fill from one
end to the other with earnest seekers for the
baptism of the Holy Spirit. The prayers of
seekers and workers went up with such unison
and in such accord that their voices sounded like
the rushing of many waters. Many were pros244

LOS ANGELES TO SAN FRANCISCO
trated on the floor under the power of God while

they received their baptism, others were filled
with the Spirit while kneeling or standing upright
on their feet, with hands and face upturned to
heaven.
These after meetings ofttimes continued until
five and six in the morning. Among the many
baptized with the Holy Spirit during these meetings were tw r o ministers, church members and a
number from a nearby Salvation Army corps.
FIRE FALLS IN WATER.
As the new converts took a firm stand for the
Lord and were buried 'neath the water in baptism,
the fire fell in the baptismal fountain till Pastor
and new converts danced and shouted, talked in
tongues with interpretation.
Throughout our meetings everywhere we have
put the ministry for the soul first, then the ministry for the body, nevertheless miracles of healing
have been wrought in almost every meeting.
Among those who were healed in the San Francisco meeting was a child whose throat was to
have been operated on the following day, instantly
healed in answer to prayer. The doctor bade the
mother take the child home, saying that she was
perfectly whole.
A lady who had suffered with internal trouble
and rupture for eighteen years was instantly
made whole by the Great Physician, Jesus, in
answer to the prayer of faith, insomuch that the
truss has been removed and she leaps and dances
and praises the Lord, absolutely free from pain.
A brother whose knee and ankle had been
stiffened from a severe accident, was touched by
the Hand Divine, and his joints loosened up so
that he danced and leaped for joy, his limb made
whole and sound as ever.

An elderly lady afflicted with neuritis in head
245

THIS IS THAT
and face, insomuch that for a number of years she
had not had a sound night's sleep, came to ask for
prayer. So tender was her head and face that she
held her hands over it while we prayed, as though
in terror lest the lightest finger touch should reach
it. She was instantly healed, and through the
entire balance of the meetings continued to praise
God that all pain and tenderness was gone, and
she slept soundly, free from suffering.
What a wonderful Saviour is He who has borne
not only our sins but our sickness in His own
body upon the tree, and by whose stripes we are
made whole. Here is the testimony of a sister :
HEALED OF TUMOR.
"I had been afflicted with a tumor on my wrist
for a number of years and had never had a permanent healing until now. Sister McPherson and
a brother prayed for me and I am thoroughly
healed. I work at my stenographic work every
day and there is no soreness in the wrist at night,
which shows it is a perfect healing. Praise the
Lord. I was healed of internal trouble which
made my life miserable, and my sight, which had
been affected from my nervous condition, was also
healed, so I am now made perfectly whole."
B. u L.
Brother and Sister Craig, who have stood as
pastors of this work for seven years, are precious,
fire-tried saints of the Lord. Through the many
doctrinal issues and contrary tides that the enemy
has brought to bear against the children of -the

Lord in these last days, they have stood firm and
true. The kindness, hospitality and love extended
to us by the dear ones of San Francisco will never
be forgotten.
After the farewell service, saints and pastor
gathered about the Gospel Car, and prayed and
sang ere we departed to our next field of labor.
246

LOS ANGELES TO SAN FRANCISCO
OAKLAND, CAL.
Mrs. Carrie Judd Montgomery, who, with
other Oakland saints, attended many of the meetings at San Francisco, having the Avork of Oakland
on their hearts, asked us to hold a series of revival meetings in that city. As this was out of the
question, every date having been promised far
ahead, Sister Montgomery arranged two speciaj
afternoon meetings, which we sandwiched in without interfering with those of San Francisco.
The first meeting was conducted in Ebell Hall,
the second in the great ballroom of the Hotel
Oakland.
Both meetings were well attended by members
of all denominations. Several ministers who were
there expressed their longing for a deeper work
and a melting of the coldness in their churches.
A Methodist minister and a Methodist Episcopal
preacher both gave cordial invitations to us to
come and preach the next Sunday morning.
SAN JOSE "THE GARDEN CITY"
Pastor J. H. Sparks and his assembly, who had
been preparing and looking forward to this special
effort for months, had all in readiness. The Liberty Hall was filled with people. All were hungry

for the meetings and eager to help.
The way in which these California saints go to
work to advertise a meeting is an inspiration.
Almost every trolley in the city carries a big
revival meeting banner outside, besides the cards
within. The windows of the shopping districts
have been placarded in every direction. The city
has been mapped off and visited from house to
house with personal and printed invitations.
In addition to th'e daily street meetings, automobiles bearing signs and banners go through the
streets. Singers with guitars and banjos and big
247

THIS IS THAT
base drums are within, whilst a brother sits
astride the engine and shouts through the megaphone of the soon coming of Jesus, and bids the
astonished populace come to the Liberty Hall and
hear all about it.
Our first convert was a poor old man who had
spent Saturday night in jail. Sunday he was
saved and the following Monday found him on
the front seat with a shining face and a glad testimony. He had found w r ork, and promised to be
true to Jesus.
One dear Catholic w r oman who had heard about
the meetings came fifty miles to be saved. With
uplifted hands and radiant face, she joined in the
march about the building, shouting and praising
her new-found Saviour.
A newspaper reporter attended every meeting
and printed the greater part of every sermon in
the daily newspaper. Ministers and church members alike came to hear the message; souls were

saved and the glory came down.
WELCOMED HOME.
"When are you coming home? W T ill meet you/'
was a message recently received over the phone
from the Los Angeles assembly. "Home," why,
'tis the first time in years we have had such a
message or a place that we could really call home.
Thus we had our first glimpse this week on a
hurried trip to Los Angeles, of the little house
which we have beheld by the eye of faith from the
day the land was dedicated, and it is going to be
just what we need, nothing elaborate in any way,
but it will be a home nest and the dear saints who
have toiled at it faithfully, have been so Spiritfilled that with the hum of the saw and the tap
of the hammer have gone up gbngs of praise and
victory, and prayers that God's blessing would
follow and bring us safely home.
248

LOS ANGELES TO SAN FRANCISCO
It has been indeed a labor of love, and our
hearts are overflowing with gratitude to the
precious Father who hath remembered the low
estate of His handmaiden and fulfilled His promise
and hath done exceedingly abundantly above all
that we could have asked or thought. We are
looking forward today with greater courage and
lighter hearts than ever before to the work of
winning souls and spreading the message of the
soon coming of the Lord, as we think of the little
ones coming home from school, singing and playing happily about the bungalow and praying for
the Mother as she comes and goes in the Master's
service, in obedience to the command of Him who
raised her up from a dying bed to preach the
Word. All glory to Him who has kept us within

His tender care until this day.
And as we are looking forward now to taking
our children to this haven of rest which loving
hands have prepared, we know that if we are
faithful a little longer we shall some day receive a
wireless message to come to the home over there
which our Lord has gone to prepare, and shall
rise with souls who have been redeemed through
obedience in preaching the Word our spiritual
children that there we may enjoy together the
building made without hands, that fadeth not
away, eternal in the heavens.

249

ROBERTA AND ROLF WITH THEIR MAMMA
send you their love and will you please pray for them?

Part II
Testimony of those touched by God
in our Meetings

THE MIGHTY POWER OF GOD MANIFESTED AT MOUNT FOREST, ONTARIO.
SISTER E. SHARP.
"Blessed is she that believed, for there shall be
a performance of those things which were told
her from the Lord."
These words were given to me while we were
talking over the work of our mission that the

Lord led us to open, four months previously, in
the town of Mount Forest, Ont., Canada, in the
year 1915. The plougher, the sower and cultivator had done their work, and now we were
expecting some fruit from our labors. As believers, we were looking for the signs following.
Hearing of a great Pentecostal campmeeting
at Kitchener, Ont., about sixty miles from us, 1
went there, and at that meeting met Sister Aimee
Semple McPherson, whom God was using mightily
among those hungry seekers my heart was greatly drawn to her, and one night while we were
praying in a tent with five young girls who were
receiving the Holy Spirit, the Lord spoke to me,
saying :
"There is the one for your work, the one I shall
use in the revival I promised you." I spoke to
her at once, and the next day she received the
assurance and confirmation from the Lord that
she was to come.
At this Campmeeting the Lord used her to
encourage and pray with my Mother, who received
the Spirit, whom she had been seeking to receive
for three years, also my brother and a niece were
baptized with the Holy Spirit at this meeting
through her ministry.
253

THIS IS THAT
Before the close of that Campmeeting my loved
ones, with myself and about sixty others, followed
the Lord in water baptism, in the river, while
multitudes of people thronged the banks. Sister
McPherson gave a soul-stirring message to them,
while still in her wet garments. About seventy
people or more were baptized with the Holy
Spirit in that meeting, through her instrumen-

tality.
Two weeks later a number of my loved ones
planned to attend a Campmeeting at London, Ont.
My daughter was anxious to go, after hearing
that so many young children were filled with the
Spirit at Kitchener. (We had never been taught
to believe that children could expect to receive the
Holy Spirit.)
During these two weeks, in answer to prayer,
God had deepened a hunger in the soul of the
preacher in our mission, so that he, with my loved
ones, went to this Campmeeting to receive this
part of "that which was spoken of by Joel the
prophet." I received a letter from them that he
and my daughter received the Spirit at the same
time, both speaking in tongues as the Spirit gave
utterance, also that my nephew had been baptized
with the Holy Spirit in the previous meeting, and
my brother-in-law and his father both were filled
with the Spirit in the same meeting, after Sister
McPherson had almost carried the father there to
hear his son speaking in tongues. A sister-in-law
also received the Holy Spirit in the same Campmeeting.
While I was reading the wonderful news I
began to shout and praise the Lord in such a way
that my seven-year-old boy closed the doors and
windows lest I should scare the neighbors and
wake up the town. It seemed as though the
floodgates of heaven were opened on my soul, and
I began at once to plan for our own meeting.
254

MIGHTY POWER OF GOD MANIFESTED AT MT. FOREST
SISTER M'PHERSON ARRIVES AT MOUNT FOREST.
The Lord would not let me advertise these

special meetings as I did before; I just announced
that Sister McPherson would be with us for a
short time, the meetings to commence on Sunday.
On Saturday evening, on my way to the station
to meet the Sister, who was to arrive on the train,
I asked the Lord for a confirmation if this was the
beginning of the revival He had promised me a
year before, if so, would He just baptize someone
that evening. The Sister, on her way up, asked
the Lord for a promise. The Lord said: "Everyone that askcth receiveth."
THE FIRE BEGINS TO FALL.
On our return to our home from the train,
which was about 9 p. m., we found the home
unexpectedly filled with young people. We at
once began to pray and sing, and presently my
boy, ten years old, fell across another young man,
and began to speak in a language he had never
learned. My husband, now convinced of his need,
received the gift of the Holy Spirit on the following Monday morning while at family prayer, and
he began to shout in other tongues. A few days
later rny younger boy, seven years old, received
the Spirit, and spoke in Chinese, as the Spirit
gave utterance. One week later I had the joy of
seeing my husband and three children, along with
many others, obey "The Word," by being buried
with Jesus in water baptism.
MULTITUDES COME RUNNING TOGETHER.
Very soon our mission could not hold the
crowds, and for some nights Sister McPherson
stood on our front piazza and preached to the
enormous crowds that filled our lawns. In
answer to prayer the Lord gave her a 30x60 tent,
which was erected on the lawn.
255

THIS IS THAT
Shortly before this, during a testimony meeting
at the mission hall, while we were singing, the
mighty Comforter came upon me with power and
set the joy bells ringing, and at the same time the
Holy Spirit fell on a young man who began
shouting :
"Glory to Jesus !" while I shouted "Hallelujah !"
The young man began to shake and to shout
louder. The church people who had gathered for
the meeting became alarmed and terrified, and
left, telling men on the streets that I was
hypnotizing this young man. Presently the hall
was filled with mockers and scoffers, and with
professional and business men of the town, inquiring, "What meaneth this?"
THEY WERE ALL AMAZED.
One doctor pulled the brother off the chair,
opened his shirt and applied a piece of ice,
wrapped in a towel, to keep the fire from burning.
Still he shouted:
"Glory, glory, glory to Jesus !" and I shouted
"Hallelujah!" The lad's parents were sent for, as
they were told "Jim" was dying. Meanwhile I
was shouting, and two doctors busied themselves
one of them placed his knees on one of the
young man's arms, and the other doctor placed his
knees on the other of the young man's arms
trying to hold his hands quiet, but he shouted all
the louder, until his father came and dragged him
home, and our meeting closed that evening without any testimonies, but has never been dismissed.
This had been the first time the Power of the Holy
Spirit had fallen in our mission hall or in any
public place in the town.
THE LATTER RAIN FALLS.
When the meetings began at the tent it was

noised abroad, and multitudes came from different
parts of the country, from villages, towns and
256

MIGHTY POWER OF GOD MANIFESTED AT MT. FOREST
cities, and we had to meet every train. The
promise, "Everyone that asketh receiveth" was
truly fulfilled. In those blessed days of blessing
and outpouring of the Spirit, many did not even
ask, but only desired the gift, and the Lord baptized them with the Holy Spirit.
What times of rejoicing we had in our home at
the rear of our tent, where we set apart our large
sitting-room for hungry souls, to weep their way
through to Calvary and Pentecost. We joyfully
took the spoiling of our goods, to see the dear
tear-stained faces weeping on our fine upholstered
chairs, couches, rugs and sofa cushions. When I
look at them now they look sacred, even to touch,
in loving remembrance of those hallowed hours,
when we tarried with them, when we heard the
heavenly choir singing, as we joined in the praise
and worship of the King of kings.
Our Sister had wonderful visions, and the Lord
gave us many songs through her while she was
"in the Spirit." The Lord gave me messages in
unknown tongues, and gave Sister McPherson the
interpretation, which put a holy fear on those
who had wandered away from God, and many
were convicted of sin and came to Jesus.
HEALING IN THE NAME OF JESUS.
One day my Mother came to our home with
her foot badly poisoned; she had suffered much
for weeks, but the Lord Jesus gave victory and
healed her.

One man, the toAvn-crier and bill-poster, had
three running sores on his ankle for years; the
doctors could do nothing more, and wanted to
amputate the foot. When he heard of the healing
power of God he came along to have some
"Mission Ointment," as he called it, applied. We
told him we had no mission ointment but the
healing ointment of Calvary. We prayed and
257

THIS IS THAT
laid hands on him, and anointed a cloth with oil
in the name of the Lord Jesus, and wrapped it
around his leg and ankle in Jesus' Name. He
came back the next day and told us he felt like
needles pricking all his toes and ankle. When we
removed the cloth we shouted "Glory to Jesus,"
for he was perfectly healed, and all the blackness
gone he walked without a limp. He was a living
testimony in the town, for everyone soon heard
of his healing.
THE OLD-TIME POWER.
One Saturday morning, about 10 :30, while my
hands were in flour, preparing to bake, and another lady worker was sweeping, with a big apron
and dust-cap on, we were asked to come out to
the tent to see my husband, slain under the power
of the Spirit on one side of the altar, and the
town-crier, who had assisted him in the tent,
with the benches, etc. slain under the power of
the Spirit on the other side of the altar.
I began to shout:
"Glory to God," and the sister shouted and
waved her hands. Next my Mother came to the
tent, and she, too, commenced to shout. Then
came our preacher, and my daughter, and Sister

McPherson. Everyone of us was slain under
the power of the Spirit. The tent rapidly filled
with scribes and pharisees, scoffers, policemen,
doctors and hotel-keepers, all inquiring what
power was this, or who was the cause of all these
people being mesmerized and hypnotized. Even
the preachers did not recognize the "Old-time
Power" which they had been praying for so long,
to visit their churches; it had come so rapidly to
the little crowd of humble people whom they
despised.
THIS IS THAT.
In a short time the whole town was stirred,
258

MIGHTY POWER OF GOD MANIFESTED AT MT. FOREST
and all rushed to see, while the power had lifted
from all but the town-crier, who was made the
subject of much criticism and examination by the
doctors.
All the while Sister McPherson, who had regained her feet (she had been slain under the
power of the Spirit, too) was preaching.
"This is that which was prophesied by the,
prophet Joel, and the same power that dear John
Wesley felt in his meetings, before the 'Amen
Corner' left the churches." She preached the
Gospel in its simplicity, decisively, and convincing many that this was the same as in Acts 2.
Others, however, mocked and said : "They are
mad, only fit for the asylum."
HALED BEFORE THE MAGISTRATES.
We shouted and praised God until far in the
afternoon, when I was served with a summons to
appear before the magistrate that evening at 7 :30,

which hour was our specified meeting time, for
praising Jesus with a loud voice. Oh what glory
filled my soul when I took that paper from the
police constable for the sake of Jesus. The Lord
was good to me; I danced around the constable in
the Spirit. This brought Sister McPherson, who,
when she saw me dancing, began to dance around
them also. He went away remarking to others:
"We cannot do one thing with these women."
The Lord was with us in the Courtroom, while
listening to the charges against us. Of course I
had to plead guilty to the charges made by the
scribes and the pharisees, some of them being
Methodist Church people among whom I had,
been a worker for years.
It was true there was such drawing power at
the tent it caused people to look out of the
photographer's window so that he could not get
them to pose for their photos, and he was consequently losing money.
259

THIS IS THAT
The printers and compositors in the pressroom
were also attracted so that the editor was losing
money.
The dressmaker was a loser, for the singing got
on the nerves of the people, and she had to go
home, ill.
The grocer felt so bad that he felt like shouting,
too.
But a dear Catholic expressman would not put
in any charge against us; he said they should just
let us go and obey God rather than men.

The Word of God was fulfilled in many ways.
The Holy Spirit gave us, at that hour, what we
should say, and we testified to the wonderful
works of God in our own souls and homes.
The Lord sent us a fine man, Kev. J. Clark, a
Methodist minister, who had been baptized with
the Holy Spirit at Winnipeg, to witness in the
courtroom that evening, and to convince the magistrate that this was of God.
While we were in the courtroom, Sister McPherson, with a band of young converts, conducted a meeting at the tent, which was packed,
and an immense crowd outside, of a furious,
angry mob. God gave her the message of:
"What meaneth this?" and "This is that"gaining them every moment, and the Holy Spirit
stilled the tempest, and the meetings were advertised far and wide, for afterwards large crowds
came to "see and hear."
I, hitherto, had possessed a man-fearing spirit,
and shrank from noise and manifestations, but I
praise the Lord for sending Sister McPherson into
my life, as she taught me how to praise the Lord
and to get out of bondage to man, and to take my
liberty in the Spirit, for "whom the Son makes
free is free indeed."
She left aside all doctrines, but lifted up Jesus,
and magnified the Blood, truly honored the Holy
260

TESTIMONY OF PASTOR W. K. BOUTON
Spirit, and preached the soon-coming of Jesus, as
we had never heard before, and our dear Lord
honored her messages by saving and baptizing
many. The effects of these meetings will reach

to the uttermost parts of the earth. This year
missions have been opened in different towns by
dear ones who received blessings at that Campmeeting.
The Lord gave us many precious songs through
Sister McPherson, in the Spirit, also the messages in prophecy: Awake, O Earth!" and
"Jesus is Coming Soon," were given through her
during the last few weeks of those meetings, before she and her husband left for his home in
Providence, R. I., where they together began their
work in the large tent donated by the saints of
that place.
Surely we have seen "the arm of the Lord revealed," and the Holy Fire came from Heaven
with slaying power when our floor appeared like
a battlefield that even unbelievers looked on in
wonder.
"He that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed 7 shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him."
TESTIMONY OF PASTOR W. K. BOUTON,
FREE GOSPEL CHURCH, CORONA, N. Y.
After preaching the Gospel for about twelve
years with marked success, I began to realize
there was something needful in my life, but did
not know just what it was. I would often say to
my people : "God is about to do some strange thing
in our midst, but what it is I do not know." I
felt a need, but thought I was in possession of all
that God had for me, except that I must go on
and "grow in grace and in the knowledge of the
Lord daily, line upon line, precept upon precept,
here a little and there a little." I never dreamed
261

THIS IS THAT

of the Baptism of the Holy Spirit. I thought
those days were passed; in fact, I was taught by
the teachers under w r hom I studied, that we need
never look for supernatural things, those days
were over and gone forever. Whenever I heard
anything about the Baptism, or people speaking in
other tongues, I would say it is an error and
would warn my people to have nothing to do with
it. We were having very good meetings, and
scores of souls were saved. We hardly ever had a
service at our church, especially on Sundays, but
what God was wonderfully blessing and saving
souls.
NEW LIGHT.
About this time one of our members came and
told me of a woman who was preaching in the
little Swedish Church here in Corona, He said:
"You ought to hear her, she speaks in other
tongues, and it seems the Spirit of God is wonderfully using her." I warned this brother to
keep away from these meetings and told him he
would be sorry if he became entangled in such a
bondage. A day or so later, a sister came to me
with the same news and told me to be sure and
hear this woman. I warned the sister likewise.
Then two other members of my church came and
told me how wonderfully God was using this
woman, and said one of our members had received
this strange blessing and also spoke in other
tongues. I said: "If she does this kind of thing
she will have to leave our church for she cannot
come to our church with this nonsense." Soon
two or three others, all members of our church,
came to see me and said I must hear this woman.
All these things made me very curious and so I
determined to hear her, not because I believed in
what she said, but because my curiosity was
aroused. The first time I heard her she impressed
me as being honest and sincere and of having a
262

TESTIMONY OF PASTOR W. K. BOUTON
great knowledge of the Scriptures. After hearing
her the first time I came home and told my wife
how I felt about this matter. My wife said : "You
be careful; you warned others; now you look out,
or you will be ensnared in some of these latter
day errors." But I found myself at the meeting
the next night, vastly interested. I was saying
"Praise the Lord!" and "Amen" to many of the
things she said. When she spoke of the falling
away of the churches I could say Amen, when she
spoke of the coming of the Lord I could say
Amen, likewise when she spoke of the tribulation
to come upon this whole earth. I could also give
my Amen when she stood for a clean church and
for a people wholly set apart for the service of
God. But when she told of the way God would
baptize us with the Holy Ghost and fire with the
outward sign, namely, speaking with other tongues
as the Spirit gave utterance, I must admit I could
not say Amen, for I did not believe it. When I
reached home I "searched the Scriptures to see
whether these things are so," and to my great surprise in nearly every place where the Holy Spirit
was poured out I found they spake with other
tongues. I was sorry to find these things, because
I had been preaching to the contrary. I continued to go to the meetings; somehow I could not
stay away. One night Sister McPherson spoke of
the Baptism of the Holy Ghost and the gifts, from
the 12th and 14th chapters of I Corinthians. This
settled it all with me; I was sure this thing was
of God and that the Lord was still baptizing
people today, as He did in the days of the
Apostles. After this meeting was over I invited
Sister McPherson to come to our church. I had
not consulted any of the Trustees, nor any members of the church. I simply took it upon myself
to invite her. She readily accepted the invitation.

263

THIS IS THAT
THE BAPTISM OF THE HOLY GHOST.
The next night the meeting was in our church.
In her first talk Sister McPherson proved beyond
doubt that down through the ages the church
had lost the gifts of the Spirit, and she likewise
proved that God was going to restore them and
was restoring them now. She said nothing in
particular, however, about the tongues. We
opened the meeting again the next night and told
Sister McPherson to say anything she felt led to,
and immediately she preached on the Baptism
of the Holy Ghost, with the signs following. That
night the Lord began to pour out His Spirit in
a way we had never seen before. All over the
church people were lying prostrate, the altar was
filled all around the rail and down the aisles. I
confess I was a little afraid. I had been praying
to see these things and now as my eyes were beholding them I was half praying that God would
stop. I feared we might all be arrested. I think
eighteen or nineteen people were baptized in one
of the first meetings. I used to plead for people
to come up and give themselves to the Lord, but
now we had to beg folks to leave the altar and
make room for others. This continued for two
weeks, every night, until one and two o'clock in the
morning. People were receiving the Baptism and
coming through speaking in other tongues. Sunday School Superintendent, teachers and people
from other churches came in, God making no difference, but baptizing all alike. Most everybody
in our church received this blessed Baptism, all
the officers included, except myself. I could tell
others to praise the Lord and lift up their hands,
but when it came to lifting up my own hands and
praising the Lord I realized in what a bondage

I was. Nevertheless, I was determined to have my
Baptism, so on the 26th day of November, 1916,
after the meetings had been going on for some
264

TESTIMONY OF PASTOR W. K. BOUTON
time, I sought the Lord. After having my hands
extended for about fifteen or twenty minutes, and
"seeing no man save Jesus only/' the Lord poured
out the Holy Ghost upon me, and I, too, began to
speak with other tongues as the Spirit gave utterance. It seemed as though heaven had opened
and I had entered into the city; I heard and saw
things which completely revolutionized my life.
DIVINE HEALING.
So in two weeks our church was thoroughly
transformed by the power of the Holy Ghost and
we began to see new things. God was healing
people. Numbers, which time would not permit
me to speak of, were healed immediately. One
man came, into the meeting with heart disease.
He had had many doctors, but none could help
him. After prayer and the anointing with oil
the Lord Jesus healed him. Two sisters with
very large tumors came for healing. One of the
two sisters was to have an operation in a week.
The tumor was on the back, a little below the neck.
After prayer and anointing with oil I placed my
hand upon the tumor. I could feel it getting
smaller under my hand. So I called her mother
and asked her to feel it. She did so and immediately threw up her hands and praised God, for
the tumor had diminished. O, there is power in
Jesus' blood, and the "prayer of faith does save
the sick." Praise the Lord! The other sister felt
that all pain had left her and she said she was
healed. Another brother had a disease for years
and the doctors were unable to help him. While

we were anointing him with oil the Holy Ghost
came upon him and he began to speak in other
tongues, and testified that God had immediately
healed him. Another sister with a very, very bad
case of catarrh was instantly healed. One sister
had a cancer on her intestines, of which an X-ray
265

TPIIS IS THAT
picture had been taken. Two local physicians of
this town had diagnosed her case. Her bed was
prepared at Flower Hospital, but Glory to Jesus!
in the twinkling of an eye God healed her. This
was nearly two years ago and no sign of it has
ever returned. Praise the Lord ! There are scores
of others which could be mentioned, but suffice it
to say that the prayer of faith does save the sick
and the Lord does raise them up.
These things have been going on in our church
for nearly two years; there has been no stop, and
the power of God is manifested meeting after
meeting. God is still saving and baptizing people.
At the present time of writing, twelve souls were
saved at our last service. When God has His
way, souls will be both saved and baptized in the
Holy Ghost.
FAITHFULNESS REWARDED.
Let me say in closing, that wherever there is an
honest heart, God will always reveal Himself to
such a one. Wherever there is one "hungering
and thirsting after righteousness, he shall be
filled." Truly, if "we first seek the kingdom of
God and its righteousness, all things will be added
unto us." God has proved this to me over and
over again. I was a poor boy, compelled to work
for a living at the age of eleven, and I know what
it is to be hungry and to want the necessities of

life. I know what it is to be without shoes on a
cold winter's day, walking the streets with the
snow water oozing out of the tops of little shoes
which had no soles on them. I know what it is
to go to school with my sister's waist on and the
other boys all laughing because I had so many
buttons down the back. But I sought Him. and
not only that, but He sought me, and praise His
Name! He found me. Today I have my own home
and most everything heart could wish for, and am
266

MEMORIES OF THE CAMP
the Pastor of a spiritual church, "who love not
their lives unto death," but Jesus first and last.
O, how thankful we are that God ever permitted
Sister McPherson to come to Corona. God
through her has done a work which will redound
to the glory of God; and the revival is still on.
Sept. 23, 1918.
MEMORIES OF THE CAMP,
BY ELDER GEORGE LLOYD.
Ever since the blessed Camp at Philadelphia
the Spirit has prompted me to write and try and
tell of some of the wonderful things witnessed
there. And that is the most difficult part, to tell
of the most wonderful things, for it was all wonderful, and our God was there in mighty power.
It was not the great number of definite and glorious healings that we witnessed that appealed to
the Spirit most urgently, for we know that our
God is a mighty God, and we know that Jesus
Christ is the same, yesterday, today and forever.
Praise His glorious name! And we know that
Jesus can and does heal, and that He loves to heal
all that come to Him in true penitence and faith.

And then there were the many soul-searching
messages in tongues, with prompt and beautifully
true interpretations, many, many of them. And
then came the heavenly drama, with various and
beautiful acts of the Holy Ghost, shown forth by
the precious saints, for they were in the Spirit.
Glory to Jesus.
And the great number of converts, it was glorious, for we never witnessed so many cases of cleancut salvation before, where the dear ones would
come weeping their way to the altar, some falling
under the power on their way. And when they
had prayed through they were ready to testify to
a salvation that saves.
267

THIS IS THAT
One blessed scene comes before us often, and we
can see that great congregation of blood-washed
saints, with uplifted hands, pouring out their
hearts to God in earnest prayer, until the sound
resembled the rushing of a mighty river of waters,
in its volume. And when the spirit of prayer had
continued many minutes, there was heard a new
sound, and the prayer was changed to a song of
holy adoration, even praises to our King.
Hallelujah !
And as the holy anthem broke forth, Sister
McPherson seemed to float toward the piano, with
uplifted hands and transfigured face, and commenced to play and sing in the Spirit. We had
heard spiritual songs before, but never like this;
never such tones from a piano had our ears heard
before, and as verse after verse of the holy anthem
was given to our Sister with tongues and interpretation, and the saints who were in the Spirit
would all join in the glorious chorus, w r e w^re

transported with ecstacy, and we were in the
Spirit and were singing the New Song without
any effort on our part.
Oh, the precious, heavenly music! Who can in
any way describe it? We could only compare it
to an geolian harp with its rising and falling
cadence, and its sweet, blended harmonies, only
far sweeter and more pure in tone than the finest
pipe organ, for this w^as the Holy Ghost playing
upon God's great instrument not made with
hands. Glory to Jesus!
So the glory seemed to increase over the white
city of tents until the last great day of the feast,
and on the last night of the blessed meetings, when
the last "God be with you" had been sung, and
the congregation was dismissed, there remained a
large class of disciples who had tarried for their
anointing for service to our King. The dear ones
took their places in line, waiting patiently and
268

A MONDAY NIGHT MEETING
prayerfully their turn for their anointing for service until the early morning hours, and God was
very near with mighty power, and we pray that
the anointing received by the dear ones shall go
with them to their different homes and assemblies,
and kindle the Pentecostal fires anew and keep
them brightly burning until Jesus comes.
As for myself, I just praised God for the anointing that remains with me, for I am conscious of
a new power such as I never had before, and a
determination to give all that I have and all that
I am into His glorious service. And as we left
the blessed tabernacle and went to our tent and
cot for an hour of needed rest before our journey
homeward, we looked up to the starlit morning

sky and praised our dear Heavenly Father for the
glad privilege of spending twenty days in Heaven,
in Whose precious Name be glory forever. Amen.
A MONDAY NIGHT MEETING.
BY PHOEBE C. BENT.
One week of the Nation Wide Pentecostal Camp
Meeting had passed. The truth had been working
in the hearts of the rough element that lined the
outside of the big tent each night in great numbers. The crowd of young men and women from
the neighborhood had come to mock and jeer the
work of God this Monday night. The very air
was charged with the opposition of the evil one.
which drove many a saint to get under the burden and lift it with prayer. If the adversary was
carefully marshaling his forces, the Master was
more carefully organizing the saints of God for
the great struggle to come; and the Master has
never lost a battle.
As the singing progressed, Sister McPherson,
inspired by a revelation from God, arose to her
feet and gave a stirring exhortation that the
269

THIS IS THAT
saints move more unitedly together against the
evilness around them. Then the Holy Spirit,
knowing what was needed for the situation,
changed the order of the service.
It has often been said that one of the charms
of a Pentecostal meeting is that there is never any
monotony. You never know what is going to
happen next, praise His name. So it was announced that a number of leaders would give their
testimonies. Have you noticed in the accounts of

the great struggle over the sea, that the secret of
a successful offensive lies in the ability of the
attacking army to hurl fresh troops into the fray.
So it was this night, that the Holy Spirit threw
one leader after another to the front with their
testimonies. Some were not even allowed to finish
their story before they were moved off, but the
Master had His way, praise His name. It was a
hard battle. A feeling of a weight almost too
heavy to lift settled over the saints.
Then came the sudden orders to dismiss the
meeting abruptly. This would seem like defeat,
yet the Lord knew just what was needed. The
crowd soon melted away, after the benediction, disappointed in their purpose of having a good time.
Then Sister McPherson called for an all-night
meeting of prayer, asking for those who would
pray through to victory. Sister Sisson arose and
said that
"The people shall become our bread. This opposition on their part has driven us to our knees in
this all night of prayer. 'Why do the heathen
rage, and the penile imagine a vain thing? The
kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers
take counsel together against the Lord, and against
His anointed. He that sitteth in the heavens shall
laugh.' Yes, God laughs He has given us a
chance to get His coin. Can't you hear His coin
clink? Help yourselves, children."
270

A MONDAY NIGHT MEETING
With common consent every one sank to his
knees in prayer, and for two hours hearts poured
out their cries to Heaven. Who could doubt that
those in prayer moved God on His throne in behalf
of His saints? The Holy Spirit placed a mighty
soul-travail upon one sister, who wept and moaned

with sounds "which only the Spirit can utter."
When the praying had ceased, Sister McPherson, in that simple way of hers, said:
"Now, dear ones, just let us be quiet and see
what God has for us." From the silence that
followed it could be seen that the Spirit worked
this way and that upon different ones. Sister
McPherson had retired to one end of the rostrum, where she swayed back and forth in a
peculiar step or dance. This continued for some
time, when suddenly she moved rapidly to the
great upright piano, and began to play in the
Spirit. The moment the first strange chord was
struck, all eyes were riveted upon her. Wonderful
music flowed from the keys as her hands flew rapidly to and fro. Strange, and sometimes weird
heavenly chords were struck, that never man
could produce in the natural chords that struck
to the very soul. After a wonderful prelude, she
sang a song about the Lord's coming, that was
perfect in rhythm, rhyme, and metre.
She then arose and gave a message in tongues,
using certain things to emphasize her words. She
took a megaphone which stood near at hand, and
filled it with flowers from a vase on the pulpit,
which typified the "horn of plenty." Next, placing the flowers on the floor, she watered them from
a pitcher, showing that His saints would be revived and watered with the Latter Rain, which
would soon fall upon them, and then closed with
an exhortation to get ready for the soon oncoming
of King Jesus.
Immediately after the message followed a tab271

THIS IS THAT

leau of the crucifixion. Sister McPherson took
the outstretched hands of another sister that
moved in the Spirit, and made the motions of driving the spikes through her hands and feet, into
the cross. Then she laid her down, as in the
tomb, then raised her up as in the resurrection.
After a message in tongues, she gave the interpretation of the tableau that had just transpired
before them as f ollows :
"Behold, the Lord is calling. He is searching
for a people for Himself. He is calling; who will
follow Him? Who will be willing to go all the
way? Such a one will reign with Me. Wilt thou,
wilt thou folloAv Me? Behold the way is long;
the night is dark ; the road is thorny ; yet trust
thou Me. I will be with thee. Behold, wilt thou
follow Me, wilt thou go with Me through Golgotha? Wilt thou go with Me through the lonely
way of Calvary?
" Behold thy hands thy hands that are busy
with the cares of this world they must be
nailed to the cross. Art thou willing to have thy
hands nailed to the cross? Thy busy feet, that
have walked for this world, must be nailed to the
cross. Thy heart, that has beat for this world,
must be pierced for Me. A new heart will I give
thee. Who will follow Me? Who can bear the
crucifixion of this world? Can you live for Me
alone?
"He was laid in the tomb then did His enemies
mock Him. Then did the resurrection come. Behold! He will come again. He will give thee a
crown eternal. Kejoice in Me, for the City is in
sight. I will present My people perfect to the
Father. Many members from the East and from
the North and from the West and South shall become one body. Little children, will you follow
Me?"
This tableau finished as the first early signs of

272

SOME THINGS WHICH I SAW
(lawn were breaking,' and the great prayer of consecration which followed from the heart of Sister
McPherson, seemed not only to take in her own
soul, but the souls of the whole camp. It was a
time in which the hearts around her melted with
that sweet sadness that only a contrite heart
knows. This prayer seemed to close that wonderful Monday night of prayer; and as each saint departed there was not one who doubted that a great
victory had been won for God. To Him be all the
praise. It was little that we did; He did it allglory to His name!
SOME THINGS WHICH I SAW.
BY ELIZABETH SISSON.
Yes, things which I saw in Sister McPherson's
tent:
A brother injured in an auto accident, for
months unable to use one leg, instantly healed,
leaping and dancing on the platform, after hands
had been laid upon him with the prayer of faith.
A blind brother was so far recovered that he
could walk about the tent and grounds, could see
the buttons and trimmings on a lady's dress, and
said he kept seeing more all the time.
A sister who came into the camp on canes, had
also a cancer, has been walking for days without
sticks, and told me she felt the healing thrills go
through and through the cancer. A sister very ill
with serious heart trouble was instantly healed as
she went forward to be prayed for; the healing
came before the hands were laid on. Another left
off her glasses, got her sight so she could thread

a needle; also all her teeth were loose, and they
have come in tight and sound.
A Eoman Catholic lady came in to be prayed
for, gave her heart to Jesus and was healed. But
it is impossible to keep track of the cases, they
so multiply on our hands, v
273

THIS IS THAT
We had two thousand chairs in the tent. These
were all filled an hour or so before preaching service began. Then all around the tent they stood,
ten, fifteen deep, in profound attention for an
hour and a half or two hours. Crowds composed
of every nationality; all the Protestant denominations, and the Eoman Catholics, with a good
sprinkling of clergy, and a large crowd of nonchurch-attendants. God certainly advertised the
goods. The power and demonstration of the Spirit
was wonderful. That "joy of the Lord" which is
"our strength" filled the place, beamed on every
face, and danced in the eye of every saint. The
"slain of the Lord were many." The whole altar
was filled with them from end to end, daily the
most wonderful baptisms in the Spirit. Altars at
night were full of unsaved, seeking and FINDING
salvation.

WONDERFUL DOWNPOUR AT VICTORIA
HALL.
BY PASTOR W. W. FISHER.
The Latter Rain in great abundance has been
coming on the saints since the sister opened her
campaign. Old, dried-up cases, where the indi-

vidual has been seeking the baptism for years, have
been falling under the power of God and coming
through speaking in tongues. Backsliders who
failed God have been swept back into life and are
now singing His praises. I never, in all my extended ministry, saw so many slain under the
mighty power of God as have been observed in
the prayer room after the call was given for
seekers. It has seemed so easy for the people to
yield themselves to the Spirit. In some instances
the Evangelist had only to lift her hands and the
power would tumble them over.
In the large Auditorium Sister McPherson held
274

SAN FRANCISCO REVIVAL
the vast throng of nearly three thousand for over
an hour with the Gospel message, and many followed her to get under the showers. In all a great
revival has started in our midst. The people are
letting go of issues and doctrines and are joining
in with smiling faces, so that old grudges are
being settled and the saints are getting the love of
God restored in their souls.
The messages of the Lord, as given through our
sister are witnessed to by the Spirit. They are
the kind the church is in need of today. They
are just the kind of messages that are needed in
the city of Los Angeles, where much spurious
doctrine has originated, and where the Saints are
in such bewilderment they scarcely know what to
believe.
The Latter Bain is falling, some say even more
copiously than the former rain, and we are exceedingly glad to be in the showers.

SAN FRANCISCO REVIVAL.
BY ROBERT CRAIG, PASTOR.
It was a glad day for the Kingdom of Christ in
this place when the Lord directed our Sister Aimee
Semple McPherson to hold a series of meetings in
San Francisco.
Literally towering mountains of prejudice
against the Pentecostal movement have been swept
away under the same candid and forceful presentation of the claims of the full Gospel Message.
How many, many times church people have said:
"This is just what we have wanted and is just
like the power fell fifty years ago, except for the
speaking in tongues."
Scores who had grown faint of heart over the
coldness and indifference of the denominational
churches have had their hearts gladdened and their
275

THIS IS THAT
spirits refreshed and warmed at these Pentecostal
fires.
Oh! how many church members, and among
them many dear Scandinavians, have been swept
thru into their baptism.
Many Salvation Army people, touched by the
power of the Spirit, have come and received the
Baptism of the Holy Spirit, Acts 2-4. Among
them several officers and ex-officers. Though it
may mean expulsion for them, yet, praise God,
they bear the reproach joyfully, counting it a privilege to thus fill up a measure of His suffering
which remains.

From every possible angle the work of the Lord
at Glad Tidings Mission Auditorium has been
greatly strengthened, deepened and settled, for
which we praise our Heavenly Father.
One splendid Baptist minister, who will now
devote his life to the Pentecostal Ministry, received,
his Baptism as did also Evangelist A. C. Stevens,
whose testimony now rings clear and strong for
Pentecost.
Just how many have been gloriously converted
in these thirty-three days eternity alone will reveal. It has been a deep work and Ave believe that
the fruit will remain forever.
The Healing power provided in the Atonemen,t
has also been graciously manifested.
Quite a number of city ministers came to listen,
wonder and view the marvelous work of God in
the large prayer room strewn night after night)
with the slain of the Lord, and hear them burst
into new tongues. Pity the man who goes back to
his church to fight against this gracious Heavensent Revival. He will be writing his own epitaph.
Toward the close of the campaign the prayer
room was much too small and little prayer-groups
could be seen in various parts of the building
pointing sinners to Christ. This beside the ofttimes crowded altar.
276

Part III
Some Sermons and Writings
of
Aimee Semple McPherson

SALVATION MESSAGES

COME IF BUT
"COME now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord;,
though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as snow;
though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.
IF ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of
the land.
BUT if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the
sword, for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it." (Isa. 1:18,
19, 20.)

G-O-M-E; I-F; H-U-T; How much is expressed
in the three opening words of the three
above verses. The whole Gospel is embodied
and expressed through these concise, plain statements of God. First of all let us take the word
C-O-M-E.
Dear sinner, Jesus loves you. His arms are
outstretched toward you, His voice is calling you,
He has prepared a glorious Salvation for your
body, soul and spirit, and His great heart and
love and life are composed of one great, loving
c-o-m-e ! c-o-m-e ! c-o-m-e !
No matter how deep you may have fallen into
sin, Jesus says, "Come, I will forgive you and
wash you whiter than the driven snow."
No matter how black and vile your heart may
be, no matter how evil your mind and filthy
your appetites, or how strong your sinful habits,

COME, and I will take away your sin-filled heart
and give you a new heart a clean heart filled with
pure, holy thoughts; I will fill your mind with
thoughts that are in heavenly places, and your
mouth with praises; I will break the fetters of
every evil habit and cause you to walk forth a
free creature in Christ Jesus.
281

THIS IS THAT
"No matter if you have been a moral professor,
striving to live well in your own way you must
come to Me just as you are," says Jesus. "You
must be born again; nothing but the blood can
save. All your righteousness is as filthy rags."
Let the little children come, the aged with their
white heads and mis-spent years, the colored and
the white, the yellow and the brown come unto
Me, all ye ends of the earth, and be ye saved.
COME! COME!! COME!!! The call goes forth
to the Queen upon her throne and to the poorest
wretch in the convict's cell alike; all have
sinned and come short of the glory of God; all
have need of His great salvation.
Come, let the weeping tears be dried and the
discouraged, hopeless soul take new courage, and
find new hope, for Jesus is the hope of the hopeless. Plunge beneath the crimson flood that flowed
from His wounded side, and thou shalt know that
there is indeed balm in Gilead, and gladness in
the house of the Lord.
Let the giddy, laughing, thoughtless sinner,
dancing on the brink of Hell, be sobered and come
to Jesus in repentance, confessing his sins, or he
will be eternally lost in that land where laughing
and dancing are never known. The invitation is
extended to all mankind, irrespective of race,

creed, color or age; all alike need Jesus, and without Him are undone; it will avail nothing to gain
the whole world and lose one's own soul. "Come,
now, and let us reason together,'' saith the Lord,
"though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as
white as snow; though they be red like crimson,
they shall be as ?roo/." No matter how great or
how small your sins may be, Jesus will forgive
and pardon you, and, better still, He will remember them against you no more if you will turn to
Him today whilst there is yet time.
282

"COME IF BUT"
I-F.
"// ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the
(jood of the land.' 7 I-F dear sinner, Jesus has
done His part, He has sent forth the great call,
"Come," throughout the world; He has laid down
His life and shed His blood to redeem you; He
has prepared a great and glorious feast and builded
a glorious, heavenly city for you to live in. But
now we come to the great, middle word of our
test, "I-F." It does not look like a very big word
to read it, yet it is of such gigantic proportions
and looms up such a mountain that your whole
soul's eternal salvation or damnation depends
upon that one .little word "IF."
God has left you a free-will, moral agent; He
will plead with you to come; He will endeavor to
win you to His salvation and love, but He will
never force you to accept it. There must be a
Avillingness upon your part to accept this Saviour
as your Lord and King, a willingness to let Him
give you a new heart, and shape your life and
pattern it after our great example, Jesus. Here,
then, is the whole key to the situation:

"If ye be willing, and obedient, ye shall eat the
good of the land."' First Willing; Second Obedient, then ye shall eat the good of the land; there
is nothing too good for the Lord's children. Has
He not told us that "AH that I have is thine" 1
and that "no good thing will He withhold from
them that walk uprightly"? The good of the land,
with its joy, its peace that flows like a river, its
heaven for evermore, are yours IF ye be willing
and obedient to the calling and commands of the
Lord. And O, His yoke is easy and His burden
light. Hallelujah !
B-U-T.
But, then we come to the only other alternative,
the solemn, dark, grim punishment of the wicked.
283

THIS IS THAT
"But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured
with the sword; for the mouth of the Lord hath
spoken it." There are only two paths : one leads
to life, the other to endless death; one leads to
hope and joy, the other to despair and utter
darkness.
God hath no pleasure in the death of the wicked,
but longs that all should turn from the error of
their ways, hearken to His great, eternal invitation, expressed in the word C-O-M-E, be willing
and obedient, and inherit life everlasting. But, if
you refuse His invitation, and rebel instead of
obeying, you choose your own path, and thereby
seal your own doom, signing your own death
warrant, and shall surely be overtaken with God's
sword of judgment, which will fall upon all who
have rejected Jesus the Christ.
If ye be willing and obedient, and become a

child of King Jesus by being born again and
accepting His salvation, you will dwell in the
courts of His glory forever.
But if ye refuse and rebel, and choose rather to
remain in sin, and continue to walk on as the
devil's child, you will, of course, share in the
devil's home and reward, and be devoured with the
sword. The mouth of the Lord hath spoken it, and
no matter who has tried to tell you destruction
will not come, nor sorrow overtake those who
refuse and rebel, they cannot change the true
facts of the case, for the mouth of the Lord hath
spoken it.
O, dear sinner, heed this simple message today.
Come to Jesus as you are. Will you not kneel
down just Avhere you are this moment, and cry
out "O, Jesus, you have invited us to come, poor,
wretched, sinful, vile. O Lamb of God, I come.
Forgive my sins, create in me a new heart, make
me obedient and true to You forever. Take all
desire for the world, the flesh and the devil from
284

"COME IF BUT"
my life, and create a right Spirit within me,
and I will follow You wherever You may lead me,
dear Saviour." You will feel His cleansing blood
applied and His Spirit will bear witness with your
spirit that you are a child of God, and with His
great, eternal arms about you, a new life will open
out before you, and you will find your feet in the
path that leads on through the gates of pearl and
the streets that are paved with gold.
May God bless you, and help you to accept this
great invitation at once ? for today is the day of
salvation. O, harden not your heart.

285

THIS IS THAT
WHAT SHALL I DO WITH JESUS?
'T'T~7'HAT shall I do with Jesus?" Clear and
l/l/ imperative rang out the voice of Pilate
' ' above the clamor of the throng assembled
in the Judgment Hall.
"What shall I do with Jesus?" The question
was flung forth over the mob of frenzied, upturned
faces.
Fair and square, demanding an immediate, decisive answer, this question of momentous importance resounded through the court room, and hung
suspended in the tense, tragedy-laden air. From
the murmuring sea of anger-tossed accusers was
born a mighty, unquenchable tempest of bowlings
and ragings, while dark faces grew darker still
with blood-thirsty fury against the still, calm figure
standing so meek and sweet in his robes of flowing
white.
It was Jesus this pure, mild man, standing
there friendless and alone in the midst of this
howling rabble. How out of place He looked
like a tall, sweet, fragrant lily in the midst of
thorns and briers; like a pure little lamb in the
midst of a pack of hungry wolves, with bared
fangs. Dear Lamb of God, innocent, and unresisting, before the great judgment seat of Pontius
Pilate he stood, awaiting the verdict of those
arrayed against Him.

"What shall I do with Jesus?" What decision
would they render upon this question this momentous question this greatest and most important question that has ever been decided since the
world began? There were only two possible ways
of answering only two courses of action open :
there was no neutral ground, for had He not declared that
"He who is not for Me is against Me"? Either
they must accept Him as the King of Heaven,
286

WHAT SHALL I DO WITH JESUS?
Jesus, their Saviour, or they must crucify and
drive Him away from their hearts. Either they
must accept Him as their Messiah, their Redeemer,
or they must reject and put Him to an open
shame.
Louder, and with ever increasing determination,
rose and fell the cry of the people ;
"Away with Him ! Crucify Him ! Crucify Him !
We have no King but Caesar." They had rendered
their decision, their choice had been made; they
had given their irrevocable answer, and had dedetermined to crucify and put their Lord to an
open shame.
Harsh hands fell upon the gentle Nazarene, and
rushed Him from the court. Mercilessly did they
tear His garments from Him, and bared His
precious back to the smiters. He meekly bore the
cruel lash to the last, stinging blow that by
His stripes we might be healed. A crown of
thorns was thrust down upon His brow; a purple
robe put upon Him in mocking derision. He was
led to Calvary's Hill, bearing His cross, and crucified by cruel men.

They crucified their Lord; they gave Him
vinegar and hyssop to drink; they spurned and rejected Him to the last. And He bowed His head
and died He who Avould have gathered them to
His bosom He who would have been their King,
and have taken them up to reign with Him on His
throne.
Pilate's Judgment Hall the very name calls to
memory that shameful scene, and our hearts cry
out:
"How cruel, how foolish those Jews were to
reject and crucify their Lord to let Him stand
there on trial alone, with no one to accept Him
and stand on His side!"
Yet, did you ever stop to realize that the
border of Pilate's Judgment Hall has been enlarged
287

THIS IS THAT
and its Avails have widened and widened, till today
this whole world is a judgment hall Jesus is still
on trial, and the Spirit is echoing and re-echoing
the question :
"What will you do with Jesus ?"
The whole world is obliged to answer this question, as did the Jews of old. Each living soul,
irrespective of race, color or creed, must take sides
either for or against Jesus. There are today as
in that day of old but two courses of action open.
Each heart must answer individually and definitely whether he, too, will cry :
"Away with Him! Crucify Him." Or whether
he will open his heart's door and let Him enter as

King of Kings and crown Him with love and
allegiance.
Perhaps some reader cries out in horror:
"Oh ! We would never crucify Jesus we would
never think of driving the nails in His hands!"
But consider a moment, dear one. If you have not
accepted Him as your Saviour from all sin and
unrighteousness, if you have not come to Him in
repentance and had the blood applied to your
heart, you have done just that crucified your
Lord afresh and put Him to an open shame.
Remember he who is not for Him is against Him
neutral you cannot be;
Each time you go out of a meeting unsaved;
each time you go to bed unrepentant; each neAv
day the sun rises and finds you unprayerful, unthoughtful of your soul's salvation, you are crying
out:
"Away with Him! Away with Him!" O, perhaps you do not say it in words. But actions speak
louder than words, and even though your mouth
may speak much love, if you have not unconditionally surrendered your heart and life to Him, and
permitted Him to rule on the throne of your heart,
you are unconsciously answering the question
288

WHAT SHALL I DO WITH JESUS?
"What shall I do with Jesus?" by saying:
"Away with Him! Crucify Him! I have no
king but self and the world; I want my own way.
Away with Him! Away with Salvation." And
another voice is added to the throng rejecting
Jesus.

"In what way am I saying 'Away with Him'?"
you ask.
Why, can you not realize, dear unsaved soul,
that every step you take every foot-fall that resounds along the corridors of time, apart from
Jesus every step towards worldiness in sin is
crying out, louder than you could ever speak;
"Away with Him ; I choose the world ; I have no
king but self." Each time you put off Salvation
and say:
"Not tonight," you are adding another thorn to
the crown which you are making of your life and
placing it on His dear brow.
We are all making a crown for Jesus out of
these daily lives of ours, either a crown of golden,
divine love, studded with gems of sacrifice and
adoration, or a thorny crown, filled with the cruel
briers of unbelief, or selfishness and sin, aad
placing it upon His brow.
Each new day lived in holiness unto the Lord;
each new sacrifice of praise, is just another gem in
the royal diadem w r ith which the Christian is
constantly crowning the King who sits supreme
on the throne of his heart.
Each new day lived in sin and indifference to
Jesus is just another thorn, another cruel brier
the sinner's life is weaving into the crown he is
placing upon the brow of the friend and King he
has rejected and driven away from his heart.
Then they put upon Him a purple robe, crying,
"Hail, Jesus, King of the Jews," and smote Him
with their hands. Many today are still living lives
of hypocrisy, mockery and pretence; many are
289

THIS IS THAT
putting upon Jesus a purple robe of outside formality; they go to church and sing "All Hail the
Power of Jesus' Name/ 7 but by their lives they
smite Him with their hands.
And He, bearing His cross, went forth unto
Golgotha, and there they nailed Him to the cross.
The great, rugged cross was stretched upon the
ground, and Jesus' dear body stretched upon that
cross. O, sinner, behold that man the Son of
God with the kind, resigned, tender eyes, waiting
to be nailed there for your sins : See those rough,
heavy hands seize the nails and place them to
the palms of Jesus' hands. Hear the great, ringing blows of the hammer, as the nails are driven
deep crunching through flesh and sinew and
bones deep into the wood of the cross for your
transgressions. Dear hands hands that had fed
the multitude hands that had blessed the children, healed the sick, raised the dead faithful
hands that are knocking at your heart's door just
now as you are reading these very words they
nailed them to the cross. It was your sins, and
my sins that nailed Him there. Are you still
pushing His hands away from your life, and piercing them with nails of scorn, and unbelief, and
pride?
Then they drove the nails through His feet the
feet that had traveled so many weary miles to
bring hope and cheer and light and He was
lifted up high on the cross, up and up, suspended
upon those cruel nails till at last the cross sank
with a thud into the hole that had been digged for
it. And there He hung, the King of glory, between
earth and heaven, in shame, alone, for us.
Sinner, dear, how high you have lifted Him in
open shame others have seen you reject Jesus!
O, won't you receive Him just now as your
Saviour? Will you not love Him who first loved

you?
290

WHAT SHALL I DO WITH JESUS?
See that beautiful face, more marred than the
face of any other man. Hear His cry:
"Lo, I thirst! Give me to drink." They offered
Him vinegar and hyssop the bitterest of their
hatred and unbelief. But ah! He thirsts for the
sweetness of their love and adoration and acceptance. What are you giving Jesus to drink sweetness or bitterness? love or rejection? Our lives
are as a sponge, either absorbing vinegar and
hyssop from the world and the devil, or sweetness
and fragrance and the water of life from Jesus
and His Word.
Jesus is calling anew today :
"Lo, I thirst!" Dear one, what have you to
offer Him today from your life acceptance or
rejection?
Jesus cried: "Father, forgive them; they knoiv
not what they do." Oh, sinner, it does not seem
possible that you could have realized what you
were doing in refusing to accept Jesus, and persisting in crying;
"Away with Him! Crucify Him!" Perhaps you
never quite realized that you were crowning Him
with thorns, and crucifying Him afresh, and that
he who is not building up for Him is tearing
down.
What will you do with Jesus today? How will
you answer this eternal question? Jesus is standing before you awaiting the verdict. You must
judge; you must render your decision, for or

against Jesus or the World, Life or Death.
Judge, and choose ye this day, for soon this whole
scene will be changed forever. The sinner will be
removed in a hurry from his judgment seat, and
Jesus will mount the judgment seat to judge the
nations. The graves shall be opened, the sea shall
give up its dead, and all the dead, both small and
great, will stand before Him whom they have
judged.
291

THIS IS THAT
Everything will then be quite reversed. Instead
of it being a question of "What shall I do with
Jesus?" the question confronting each sinner will
be, "What will Jesus do with me?" In that great
day those who have accepted Jesus and made Him
ruler in their lives, will be accepted of Him and
sit with Him on His throne, but all those who
have rejected Him, and cried:
"Away with Him from my life, I have no time
for Jesus/ 7 will be rejected then by Jesus. He will
Himself echo the sinner's own words;
"Away with him; 'depart from Me, I never knew
you.' Depart into the home prepared for the devil
and his angels."
Those who gave Him to drink of the sweetness
and wine of their love will drink anew with Him
the wine of His Father's Kingdom, but those who
gave Him naught but rejection, and the gall of
bitterness, must drink the cup of their own sin
and death to the dregs.
What will you do with Jesus? O, accept Him
now; seek Him whilst yet He may be found; call
upon Him while He is near. Put away the evil of
your doings; cease to do evil; learn to do well;

wash you; make you clean. Accept Him as your
Lord and Saviour just now. He is calling you
who are weary and sick with sin; seeking you in
tenderness. He is whispering; Come unto Me all
ye who are weary and, heavy laden, and I will give
you rest. Him that comcth unto Me I will in n<j,
wise cast out. Today is the day of Salvation; tomorrow it may be too late, for He is coming soon
to earth again, coming with power and great glory.
Get ready to meet Him.

292

WHICH WILL YOU CHOOSE?

WHICH ROAD?
WHICH ROAD?
ONLY TWO ROADS IN LIFE: UPON WHICH ARE YOU?
SEARCH where you may, the wide world over,
there are only two roads to be found in this
life.
One road leads to Heaven; the other road leads
to Hell. The first road leads to everlasting life,
the second to everlasting death. The one to joy
and peace and eternal day; the other to eternal
sorrow and darkest night and destruction.
Every man, woman and child in this world,
irrespective of race, color or creed, is at this very
moment traveling either the one or the other of
these two roads. In other words, every individual
living is either on the road to heaven and life, or
upon the road that leads to Hell and death.

I am just a plain body, that believes in stating
a plain fact in plain words. It is time that
preachers stopped sugar-coating and misconstruing
God's Word; time they stopped preaching politics
and oyster suppers and began to preach these
plain facts that are so simple that even a fool
need not err therein.
First of all let me give my text, and we will see
what the Lord says' about these two roads, their
destinations, and the pedestrians thereon. Jesus
says, "wide is the gate, and broad is the way that
leadeth to destruction, and many there be which
go in thereat; because straight is the gate and
narrow is the way that leadeth unto life, and few
there be that find it."
This statement, if understood, would surely
revolutionize the ideas of a great many so-called
broad-minded people, who have always believed
that living a moral life or being a church member
would be a sufficient passport into Heaven. Being
a church member is no longer a despised way, but
quite the opposite; it is now considered quite
the fashionable and proper thing to do. Many
293

THIS IS THAT
think this is all the Lord requires of us; but upon
this erroneous belief falls the Word of God with
a startling blow that overthrows all such false
security.
Narrow is the way that leads to life and few
there be that find it. O, that Christians, as well
as sinners, and cold professors, would aAvaken to
the reality of this fact and get one glimpse of the
countless millions pouring into eternity every day
without God and without hope! They would

spring from their beds of ease and rush into the
highways and hedges to compel men to come into
the narrow way, and get right with God before it
is too late.
The Word of God shows us where these two
roads start. "All were born in sin and shapen in
iniquity." "All have sinned and come short of the
glory of God." We are also reminded that as God
"cannot look upon sin with the least degree of
allowance," "the soul that sinneth, it shall die."
But Jesus took our place, He died in our stead,
thereby opening a new and a living way, the
narrow way, into the presence of the Father.
O, sinner friend here tonight ! O weary, heavyladen pilgrim ! halt a moment and consider. Which
road are you on? Are you traveling towards
Heaven or Hell? We all entered life by the one
and self-same road, that is, we were all born in
sin, and shapen in iniquity.
Figure one on the chart shows us just a little
of the circle which represents the earth. All
having been born under the curse of sin, and,
having need of the second birth ("Except a man
be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
into the kingdom of God." John 3:5), enter the
infancy of life on the wide road marked by figure
two on the chart.
Many anxious mothers ask the question :
"Sister, what do you think becomes of the little
294

WHICH ROAD?
babes, and children who die before the age of
accountability?" I answer promptly, and without*
a moment's hesitancy

"I believe they are taken to be with the loving
and compassionate Jesus, who said: 'Suffer the
little children to come unto Me, and forbid them
not, for of such is the kingdom of heaven'."
But there comes a day, possibly most of you
can look backward along the road of time and
recall that day for yourself when the little heart
and mind begin to know the difference between
right and wrong. The young pilgrim, after run :
ning along carelessly from infancy, suddenly
sights in the distance a great, old, rugged sign
post, that has stood the storms of many generations, but still stands firm and unmovable. This
sign post the Cross of Calvary stands just at
the parting of the way.
Did you ever notice the peculiar and wonderful
shape of the cross? The foot points to the earth
and humility, and to the fountain filled with blood,
as though it were saying
"Come, poor, tired, troubled, sin-sick soul. Lay
down your burden; plunge into the fountain filled
with blood. Here is cleansing for the filthy, pardon
for the sinful, rest for the weary, peace for the
troubled, relief for the oppressed, freedom for
the captive. Just throw yourself down at the feet
of Jesus and He will make you whole."
The top of the cross points upward toward the
sky and heaven, as though saying
"Lift up your head, poor, weary pilgrim; lift up
your eyes to the heavens above you; lift up the
hands that hang down; strengthen the feeble
knees; say unto them that are weak, 'be strong
and of good courage, for He who died upon the
tree has gone up yonder, beyond the clouds of
glory, to prepare a place for you, that where He
is there you may be also/ '
295

THIS IS THAT
The two arms of the cross are outstretched as
though to gather the whole world into the loving
embrace of Him who said :
"Come unto Me, Oh ye ends of the earth, and be
ye saved."
Thank God for such a sign-post to reveal the
way of pardon and point out the narrow heavenbound road to the sin-sick soul.
Figure three on the chart shows. us where the
two roads divide. Oh, let your feet pause here,
dear one, at the parting of the way. Don't make
a mistake, for this is the most important decision
you will ever be called upon to make in your
whole life. Which road will you take? One
turns to the left, the other to the right. One leads
to heaven, the other to hell.
Look carefully at the two roads as depicted on
the chart, and you will notice that the broad road
which leads to destruction is a crooked road, so
crooked that he who walks upon it is always
unable to see just what lies ahead. Each new
turn of the road he finds himself committing sins
more vile than his conscience would have permitted
a month or a year before. Were the road not
crooked he would be able to see the flames of hell
and hear the weeping and the anguished cries of
the lost who call :
"Go back! Go back!" He would run for his life
to the refuge of the cross.
"Why is the road crooked?" you ask. Because
it is the trail of the serpent. The same serpent
that deceived Eve in the garden is deceiving the
nations today.

"Why is it crooked?" Why, because it is impossible for a serpent to crawl straight. The devil
is crooked and he will deceive you at every turn
of the road till at last he has plunged you into
destruction.
296

WHICH ROAD?
Now while the trail of the serpent leads into
hell, 'tis the way of the cross that leads home to
the glorious land of heaven. Oh 'tis a heaven to
go to heaven in when AVC walk in the shadow of the
cross. Hallelujah !
The broad road, that leads to destruction, looks
inviting to your feet. It is strewn with flowers
and worldly pleasures. The so-called broad-minded
man who lives on the broad way can tell you of
worldly pleasures, theatres, dance halls, fashion,
love of money, popularity, music and sin to be
found at every turn of the road.
They could tell you, if they would, of broken
hearts too, of drunkards, and harlots, of empty
hearts, and misspent lives. They could whisper,
too, with white faces and scared eyes, of ghastly
deaths they have witnessed of those who found the
wages of sin were death, and went into the presence of their father, the devil, and to the home
prepared for him and his imps.
But no, they will not tell you of these true
facts, but tell only of the light surface, and the
tinseled, varnished side.
THE BROAD WAY.
That downward road (figure four) is broad and
easy to enter. Just a little disobedience, a little

lie, forgetting to pray, wandering from God, whatever it was that came first into your life you
remember it when you began your downward
career on the broad way that leads to destruction.
Perhaps you did not really mean to go far on
that downward path, but somehow it all seemed so
easy. One sin led to a greater one, till soon you
were so tangled up and slipping so fast it seemed
impossible to stop and go back.
It is so easy to go down to hell and destruction,
just a toboggan slide, till at last you shall aAvaken
to find it is too late, unless you listen now to the
297

THIS IS THAT
warning and stop and return to the cross, that
dear old weather-beaten sign-post, and weep it all
out at Jesus 7 feet.
THE END THEREOF IS DEATH.
It is a dreadful thing to go on to the end of the
broad, sinful road. I have gazed with wide, horrified eyes into bleary, sinful eyes and bloated
faces. I have marked the lines of sin upon the
face and oftener upon the heart. I have seen
the great chains of appetite, the prison doors of
evil, I have stood at the death beds of those who
had rejected Christ, and such a message as you
are now hearing, and held their hands with a
shudder as they passed out into the dark, without
God, to reap their reward. I have heard those
who would never seem to sober down and think
before, when asked to accept Jesus on their death
beds cry out:
"Too late! Too late! I'm lost!" I can tell of
weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth, as they
died.

The proud and haughty sinner, the infidel, they
who have declared in their learning that there was
no God, no hell, no heaven, shall have to pass with
the drunkard and the harlot through the jaws
of death (figure five) into that awful home prepared for the devil and his angels. There shall be
weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth. Their
not having believed there was such a place will
not have moved it or taken it away. "The wages
of sin is death."
DYING WORDS OF THE UNSAVED.
Here are some of the dying words of the unsaved :
"Hell is a refuge if it hide me from thy frown."
Altamont. 4
"I would gladly give thirty thousand pounds to
have it proven there is no hell." Charteres.
298

WHICH ROAD?
"Give me more laudanum that I may not think
of eternity and what is to come." Mirabeau.
"Oh, my poor soul! what will become of thee?
Whither wilt thou go?" Cardinal Mazarin.
The atheist Hobb's last words were: "I am
taking a fearful leap into the dark."
Voltaire was a noted, wealthy infidel, yet his
last words were: "I am abandoned by God and
man; I shall die and go to hell."
Death in that awful place where their worm
dieth not, and the fire is not quenched.

"Oh," you say, "if God is a God of love He
would never cast a soul down into hell." No, God
will not willingly cast the sinner into destruction,
and if he goes to hell he will have to go over the
body and blood of Jesus Christ who died to save
him ; rejecting -the love of the Saviour who did all
in His power and shed every drop of His blood to
redeem him from that place which was built, not
for the sinner, but for the devil and his angels.
Those who live in sin, with the devil as their
father, in this world, will live with the devil as
their father in that home which has been prepared for him; but the children of God who have
owned Him as their Father here below, will live
with Him in His home in peace and joy for
evermore.
THE NARROW ROAD.
The other road (figure six), the narrow road,
blest road of light and life, begins at the cross.
Jesus is the door; there is no way to enter but by
Him, and the blood He shed for the remission of
our sins. It is a narrow road, there is no room to
take earthly things with you; there is just room
for Jesus and you. If any man would follow Me,
let him deny himself daily, take up his cross and
follow Me. It means a right about face. It
means being born again and being made a new
299

THIS IS THAT
creature in Christ Jesus, so that the things we
once loved we now hate, and, Hallelujah! the
things we once hated we now love.
In order to enter this narrow road that leads to
heaven you must repent of all sin, make things

right, straighten up your back tracks as far as
possible, ask Jesus to cleanse you from all sin and
unrighteousness, and "though your sins be as
scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though
they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool."
Isa. 1 :18. "For he who cometh unto Him, He will
in no wise cast out/ 7
Those who travel upward, for it is a steady
climb, can tell you of joys untold. They can tell
you of a peace the world can not give nor take
away. They can tell you of broken hearts that
have been healed, and sad lives made glad. They
will testify to you of salvation from all sin, and
deliverance from all bondage, of broken chains,
and captives made free in Christ Jesus. They can
tell of the baptism with the Holy Ghost (Acts 2 :4)
and the gifts and fruits of the Spirit in their
lives.
I have in this road also looked into eyes and
faces, but they were filled with the glory and
love of God. Instead of evil and avariciousness,
they were filled with tenderness and tears of
gratitude to the blessed Saviour w r ho grows sweeter
as the days go by. Glory! Glory! Glory! Each
step you take in this road brings you one step
nearer heaven; one foot says "Glory!" and the
other says "Hallelujah !" and with a pure heart
and a clear conscience you are on your way to
heaven. O, sinner, where have you such joy as
this?
THE END THEREOF IS LIFE.
Here, too, I have stood by death beds and instead of convulsed, fearful faces of sinners, I
300

WHICH ROAD?

have seen calm, peaceful faces of those just going
to rest in the arms of Jesus. Blessed are those
that die in the Lord, and go shouting home to
glory.
Here are the dying words of a few of the
saved :
"Lord Jesus, receive my spirit." Stephen.
"I have fought a good fight, I have finished my
course, I have kept the faith.
Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge,
shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but
unto all them also that love His appearing." II
Tim., 4:7 Paul.
"The best of all, God is with us." Wesley.
"I am sweeping through the gates, washed in
the blood of the Lainb." Cookman.
"I am in perfect peace, resting alone on the
blood of Christ: I find this sufficient to enter
the presence of God with." Trotter.
"The battle is fought, the battle is fought; the
victory is won." Dr. Payson.
The cross-bar of the cross (figure seven), represents the river of death through which so many
saintly feet have trod. Oh, what a Avonderful
thing to have Him bear you up that the floods do
not overflow, and to be able to cry with Catherine
Booth :
"The waters are rising, but so am I; I am not
going under, but over."
Just beyond the waves of death a glorious
crow r n is waiting. Will there be any stars in your
crown? Do you not long to be a soul-winner for

Jesus? How pitiful it would be in that last day
to have lived the most of our lives for the devil,
to have given Jesus but the few closing hours of
life's little day, and to be obliged to go emptyhanded without a single soul with which to greet
301

THIS IS THAT
the Master, not a trophy nor a jewel to adorn the
crown that you lay at His feet.
Beyond lies the glorious city of Heaven whose
twelve gates are each composed of a solid pearl,
whose street is made of pure gold, as it were
transparent glass and the foundation of whose
wall is garnished with all manner of precious
stones. The building of the wall is of jasper, and
the city of pure gold like unto clear glass. That
land has no need of the sun, neither of the moon
to shine in it, for the glory of God doth lighten it,
and the Lamb is the light thereof.
Here there shall be no sickness nor crying, no
pain nor death nor sorrow, no misunderstandings
and no heartaches, and there shall in no wise
enter into it anything that defileth or that worketh
an abomination or maketh a lie, but they which
are written in the Lamb's book of life.
Ah! the toils and thorns of the way are naught
to be compared with one glimpse of the glory that
awaits us in that beautiful city where Jesus wipes
all tears from all faces, and there is no more night.
Hallelujah! the very thought of seeing Jesus sets
my whole soul on fire.
Who ever heard a sinner saying, "O, I'm so
glad that some day this life will be over and I am
going to die and go to hell and destruction." NO !
You never hear them anxious to talk about death

and punishment. But the true child of God loves
to think of the day when he shall lay down the
cross and receive the crown.
Between heaven and hell is a great gulf fixed.
There is no possibility of crossing from one to the
other after death. As a tree falls, so shall it lie.
Today is the day of salvation tomorrow may be
eternally too late.
Now sinner, stop, and decide just now, which
road you are on, and which road you choose to
journey on from this time forward; decide which
302

WHICH ROAD?
home you will dwell in forever where the tire
is iiot quenched and the worm dieth not, or where
no weeping shall ever be heard, but singing and
rejoicing and joy unspeakable for ever and forever.
You are a free-will agent; you must decide for
yourself. Jesus has opened the way, and He is
holding the gate open wide for you just now. O
come tonight, dear ones, come just now. Never,
never blame Jesus, or say He sent you to hell, for
if you refuse to be saved and enter in, you send
yourself there; He has done His part. How He
will help you and carry you through if you will
only let Him. Just now, wherever you are, He is
whispering,
"Behold, I stand at your heart's door and
knock." Open to Him just now. Say, "I will
arise and go unto my Father." Today is the day
of salvation. You have no lease of tomorrow.
Come just now.
"Angels are lingering near,
Prayers rise from hearts so dear,

O wanderer, come."

303

THIS IS THAT
BEHOLD, THE MAN!
"Then came Jesus forth wearing the crown of
thorns and the purple robe, and Pilate said unto
them, Behold the man" John, 19 :5.
JESUS has promised us in His Word that He,
if He is lifted up from the earth, will draw
all men unto Himself, and before beginning
this subject today I cried out to the Lord to help me
to sink out of sight and to lift Him up above the
earth until you should see no man save Jesus only.
BEHOLD the man ! Behold THE man ! Behoid
the MAN ! I would like to repeat it over and over
again, until I catch every wandering mind and
bring each straying thought into captivity. Behold the man. Just close your eyes to all else
for a few moments.
STOP beholding your business your pleasure
your home your earthly cares and duties your
neighbor whatever it may be that has been absorbing your attention, and Behold the Man,
Christ Jesus.
If you have never stopped long enough before in
your busy life to behold the man, the Lamb of
God, the one who loves you more than any earthly
friend loves you, I want you to behold Him NOW.
I am sure that if you could only get one glimpse
of that face which is the fairest among ten thousand, if you could only catch one cadence of Hi*?

voice, sweet as the rushing of many waters, if
you could only gaze for one moment into the
depths of those tender eyes filled with understanding and sympathy and love, the tears of love and
gratitude would spring to your eyes, your heart
would fill with praise till you would never wish to
cease from beholding and adoring and worshiping
this Man, Christ Jesus. As the shades of darkness and unbelief are driven back by the light of
304

BEHOLD, THE MAN !
the sun of righteousness, and as you behold the
man, you will find new beauties, new attributes
and graces unfolding themselves before your
astonished and adoring eyes each moment you
behold, till your heart bursts forth into singing,
" Since mine eyes were fixed on Jesus,
I've lost sight of all beside,
So enhanced my Spirit's vision,
Gazing at the crucified."
As we sweep back the curtains of the centuries
and look back through the undimmed corridors of
the past, we behold the Man seated with His
Father upon his throne. He was with His Father
from the beginning the brightest jewel in heaven,
the joy of the Father, the delight of the angels,
the light of the temple, the only begotten Son,
worthy of praise upon harps of gold, and the
angels fell prostrate at His feet as He sat in His
kingly robes and splendor in their midst.
Behold the Man, with His Father when He
spoke the world into being, and set the sun, the
moon and the planets in the sky.

Behold the Man, filled with sorrow on that memorable day when our ancestral parents fell into
sin and because of that sin were banished from the
sight of God under penalty of death. And Avhen
there was no eye to pity, no arm to save, none
that could pay the ransom price for their redemption, we
Behold the Man, saying: "Father, send me, I
will pay the price. Without the shedding of blood
there is no remission of sins; I will shed my
blood, Father, I will be the bridge to span the gulf
'twixt man and God." Then we read that "God
so loved the world that He gave His only begotten
Son that whosoever belicveth in Him should not
perish but have everlasting life."
305

THIS IS THAT
Behold the Man, standing up to take leave of the
Father, leaving the songs and the adoration of the
angelic hosts, laying aside His royal robes, His
sceptre and His crown, stepping down from the
throne and coming all the way from heaven to
earth for you and me, that we might not perish
but have everlasting life.
Behold the Man, conceived of the Holy Ghost,
born of the virgin Mary, coming to a world that
found no room for Him in the inn. Behold Him
born in a manger amidst the most deplorable and
humble surroundings, coming to reach the lowest
and the poorest of sinners.
Behold the Man living and growing up with
Mary, His mother, and. Joseph, in the carpenter
shop. Behold Him at the age of thirty, baptized
of John in the river Jordan, ready to begin His
ministry. Behold the Man rising from a watery
grave as the heavens opened and the Holy Spirit

descended upon Him and the voice of God spoke
aloud saying, "This is my beloved Son in whom I
am well pleased." Thus He entered upon His
ministry with divine authority and the power of
the God-head resting upon Him and abiding with
Him.
Behold the Man tempted in the wilderness for
forty days, tempted in all points like as we, and
yet without sin. Behold Him turning the water
into wine, preaching the gospel of the Kingdom,
healing the sick, cleansing the leper, raising the
dead, opening the eyes of * the blind, unstopping
the deaf ears, feeding the hungry multitudes,
calming the troubled sea, weeping over Jerusalem,
forgiving the sinner, giving water to the thirsty,
healing the broken-hearted.
Behold the Man the King of Glory walking
in humility upon this earth, footsore and weary.
Behold Him praying alone, night after night on
the mountain side, praying for you, dear heart,
306

BEHOLD, THE MAN !
and for a sleeping world who would never appreciate nor understand. The birds had their nests,
the foxes their holes, but the Son of Man had nowhere to lay His head.
Behold the Man, at the last supper when even
though His heart was aching, even though He
knew the hand that would betray Him, and the
disciple that would deny Him, even though He
knew that all would forsake Him and flee away,
His thoughts were for you and for me when He
vowed that He would drink no more of the fruit
of the vine until He drank it anew with us in His
Father's kingdom, saying:

"As oft as ye do this ye do show forth my death
'til I corned Oh, glorious bridge that spans the
long, silent years from the day of His death till
the day He shall come.
Behold the Man, praying in the garden alone
Avhile His disciples slumbered and slept. Behold
His agony and the travail of His soul as He
cried: "Nevertheless, not my will, but thine, he
done. And being in an agony He prayed more
earnestly: and His sweat was as it were great
drops of blood falling down to the ground."
Behold the Man bending low over His disciples
in His sorrow, craving one understanding heart
to watch with Him. But He found them sleeping and said unto them : "Why sleep ye, rise and
pray." "And while He yet spake, behold a, multitude," pressing on through the gray dawn of
morning, coming with staves and swords to take
this Man this Jesus of yours, and mine.
Behold the Man, led as a sheep to the slaughter,
and as a lamb before his shearers is dumb, so He
opened not His mouth. Behold Him despised and
rejected of men, a Man of sorrows and acquainted
with grief. Behold Him bearing our griefs, carrying our sorrows, wounded for our transgres307

THIS IS THAT
sious, bruised for our iniquities. He was taken
from prison and from judgment.
Behold the Man, condemned to die by the multitude He loved and longed to gather in His
arms. Behold Him, beaten with stripes and nailed
to the cross. The crown of thorns was placed
upon His brow, the Koman spear pierced His
side. But, Oh, beloved, hear Him cry, "Father,

forgive them, they know not what they do!" Then
when the debt had been paid, when He had borne
our penalty (death) in His own body on the
tree, hear the glad triumphant words that rang
through the sky that hour, and still resound
through the earth today:
"IT IS FINISHED." Then behold the Man
as midst rending rocks and darkening sky, He
bowed His head and gave up the ghost.
Behold the Man, lying wrapped in the cold
silence of death in the tomb. Then in the early
dawn of the third day, as the first gold and
purple rays of morning rose in glad triumph above
the hills of Jerusalem, an angel from heaven
spread his great white pinions and, sweeping down
from heaven to earth, rolled the great stone away
from the mouth of the sepulchre.
Behold the Man resurrected, rising and coming
forth again to look upon the world His world,
purchased by His blood. Behold Him again, living and loving, walking and talking with His
people, feeding the hungry, encouraging the
downcast.
Behold the Man, leading captivity captive, ascending on high to give gifts unto men, saying:
"It is expedient for you that I go away, for if I go
not away the Comforter will not come. But if I go
away I will not leave you comfortless, I will send
another, even the Holy Ghost. If I go away I will
come again and take you unto myself that where
308

BEHOLD, THE MAN !
I am there ye may be also," and the clouds received Him out of their sight.

Behold the Man seated again at the right hand
of God the Father. Behold Him standing at your
side just now as revealed by the Spirit, hear Him
say: "Behold, I stand at the door and knock,
.if any man will open to Me, I will come in and
sup with him and he with Me." Let Him in, dear
heart, draw nigh to Him and He will draw nigh
to you. Eeceive the Holy Spirit which He has
sent to lead you into all truth. Be faithful a little
longer. Then soon, yea, very soon, you will
BEHOLD THE MAN, coming in the clouds of
heaven with power and great glory to take you to
Himself, where in the midst of joys unbounded as
the waves of the ocean, we will behold the Man by
the glassy sea, and worship in adoration at His
throne, our Redeemer, bur Bridegroom forevermore. Open your eyes just now, dear heart, Oh!
BEHOLD THE MAN!

309

THIS IS THAT

BAKABBAS.
"And they all cried out at once, saying, 'Away with this
man, and release unto us Barabbas.'
Now Barabbas was a robber, who for certain sedition
made in the city, and for murder, was cast into prison."
Luke 23:8, 19; John 18:40.
JUST these few vivid, gripping incidentsnothing more is told us of this man Barabbas.
The thick shroud of mystery that envelops both
the beginning and the ending of his life is undis-

pelled by the light of the scriptures, but these few
bright crimson drops, wrung from the very heart
of his story, as it were, seem to cry aloud the
tale of
Innocence pursued by Temptation.
Temptation overtaken by Sin.
Sin pounced upon and condemned to die by
The Law.
Stern Law conquered and its grip loosened by.
Jesus, the Substitute and Redeemer who died in
the sinner's place.
Such a striking type is Barabbas of the whole
human race, and of ourselves individually, that,
as we stand looking down upon the incomplete
story of his life, it seems like some wondrous,
fascinating, unfinished texture stretched upon the
loom of life, its riotous colors bespeaking sunshine and shadow, joy and sorrow, tragedy and
triumph, threads frayed and hanging from the
ending, threads loose and dangling at 'the beginning, as though inviting the onlooker to pick them
up and weave again the history of the whole
human race, as embodied in the study of Barabbas.
CHILDHOOD DAYS.
About the spring time of every child Ave love
to weave the white threads of innocency, a godly,
praying Mother, and the picture of a little whiterobed form learning to pray at mother's knee.
310

BARABBAS
The home that has robbed its children of a praying mother has deprived them of one of the rich-

est treasures that it is within its power to bestow,
a memory which money could never buy, nor time
destroy.
Whether Barabbas had a praying mother or not
we do not know, but we long to think of her as
instructing him in the old laws and the prophets,
weeping and praying for him as he wandered into
bad company and the paths of temptation. As he
grew older we do not know whether or not he was
married, but there may have been woven into the
loom of his life with golden threads of love, a
wife and a beautiful baby boy, but one thing we
are certain of, and that is that he was led into
sin, ever deeper and deeper, while God was speaking to him and the angels were Avarning him,
saying,
"BARABBAS, BE SURE YOUR SIN WILL FIND YOU OUT."
Doubtless, Barabbas meant to call a halt some
time in the near future. He never meant to go
so far into sin as to be caught, cast into prison
and condemned to die. Every dark cloud of warning that the Lord put into his way was doubtless
tinted rosy with promising colors of golden wealth
and remuneration by the devil, as he was led on
and on from one sin to another, until at last we
read that
"BARABBAS WAS A ROBBER."
In all probability his robbing started in some
seemingly simple and trivial way, some tiny,
childhood theft for which his conscience troubled
and accused him. At the second theft, a little
larger than the last, his conscience did not seem
to trouble him quite so much, and unbelievably
soon, his soul was hardened, until he became the
leader of a band of robbers and started up insurrection in the city. He may have chuckled to him311

THIS IS THAT
self and told his colleagues that they were clever
enough to evade the law, and that they never
would be caught, as many another sinner assures
himself. But once more came the last and final
warning :
"Repent; be sure your sin will find you out.
Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.
The soul that sinneth, it shall surely die."
( Oh, Barabbas ! What a striking type you are
of our foreparents who, in the Garden of Eden,
when first tempted by this same sin, stole and ate
the fruit from the forbidden tree. No doubt
Satan, in the form of a serpent, whispered in your
ear, as he did in the ear of Eve, saying:
"Eat thereof. Ye shall not surely die." And
then, guilty and sinful, you sought to hide yourself behind the trees of deception, and to assure
yourself that neither God nor the Law would see
nor punish you there.
But just as surely as Adam and Eve, shrinking
guiltily behind their covering, heard the firm footfalls of Almighty God, walking through the garden to meet them, in the cool of the day, just as
surely as God called 'out, saying :
"Adam, where art thou?" just as surely as He
discovered, condemned, and punished their sin;
just so surely did the footsteps of the law seek
and overtake you, Oh Barabbas!)
Cunningly the devil led him on and on until
one day he found himself the ringleader of an insurrection made in the city streets. Then, blinded
with demoniacal rage, his blood surging in tumultuous riot through his veins, his reason overstepped
her bounds, and quick as a flash a heavy blow was

struck; the limp body of his victim fell with a
sickening thud to the ground; a deep-dyed thread
of crimson was shot through the texture upon
the loom of life, and
312

BARABBAS
BARABBAS WAS A MURDERER.
Swiftly the heavy, relentless hand of the law
fell upon the shoulder of the guilty wretch, staging with horror upon the work of his hands.
Escape was impossible. Mercy was out of the
question. The Law must take its course. Doubtless the trial that followed was fair and square
in every respect. Barabbas was G-U-I-L-T-Y.
And there were many witnesses to prove his guilt,
both as a robber and as a murderer. No power
could avert the penalty of the laAV, nor hinder it
from descending upon him.
To and fro, back and forth flew the shuttle of
time across the loom of life, UOAV weaving threads
that were dark sombre mournful. Was it with
bated breath and blanching cheeks, or was it with
a thin veneer of bravado that he heard the awful
sentence pronounced upon him :
"Barabbas, you, with your two thieves, who
conspired to work under your leadership, are
condemned to die, and shall be hanged upon three
crosses of wood on Calvary's hill till you are
dead."
And when, plunged into the blackness of the
dark dungeons beneath Pilot's judgment hall,
chains clanking upon the damp flagstones as he
writhed in the anguished throes of remorse, did he
cry aloud?
"Oh, bitter thongs of the law ! Oh, bands and

chains of justice! Is there no escape from thee,
e'en though I see my awful error and now repent?" And did the voice of firm, relentless law,
with face like flint, echo from the haunting memory of mother's teaching, "An eye for an eye, a
tooth for a tooth; the Murderer shall surely be
put to death." Sitting there in the darkness of
sin, unable to help himself, beyond the help of mortal man, the chains of approaching retribution
313

THIS IS THAT
already biting into the flesh of his body, condemned
to die without hope, nothing to look forward to but
death, what a picture is Barabbas of the whole
human race.
BARABBAS A PICTURE OF THE HUMAN RACE.
By Adam sin entered. The first sin recorded
was that of theft; Gen. 3:6. The second sin to
be recorded was murder. Gen. 4:8. God, in His
infinite holiness, could not look upon sin with
the least degree of allowance; the soul that sinneth, it must die. Death and eternal despair followed in the wake of sin. A great gulf had been
fixed between man and God, the strong arm of the
law fell heavily upon the human race, and after
a fair trial the verdict, G-U-I-L-T-Y, was brought
in. The sentence of "death" was passed, and man
was plunged into the dark prison of captivity beneath the judgment hall waiting the hour when
judgment should be executed upon him.
Oh! that someone would come to open the
prison doors of those who were bound. Oh! for
an arm to save, one who would bear the griefs
and carry the sorrows of a sin-stricken race, one
who would be wounded for the sinner's transgression and pay the sinner's debt!

Who knows the thoughts that throbbed through
the aching brain of Barabbas during the days
that followed, the stabbiugs of remorse, memories
of other days, and thoughts of what might have
been, the sleepless nights, the hopeless days, not
one ray of light to pierce the gloom! Did that
awful voice that had pronounced the sentence in
the judgment hall keep ringing in his ears :
"Thou shalt be hanged upon a cross of wood
on Calvary's hill, thou and thy two thieves, till
thou art dead"? Did he lose all track of time,
till his ears were ever straining to hear his name
called and the great door to be swung wide, the
314

BARABBAS
hour when the dark silence would be broken, and
midst the roaring of the voices of the rabble, and
the piercing light of day, he would be led forth to
die that shameful and ignominious death? In the
silent darkness of his cell, with no other sound
than the drip, drip of the sweat drops which
came from the ceiling and fell like tears upon the
flagstones at his feet, did the vision of the cross,
his cross, rise before him, ever drawing nearer
and nearer as the hour of his crucifixion approached?
Steadily on and on the shuttle flies across the
loom in sombre and desolate colorings.
Oh! what is this! The threads of wild terror
and panic are being shot across the loom! Barabbas, sitting stock upright, rigid as though
turned to stone, listens with every nerve tense.
Hear it? There it is again; it is his name they
are crying:

"Barabbas! Barabbas! Release unto us Barabbas. Bring forth Barabbas! Barabbas! B-A-RA-B-B-A-S !"
'Tis the voice of a multitudinous rabble, ever
growing and swelling in volume. But how could
he hear it away in this dungeon? The doors must
be open. Yes, footsteps are echoing along the
stone corridors that lead to his cell, nearer and
nearer they sound, swords singing, keys jangling on
their rings, and ever as a background, comes the
imperative roar of the mob in the judgment hall
above, a roar that is now settling into a steady
chant brooking no denial.
"Barabbas! Barabbas! Release unto us
BARABBAS ! ! ! !
Louder and plainer comes the tread of the soldiers, until, at the sharp word of command, they
halt before the cell. The rattle of the ponderous
key in the door, the grating of the lock, the creak315

THIS IS THAT
ing of the heavy door, and then the expected
words :
"Conie forth, Barabbas, another is to die in your
place today. You are a free man."
Tell me, O weaver at the loom, did a faint ray
of hope dawn in his heart, or did he shrink back
and cry, from the anguish of his soul?
"Oh ! ! Do not laugh at my calamity, and mock
when my fear cometh. I know that I have had a
fair and square trial. I know that I have been
proved guilty and am worthy of death. I Avill go
to my death upon the cross, but Oh! don't, don't

mock at my calamity and jeer at my hour of sorrow." And did the keeper reply:
" 'Tis neither jest nor mocking, Barabbas. ? Tis
true, thou art a free man. For one named Jesus
is to be stretched upon your cross on Calvary's
hill, 'twixt the two thieves today. With mine own
eyes have I seen Him tied to the whipping-post
in the court without, His back bared to the smiters, the blows of the cruel lash raining upon His
shoulders. They are now leading Him up the
hill to be crucified. Come forth! Barabbas!
Come forth! You are free! He shall be bruised
for your iniquity, and the chastisement of your
peace is to be upon Him. He will die in your
stead."
A FREE MAX.
Free? FREE?? F-K-E-E??? Surely his ears
could not hear aright ! Surely this must be some
horrible dream rising up to torment him.
"Make haste, Barabbas, come forth!"
Ah! the chains Avere loose at his feet. His
hands were free. The biting iron that had long
lacerated his flesh was gone. One trembling step
two three and he was almost to the door, but
no restraining hand had fallen upon him, no voice
had jeered:
316

BAKABBAS
"Ah, Barabbas, come forth and pay the price.
Thy sin hath found thee out." Four five six
he had gained and passed the door. Seven eight
nine steps. He was groping his way along the
corridor, stumbling blindly toward yon distant
ray of light. True, the soldiers were marching
behind him, but they were making no effort to
seize him. What did it all mean? Surely they

Avould seize upon him at the last moment. But,
no, they are turning off in another direction and
he is left alone, walking into the ever-growing
light that pierces his unaccustomed eyes.
When at last, reaching the yawning doorway,
clinging to its portals with one trembling hand,
and shading his eyes with the other, what were
his thoughts as he gazed once more upon the sunlight, and once more heard the singing of the
birds, and the voices of children round about
him? Were the golden threads of hope and new
resolution already being woven into the texture,
even amidst his bewilderment?
Oh these dangling threads that hang loose from
the end of the texture, tell me, just how was the
story finished? Did Barabbas catch sight of the
throng wending their way to Calvary's hill? Did
he hear the hissings and the jeerings of the multitude, and see yon lovely Man, in robes of white,
fall beneath the burden of the cross? Did he run,
perhaps, to the old cottage home, and clasping his
amazed wife and little boy by the hand, cry:
"Oh, come with me, and let us go and see the
man that is dying in my place. Today was the
day set for my execution. Today I was to be
hanged upon the cross and die a felon's death,
but another man, an innocent man, is dying, dying
for me. Oh, come and let us go and look upon
His face that we may fathom the mystery of such
love."
317 \

THIS IS THAT
LET US GO AND SEE THE MAN.
And did they push their Avay together through
the throng and up the hill, ne'er stopping till
they reached the foot of the cross, where sobbing

women mourned the grief of Him who bore our
sorrows? And as Barabbas gazed into that face
most fair, and saw the nails, and the blood drops
streaming down from brow and hands and feet,
as he looked into those eyes of deep, unutterable
love, and heard the words:
"Father, forgive," falling from those anguished
lips, did he cry:
"Oh, Jesus, thy love has won my heart! Yonder are the two thieves, one on the right, one on
the left, but there is the middle cross, the cross
upon which I should have died." And stooping
down, did he take his little son up in his arms,
and pointing to the cross did he sob in his ear :
"Oh, Sonny, look, that is the cross your Papa
should have died upon; that is the place where I
should have hung, the death I should have died,
but yon lovely Man, whom they call Jesus, is dying in Papa's place. Oh, wife and son and Oh,
my heart, let us ever love and live and work for
this Jesus who gave Himself for me"?
As Barabbas gazed steadfast into the eyes of
Jesus, did .the face of the Lord turn toward him?
Did their eyes meet, and was there a look of understanding exchanged between the two that broke
Barabbas' heart and held him captive by the
chains of love forever? Did he fall upon hi?
knees, crying : "Jesus, how can I ever thank you?
Drops of grief could ne'er repay
The debt of love I owe;
Here, Lord, I give myself to Thee,
>Tis all that I can do."

318

BARABBAS
Was he there when the mangled body of Jesus
was lowered from the cross and laid within the
tomb? Was he there upon the morning when
Jesus appeared to His people and ascended up in
the clouds unto His Father's throne? Was he
among the hundred and twenty on the Day of
Pentecost who received the gift of the Holy Ghost
and went forth proclaiming the message of Jesus
and His power to save?
We know not of a certainty, but one thing we
do know, and that is, that Avhen this whole world
of ours was wrapped in darkness and imprisoned
by sin and death, the Spirit of the Lord was upon
Jesus, anointing Him to preach the gospel to the
poor, to heal the broken-hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, recovering of sight to the
blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, and
to preach the acceptable year of the Lord. We do
know that Barabbas was no greater sinner, nor
more devoid of hope than this whole world of lost
sinners, and that Jesus came and was wounded for
our transgressions, bruised for our iniquities, the
chastisement of our peace was upon Him, and by
His stripes we were healed; that when we like
sheep had gone astray, and had turned every one
to our own ways, the Lord laid upon Him the
iniquity of us all. He was oppressed and He wm
afflicted, yet He opened not His mouth. He was
taken from prison and from judgment. He was
cut off from the land of the living. For the transgression of the people was He stricken. He made
His grave with the wicked and with the rich in
His death, yet He had done no violence, neither
was there any deceit in His mouth. He was numbered with the transgressors, and He bare the sin
of many and made intercession for the transgressors.

319

THIS IS THAT
MANKIND,, IN THE DUNGEON OF DESPAIR.
AWAITS DEATH.
By one man sin entered into the world, and
death by sin; and so death passed upon all men,
for all have sinned. Rom. 5 :12.
What a hopeless, miserable dungeon, man had
placed himself in by his sin, and disobedience to
God. No matter how he might search, there was
no way out. The great, massive DOOR OF
MERCY was the only hope. The Law, stern
jailer that he was, refused to open that. Because of one man's sin Death reigned supreme upon his throne from Adam to Moses. ( Rom. 5 :14. )
Sitting there within the prison cell of despair,
there came the day when the people which sat in
darkness saw a great light, and to them which sat in
the region and shadow of death, light sprang up
(Mat, 4:16.)
The footfalls of Deliverance were heard coming
along the corridors of time, Grace (heaven-sent
turnkey) bore the key of divine, sacrificial love
that turned the lock of condemnation and swung
wide the ponderous door of mercy.
Mercy and Love (inseparable pair) stepped
within the prison cell, and, loosening the bands
of Despair, and breaking the power of Sin's strong
chains, called to all mankind :
"COME FORTH."
"You are free men; another has died in your
place, one named Jesus has borne your cross and

paid the price of your redemption. Come forth,
come forth. Oh ! trembling souls, why sit longer
in the valley and in the shadow of death? Can
you not understand? The door is open, the
chains are broken. Barabbas, BARABBAS,
COME forth !" What would you have thought of
Barabbas, had he refused to leave the dungeon,
320

BARABBAS
choosing chains and darkness rather than liberty and light? What opinion would you have
had of Barabbas had he been such an ingrate,
so void of appreciation and gratitude that he did
not even take the trouble to climb blest Calvary's
hill to see and thank this Jesus who died for him?
Jesus died for you; your prison door stands
WIDE, the Spirit calls : "Come forth, the sunlight of
God's love and mercy awaits you, pardon and peace
are yours for the taking. Will you turn just now
to Calvary, wend your way to the cross and gaze
into the face of your Saviour, that face which was
more marred than the face of any other man ?"
There are your tAvo old companions, Sin and
Death, hanging upon the two crosses beside your
Lord; for the first thief y sin, there can be no
allowance, no excuse sin must die to you and
you to sin. For how can we that are dead to sin
live any longer therein ?
As for the second thief, at the eleventh hour
his pardon came, when death was swallowed up
in victory. For the sting of death is sin, and
when our old companion, sin, is dead, then it is
that the sting is taken out of death, and the ransomed soul can cry: "Oh! death, where is thy
sting?" Whether the body sleeps or wakes matters not. To be absent from the body is to be

present .with the Lord. Verily, I say unto yon,
this day shalt thou be in Paradise with Me.
Yes, dear sinner, Jesus paid it all, all to Him
you owe. Turn to Him just now. Thank Him
for His great love and for the shedding of His
precious blood, and as you gaze upon Him your
heart will be melted, the tears will fall from your
eyes, and you will break forth into singing:
"My Jesus, I love thee, I know Thou art mine:
For Thee all the follies of sin I resign;
My gracious Redeemer, my Saviour art Thou;
If ever I loved Thee, my Jesus, 'tis now.
321

THIS IS THAT
A CERTAIN MAN WENT DOWN.
Luke 10:30-35.
THE message which the Lord has laid upon my
heart to bring to you, whilst directed to all
sinners, is intended more especially for the
backslider.
Oh, there are so *nany backsliders in the world,
so many who once walked with the Lord, but have
someway or other let go of His hand and have
wandered far away. There is not a man or
woman on the face of this earth more miserable
than a poor backslider, who, once having walked
in the presence and joy of the Lord, feasting upon
the dainties from His bountiful hand, goes down
into sin and seeks to drown the achings of his
longing heart in the swirl of this world's gaudy,
tinseled pleasure.
It would be impossible for one who had never
been a backslider to fully understand or sympathize with the mute agony, shame, and longing
in the backslider's heart. / was a poor, discour-

aged backslider just once since my conversion,
and I know the miserable yearning and crying of
the heart to be back in the sunlight of His dear
smile the leaking out the trying to cover up
our backslidden condition from those round about
us the plunge into the world to try to stifle and
satisfy the restless longing that nothing but Himself can satisfy.
How desperately I longed for someone who
could enter in and sympathize with and help me,
and had there been someone to make a real effort
to reach out and help me back to victory and the
security of His Love, I would have escaped much
suffering and buffeting at the hand of the enemy.
And so tonight my whole heart goes out to the
backslider, and I long to reach your hand and
help you back to Jesus and the city of Jerusalem.
322

A CERTAIN MAN WENT DOWN
The first step toward getting back to Jesus is
made by realizing and frankly admitting that you
are a backslider.
We are going to read tonight about a certain
man who went down, and I want each of you to
watch, as we follow him in his journey, and see
whether his case is not very similar in every
respect to your own. First of all let us refresh
our memory by reading the whole story. It is
found in the tenth chapter of Luke, beginning at
the thirtieth verse:
"And Jesus said, A certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho and fell among thieves, which stripped him
of his raiment, and wounded him, and departed, leaving
him half dead.

"And by chance there came down a certain priest that
way; and when he saw him, he passed by on the other side.
"And likewise a Levite, when he was at the place, came
and looked on him, and passed by on the other side.
"But a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where
he was; and set him on his own beast, and brought him to
an inn, and took care of him.
"And on the morrow when he departed, he took out two
pence, and gave them to the host, and said unto him, 'Take
care of him; and whatsoever thou spendest more, when I
come again, I will repay thee'."
Now as we go through it word by word, and
follow the picture on the chart, let every backslider and sinner put themselves in the place of,
the "certain man" and find their location in this
picture. There are many of the certain men
and women who have been "going down," here
in this room tonight, but let each forget the
other forget that there is another "certain man"
in the room, and narrow the words down to his
own individual case.
A CERTAIN MAN WENT DOWN.
Oh, "certain man" here tonight, you who have
been wandering away from God, how easy it is
to go down. The road to destruction and eternal
sorrow of hell is just one long, swift toboggan
slide. There is nothing to boast about in being
a sinner or a backslider. Anybody could go down,
323

THIS IS THAT
any coward could become a sinner, but it takes the
real courage and grace of God, and every spark
of manhood and womanhood there is in you to

go up the steep incline to heaven. A dead fish
can float down the stream, but it takes a live one
to swim up against the current. Any poor, spiritually dead soul can float down to destruction; it
does not require any swimming or resistance.
Nothing but the divine life and power of the Lord,
however, can take him up again.
Went down! Oh, the depths of the precipices
and pits of sin that are conveyed by that one word
d-o-w-n.
FROM JERUSALEM TO JERICHO. V r
Let Jerusalem, on the chart, stand for all that
is holy and pure and Christ-like, for all that is
embodied in the New Jerusalem that is soon coming down from God out of Heaven, and Jericho
for all that is sinful and profane and ungodly.
How you, dear certain man, ever came to pass
out through the gate of Jerusalem and start on
your long downward journey, I do not know.
Perhaps it was lack of prayer it may have been
a failure to read God's Word (you can not dwell
in the presence of the Lord without prayer and
the Word any more than you could live without
breathing. When you pray you are talking to
God when you read the Word He is talking to
you) it may have been that you allowed the
cares of this life to press heavily upon you.
With me it was the taking away of the dear one
who had led me to Jesus, and upon whose
strength I had ever leaned instead of allowing the
Lord to teach me to grow in Him and be able to
stand the storms. When my earthly support was
suddenly transplanted to Heaven's garden, I was
left like an ivy, stripped from the oak to which if
had clung. Oh, what a poor little, fallen, tumbled
heap I was! But now, bless His dear name, I
324

HAVE YOU TAKEN THIS JOURNEY?

A CERTAIN MAN WENT DOWN
have learned to cling to and lean upon Jesus a
support that will never die nor leave me alone.
Be the primary cause what it may, the fact remains that the certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho
AND FELL
Oh, you cannot walk one single step without
Jesus, no matter hoAv strong you are ; or how many
years you have been a Christian; the moment you
let go of His dear hand, that moment you will
cease to stand, and you will fall
AMONG THIEVES.
It is not long after the backslider has begun his
downward journey that he discovers that he, too,
has fallen among thieves.
These thieves that we are reading about did two
things to the certain man before they left him :
I. THEY STRIPPED HIM OF HIS RAIMENT.
II. THEY WOUNDED HIM AND DEPARTED, LEAVING
HIM HALF DEAD.
and that is exactly what the thieves have been
doing to you.
Did you ever stop to realize just what constituted the raiment which used to clothe you in

Jerusalem (the city of salvation) this priceless
raiment and attire of which the enemy has
stripped you?
Let us look at the chart and see what sort of
raiment the holy life in Jerusalem stands for,
and what you have lost.
Those who walk and live in the presence of the
pure and holy Son of God must be attired in the
raiment clean and Avhite which is the righteousness of the saints.
Each individual that goes into the marriage supper of the Lamb must have on the wedding robe
Jesus has prepared worldly garments and the?
cloak of self -righteousness and morality AVI 11 not
suffice but will vanish before His gaze.
325

THIS IS THAT
J stands for JESUS : When we walk with Him He
clothes us with Himself, and the garments of His
righteousness. (R ev . 3:18)
E stands for ENJOYMENT: His presence is fullness of joy. (p s . 16:11.) He has poured the oil of
everlasting joy upon the heads of His people, (isa. 35:io.)
R stands for REST: In the presence of Him who
said : "Come unto Me and I will give you rest."
(Matt. ii:28.) "The weary find rest for their souls."
(Jer. 6:16)
U stands for USEFULNESS : Those who walk with
the Saviour, who said: "Work while yet 'tis day,
for the night cometh when no man can work," will long
to be soul-winners and wear the cloak of service.

S stands for SALVATION : Ah, dear backslider, do
you not remember how you used to go forth, glad in
the beautiful garments of salvation, which had been put
upon you by Him who was "your light and your salvation"? (Ps. 27:1.)
A stands for ADORATION : Where is there a soul
that could behold his glorious Redeemer without
bowing at His feet in adoration and praise? Did you
not feel a great loss when the thieves stripped from you
the garments of adoration and worship?
L stands for LOVE : When we dwell with the GOD
who IS LOVE (i John 4:8), and He "hath set His
love upon us" (PS. 9i:i4), we will imbibe and partake of
His nature until the first fruit of the Spirit, LOVE
(Gal. 5:22), shall spring forth from our lives.
E stands for ENRICHMENT: No mortal tongue
can tell the great, inexhaustible store of riches to
be found in the Christ who became poor that we by His
poverty might be made rich.
M stands for MERCY: The child of God who
abides beneath the blood is covered with the
MERCY (as a garment) that is "great above the heavens" (PS. 108:4), and TRUTH (the girdle which fastens
the garment about him) of PS. 85:io, these meeting together to form His raiment.
326

A CERTAIN MAN WENT DOWN
What a dreadful loss it was when the thieves
stripped YOU of YOUR raiment. It was impossible to go without the secure walls of the city
of His love and to begin your downward journey
toward Jericho without losing those beautiful
garments. It was indeed a sad day when you
were stripped of your robes of Christlikeness.
Gone was your Jesus; gone your Enjoyment,

your Rest. Taken away was your Usefulness,
your robes of Salvation, your Adoration, Love,
Enrichment, and Mercy.
The first stroke of the enemy which left you
denuded of such garments was bad enough, but,
Oh, the second thing that happened to the "certain man" was far, far more sad, if that were
possible, for
T-H-E-Y W-O-U-N-D-E-D H-I-M, and departed,
leaving him half dead.
What wounds the devil and his imps (the
thieves who rob you of salvation, rest and happiness in this world and the world to come) can
inflict upon the backslider and the sinner! When
the garments which Jesus purchased for Him by
his blood are taken away there is nothing left to
protect the sinner from the blows rained upon him
by the enemy.
The backslider, wandering far from God, who
has been thus stripped and wounded, is in a critical condition indeed. The wicked old thieves nod
and wink to one another as they pick up their
booty and DEPART, LEAVING HIM HALF DEAD.
The mile-posts by the way now point toward
JERICHO, and each mile-post the certain man
reaches on his downward way means just another
wound to burn and sear its way into his very
soul.
Let us look again at the chart and see what
these mile-posts that lead to Jericho stand for
First :
327

THIS IS THAT

J stands for JOLLIFICATION. "Not a serious
wound," you say, ''just a little amusement, no serious
harm in that, a little gossip, an idle jest, the theatre,
novel or a game of pool." "Young folks must have entertainment," says the enemy. Who hearkens will find
that jollification has left a wound and hastened him to
the second mile-post
E which stands for EVIL. I have seen the serious
wound reflected in the sinner's eyes, in the lines of
his face, and have heard the words of profanity rise from
his heart but O, the eyes of God look right down into
the depths of that soul, and from Him there is nothing
hid.
R stands for RESTLESSNESS. Instead of rest
which was once his, when he loved the quiet hours
of prayer "alone with God," there is now a driving, irritating restlessness that goads him day and night. Anything to get away from his own thoughts is a welcome
diversion.
I stands for INDIFFERENCE. The heart that once
responded to His every leading and sprang to obey
His call, is now indifferent to His voice.
C stands for CALLOUSNESS. The indifferent
heart soon becomes calloused and hard. Once so
tender that he melted in contrition before the Lord, he
now listens to the tender story of the Crucifixion, the
warning thunder of coming wrath unmoved.
H stands for HATRED. When the devil has gotten
his victim into the place where he hates the Spirit,
who endeavors to rouse him into sense of his peril, hates
good and loves evil (Mic. 3:2), he rubs his evil hands and
a smile of demonic joy twists his countenance as the
poor, duped soul draws near the city of eternal Woe.
O stands for OBSTINACY. When one receives this
wound he obstinately refuses to be warned of his
danger or flee from the wrath to come. He walks out
of the meeting, goes home and to bed, hard, unyielding,
obstinate.

328

A CERTAIN MAN WENT DOWN
AVhat a deceitful old traitor the devil is! He
smiles and tricks and fools the soul along while it
has life and strength and means, but Avhen it is
down and out, helpless, dying and alone, the devil
does not even take the trouble to pretend that he
is his friend.
Half dead thank God he is not altogether dead,
for whilst there is life there is hope! Helpless,
unable to drag himself one painful step toward
the city of salvation, the sin-sick soul is left lying
in the road. "The whole head is sick and the
whole heart faint; from the sole of the foot even
unto the head there is no soundness in it, but
wounds and bruises and putrifying sores; they
have not been closed, neither bound up, neither
mollified with ointment." Isa. 1:5, 6.
What a picture, not only of the individual, but of
the whole human race, that wandered from God.
"THERE CAME DOWN A CERTAIN PRIEST THAT WAY."
Surely this priest, who typifies the L-A-W, will
be able to lift, heal and restore the sin-sick soul.
But no, there is nothing to hope for from him, for,
"HE PASSED BY ON THE OTHER SIDE."
And Paul explains to us that "The law made
nothing perfect." Heb. 7 :19. Moreover the law
entered that offenses might abound.

"And likewise a Levite, ivhcn he was at the
place, came and looked on him." Surely one
would be justified in expecting help from the Levite who is filled with his good works and selfrighteousness, but no, the Word tells us that all
our righteousness is but "filthy rags" (Isa. 64:6),
and that "a man is not justified by the works of
the laic" (Gal. 2:16). Turning over a new leaf
or signing your name to a pledge can never lift
you nor heal the wounds of your sinful soul, and
thus we read of the Levite : "And he passed by on
the other side."
329

THIS IS THAT
Eii what a deplorable, perilous condition humanity found itself. Is it any wonder that the helpless soul should cry aloud:
"Oh, wretched man that I am, who shall deliver
me from the body of this death?" Bom. 7:24. Is
there no arm to save? Is there no eye to pity?
Ah, yes?, glory to Jesus, there is one who sees and
approaches from the distance.

Who could it be but Jesus this good Samaritan filled with compassion and tender love for
lost, wretched humanity, groveling in the dust
of humiliation and despair?

Oh, what a journey Jesus took in order to reach
poor, fallen souls who lie bruised and bleeding
on the road to destruction. What a journey ! All
the way from heaven to earth He came; all the
way from the manger to the cross He went, and
from the tomb to His Father's throne.

"As He journeyed" no distance was too great
to go, no soul too far out of the way for Jesus
to reach him with His love and proffered help
"CAME WHERE HE WAS"Yes, this good Samaritan who was none other
than the King of Glory, never rested, once He had
seen the fallen condition of the world, until He
had laid aside His crown, divested Himself of His
kingly raiment, taken upon Him the form of man
was not contented even with standing by the
sinner's side, but must come where he was, taking
his place, and hanging upon his cross, paying his
penalty, and dying his death.
"For what the law could not do, in that it was
weak through the flesh, God, sending His own
Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin,
condemned sin in the flesh :
330

A CERTAIN MAN WENT DOWN
That the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh but
after the Spirit." Rom. 8 :3, 4.
Was ever such love, such mercy as this known
in this universe of ours? "Came where he was."
Why, dear sinner, dear backslider, there is not
one of you who has wandered so far away whose
wounds are so obnoxious and horrible but Jesus
has come where you are.
Was humanity poor? Jesus became poorer than
they all.
Were any despised? He Avas more despised
than they.

Was there any friendless and alone? He
prayed on the mountain-side, sweat great drops
of blood in the garden alone, and groaned upon
the tree.
Was any filled with sin and laden with iniquity?
He bore their sins and their sickness in His own
body on the tree.
Oh, how I love those words, love to repeat them
over and over:
"As He journeyed. He came where he was."
Why, sinner, look! Can you not see Him just
now? He is standing right beside you. If you
put out your hand you can touch Him and feel
His nearness. "They should seek the Lord, if
haply they might feel after Him, and find Him,
though He be not far from every one of us." Acts17 :27.
Just the faintest little cry for help, uttered or
unexpressed, and He will reach down His great
arms and place them about you. Praise His
name !
"And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall
call on the name of the Lord shall be delivered:
for in Mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord hath said, and in the remnant
u-hom the Lord shall call." Joel 2 :32.
331

THIS IS THAT
"Call unto me, and I will answer thee, and show
thee great and mighty things which thou knowcst
not." Jer. 33:3.
"AND WHEN HE SAW HIM"

What an awful and yet what a wonderful thing
it is to know that Jesus sees right down into the
depths of the heart, and the intents of the human
mind that nothing is concealed from Him that
everything is laid bare and open in His sight.
Oh, what will this good Samaritan do when He
looks down into your heart? Will He shake His
head and walk away when you confess your awful
sins? Why, no, the Word tells us that when He
saw him
"HE HAD COMPASSION ON HIM."
No matter what your mistakes, your failures;
no matter how vile your sins have been; if you
will but truly repent and obey the Word of the
Lord He will have compassion upon you. If man
were your judge there would be very little to hope
for or to expect but punishment, but His heart is
filled with compassion. He knows the many times
that you have wept upon your pillow; He knows
the heartaches and the longing; He remembers the
weakness of your frame, and pities you as a Father
pitieth His children. It was that great heart full
of compassion that caused Him to weep over Jerusalem and cry upon the cross:
"Father, forgive them; they know not what they
do."
"AND WENT TO HIM"
elesus has come to meet you, not half way, not
three-quarters of the way, but all the way. He has
come to you just now with pleadings and tender
mercy. Just one word and He is right at your
side with hope and succor.
"AND BOUND UP HIS WOUNDS."
Yes, those painful, cankerous wounds are the
332

A CERTAIN MAN WENT DOWN
first thing that demand His attention. All infection must be cut away and sin destroyed. He can
bind every heart-bruise so gently, pouring in oil
and wine.
"But, oh!" you say, "I don't seem to have the
feeling and the tender desire for the Saviour
which I should have. My heart seems hard, and
my conscience dulled." Yes, I know; that is be ( cause of those dreadful wounds indifference, callousness, and obstinacy, but do not let this discourage you from calling upon the Lord, for when
He comes He will bring with Him his cruse of oil
and will soften every hardened wound, making
your heart tender, and flooding your soul with the
old-time love.
"Oh, but I do not seem to have any strength.
My spiritual energy seems to be so faint and at
such a low ebb." Well, praise the Lord! He
brings His wine with Him also. He will revive
and bring back life and strength by the quickening
of His Spirit.
"AND SET HIM ON HIS OWN BEAST. "
How many poor, timid souls, halting between
two opinions, trembling at the sight of the yawning pit before them, and yet fearful to trust themselves to the Lord's tender hands, say:
"Oh, I do so long to be a Christian, but I am
afraid I could not hold out. I am afraid I could
not hang on to my profession." Why, Hallelujah !
I have such good news to tell you. This is a salvation you do not need to hang on to it will hang
on to you. This is a Saviour that you do not have
to uphold and keep from falling; He will uphold
and keep you if you will but put your trust in
Him.

"They that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount
Zion, which cannot ~be removed, but abideth forever." Ps. 125:1.
333

THIS IS THAT
What would you have thought of this good
Samaritan had He turned to the wounded man and
said:
"Now come, my man; I have bound up your
wounds. I have poured in oil and \vine. Here
beside you stands the little beast (salvation), the
sure-footed little animal that can climb the most
rugged mountain without slipping or making a
misstep. I want you to pick up this beast, put it
on your poor, bruised back, walk back all the
many weary miles to Jerusalem with this burden
upon your shoulder, and mind you do not let it
fall."
Was this what he said? NO, Never! He did
not ask the man to carry the beast, but He brought
the beast to carry the man. Therefore He set him
on His own beast
"AND BROUGHT HIM TO AN INN"
The inn is the place of shelter and security
where his wounds shall be ministered unto in
other words, the church of God. It was the good
Samaritan Himself who brought him to the inn;
not by his own struggles and weak efforts, was
he carried thither. Put your case in the hands of
Jesus and He will bring you forth by His own
hand and lead you in a way you know not of.
Mountains that seemed impassable in your own
strength will be surmounted, and you will be
borne up upon wings as of an eagle over every

difficulty.
"AND TOOK CARE OF HIM."
Have you ever sang that chorus :
"God will take care of you,
Through all the day, o'er all the way,
He will take care of you.
Be not dismayed, whatever betide ;
God will take care of you;
Within His arms of love abide;
God will take care of you"?
334

A CERTAIN MAN WENT DOWN
The tender, loving solicitude and care of the
good Shepherd over His little lambs of the good
Samaritan over the wounded soul, can never be
described. His patience and His love are boundless. He will supply every need of body, soul and
Spirit.
"ON THE MORROW WHEN HE DEPARTED"
Yes, there came the day when, after Jesus had
journeyed all the way from heaven to earth, and
from the manger to the cross; after He had fed
the multitudes and healed the sick, and comforted
the broken-hearted, and taken the sinner's place,
and shed every drop of His blood for the redemption of a lost world, conquered death and the
grave, He fulfilled the word which He had spoken
to His disciples, saying:
"Ye have heard how I said unto you, I go away
and come again unto you. If ye loved me ye
would rejoice because I said, I go unto the Father,
for my Father is greater than I." John 14 :28.

"It is expedient for you that I go away; for if
I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto
you; but if I 'DEPART I will send Him unto
you." John 16 :7. And thus it was that on the
morrow, "while they beheld, He was taken up and
a oloud received Him out of their sight/' But before He departed the thoughtful Saviour, who was
ever providing for our good,
"TOOK OUT TWO PENCE"
(Salvation and the Baptism of the Holy Ghost).
Two pence was a day's wages at that time; so He
has left enough to supply the need for this entire
day. Praise His name.
"AND GAVE THEM TO THE HOST :"
Has the host of your inn, the preacher of your
church, been faithfully spending and preaching
these two pence, dispensing all that they provide
for your comfort? Many hosts hold back one
335

THIS IS THAT
penny and feel that when they have preached salvation and repentance they have given the man all
that he has need of, and is for his good. If this
is what your preacher has been doing you should
go up to him and ask him what he has done with
that other penny, why he is not preaching the baptism of the Holy Ghost according to Acts 2 :4.
Peter, who acted as host to the three thousand
on the day of Pentecost, dispensed the two pennies freely as he said:

"Kepent, and be baptized, every one of you, in
the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of
sins" penny number one;
"And you shall receive the gift of the Holy
Ghost" penny number two. Acts 2 :38.
"AND SAID, TAKE CARE OF HIM."
Stewards, hosts, and pastors, you are responsible to God for the way you preach the Word.
There is power enough, encouragement and grace
enough in the Word of God to take care of and
support all them who come beneath your teaching, if you preach the Word in its entirety, and
they will but obey.
"WHATSOEVER THOU SPENDEST MORE:"
These words open to us such a vista of glories,
such unlimited acres of promised land, with the
fruits of the Spirit, the luscious grapes, and the
land that flows with milk and honey, such a
boundless and fathomless ocean of blessing, such
heights and depths, such lengths and breadths in
the great unsearchable love of God, that we cry
out
"The half has never yet been told."
"Whatsoever thou spendest more"; why, dear
heart, salvation and the baptism of the Holy
Spirit are just the beginning just the first few
toddling steps of the new-born child into the realm
of the Spirit just the a, b, c's of the gospel. To
336

A CERTAIN MAN WENT DOWN
live without salvation through the blood of Jesus
and the baptism of the Holy Spirit according to
Acts 2:4, is to live in an abnormal condition nowhere recorded in the Word of God. Ahead of
you are the gifts and the fruits and the graces of

the Spirit, and a life that He longs to change from
glory into glory until He has brought us unto perfection and can present us to the Father faultless,
without spot or wrinkle.
"WHEN i COME AGAIN"Why, beloved! He is coming again!! Did not
He whose promises are known never to fail say :
"If I go, I will come again, and receive you unto Myself"? John 14 :3. And when the disciples
had watched Him until the clouds had received
Him out of their sight, did not the two men who
stood beside him, clothed in white apparel, say:
"Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into
heaven? This same Jesus, which is taken up from
you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as
ye have seen Him go into heaven." Acts 1 :11.
Did not the apostle Paul declare that
"The Lord Himself shall descend from heaven
with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and
with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ
shall rise first:
Then we which are alive and remain shall be
caught up together with them in the clouds, to
meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be
with the Lord." I Thess. 4:16, 17. Did He not
tell us to comfort one another with these words?
Did not the Lord, speaking through John on the
Isle of Patmos, say:
"Surely, I come quickly." And is not the Spirit
speaking today throughout the whole world,
through yielded vessels:
"Behold, Jesus is coming soon; get ready to
meet Him"?
337

THIS IS THAT
"When I come again" Oh, what a glorious
day that will be when we shall gaze with open
face upon the beauty of the good Samaritan, our
Redeemer and Saviour divine. "And when I
come again
I WILL REPAY THEE. "
Why ! Just one glimpse of His beautiful face
fairer than the lilies, brighter than the sun
just one smile from His tender eyes just one
"well done," and we would be a million times
repaid for any little labor of love that is naught
but our reasonable service when all is said and
done.
Oh, dear backslider, and Oh, dear sinner, will
you not speak the word just now:
"Lord, save me." He is standing right beside
you. He will hear the faintest cry; His glorious
salvation is ready to carry you to the safe refuge
of the inn. He is waiting to care for and watch
over you, and at last, when He comes again, to
take you to dwell with Him forever.
"Come, weary soul, by sin oppressed,
There's mercy with the Lord;
And He will surely give you rest,
By trusting in His Word.
"Only trust Him; only trust Him;
Only trust Him now.
He will save you; He will save you;
He will save vou now."

338

HAST THOU NOT KNOWN ME ?
IT WAS just after I had finished preaching the
other night, that during the altar service, while
an invitation song was being sung, I went down
through the audience inviting sinners to the
altar. Amongst others with whom I was dealing
I came to a young man who answered my invitation to give his heart to Jesus by saying:
"O, Sister, if I could if only I could believe!
But I have never seen or felt the presence of the
Lord in my life; I have never heard His voice or
been conscious of His dealings with me."
Soon after that the Lord gave a message in
tongues and its interpretation that set me to
thinking a great deal. How slow of heart and
how slothful of understanding the whole world
has been, when it came to recognizing the presence, leadings and dealings of the Lord!
"The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his
master's crib: but Israel does not know, my people
doth not consider." For thousands of years God
has walked with His people, but they have not
understood or recognized His presence. The
world today, and even many of the Lord's children, fail to recognize the stately steppings of
the King.
Away back in the garden of Eden, God walked
with Adam. He longed to walk with him and
commune with him in unbroken communion; but
both Adam and Eve failed to comprehend the
great plan and purpose of God, and miserably disobeying Him, lost the garden of Eden.

God walked with the children of Israel as Moses
led them through the Red Sea. He walked with
them through the wilderness; revealing Himself
by the pillar of fire and the cloud. He came unto
them as manna from heaven; He was made manifest to them as a Rock which followed them, and
from which gushed forth th^e clear, living water of
339

THIS IS THAT
life. He thundered forth His voice from Mount
Sinai, but His people failed to really understand
and to recognize the leadings and manifestations
of the great, omnipresent God. They murmured
and rebelled, and lagged behind until they fell
short of the Promised Land.
God visited Pharoah, and walked in his land.
He walked through his palace, and visited the
humblest home. When Pharoah would not listen
to His voice, God spoke through plagues and pestilences. God walked through his land with no
uncertain step, leaving the imprints of His feet
in every home; but all failed to understand, or
recognize the dealings and presence of Jehovah.
Some one says, "O ! but if I could only see Him,
or some plain, unmistakable manifestation would
be wrought in my sight, I could believe." But,
dear one, if you cannot recognize Him through
His Word, and present' day manifestations, you
would not believe even though one should rise
from the dead.
Jesus came and walked with His people, came
away from His Father's throne ; all the Avay from
heaven to earth. He walked in a fleshly, visible
reality among the people of this earth, but the
world would not recognize or believe in Him.

He was born in a manger. He lived in His
Father's home for thirty years, but the world round
about were not stirred into belief they did not
understand. He walked into the midst of the
teachers in the temple at the age of twelve. They
marvelled at His words, but with all their wisdom
and learning, even they did not recognize their
Lord. He walked through the throng, and into
the river of Jordan to be baptized of John, but
even though the Spirit descended upon Him in
bodily form as of a dove, and even though the
Father's voice spoke aloud from the heavens, "This
is My beloved Son" still they did not understand,
340

HAST THOU NOT KNOWN ME?
but slow of heart and slothful of understanding,
they said, "An angel spake/' or "it thundered."
For the three following years Jesus walked in
the midst of His people. He wrought signs and
Avoriders; He healed the sick, cleansed the lepers,
raised the dead, yet, through it all the unbelieving
world failed to understand, or believe, or recognize the pure, spotless Lamb of God, moving in
their midst. He passed through the city's throng;
He entered the lonely home; He preached on land
and sea to the multitude, and to the lone woman
at the well; but few, O so few, recognized Him
and believed it was the Lord.
He stood in plain sight in the midst of the
rabble throng, as a Lily among thorns, a Lamb
among wolves, but they did not understand. Pontius Pilate was near the truth when he asked the
question : "Art thou the King of the Jews?" The
high priest was near the light when he asked:
"Art thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed?" but
neither of them really recognized or understood
the import of Jesus' reply, or knew He was the

Son of God.
He walked up Calvary's hill, bearing His cross.
He was lifted high between heaven and earth as
He prayed : "Father,, forgive them, they know not
what they do." But though the rocks rent, and
the earth did quake; though the veil of the temple
was rent in twain from the top to the bottom;
though many graves were opened, and the bodies
of the saints which slept arose; though the sun hid
its face and the heavens were filled with blackness,
still, unbelievable as it may seem, the spectators
in Jerusalem at large did not understand or
believe this Jesus to be the Son of God.
With what piteous ignorance and utter incomprehension they sealed His tomb, and stationed
the Koman soldiers to guard the door of the grave
of the Lord of heaven and earth. Then, though
341

THIS IS THAT
the stone was rolled away, and the very earth gave
up its dead, and the soldiers themselves were
slain by the power of God, the people round about
refused to recognize the Lord.
Even Mary, when first meeting Him in the
garden after His resurrection, failed to recognize
her Lord, and mistook Him for the gardener. How
many times today, even those to whom He is
dearer than all else, fail to recognize His form
and step, as He conies walking through the garden
of their lives.
He walked with His disciples by the way, but
their eyes were hold en, and they did not know
Him ; even though their hearts did burn within
them as He talked to them by the way, they failed
to recognize Him. Thomas refused to believe the

evidence of his own eyes and Jesus had to bid
him thrust in his hand, to handle Him and see
that it was really He Himself, before he would
believe.
He was seen of above five hundred brethren at
once, after His resurrection ; He was caught up
and a cloud received Him out of the sight of those
watching below, and yet after all there were only
about one hundred and twenty who really followed
to the Upper Room to tarry for the Holy Ghost.
How patient He has been with our stupidity,
and slow, unbelieving hearts! How His heart
must ache when even today the world rushes
blindly on to destruction over His crucified body,
and refuses to understand. Hear Him say :
"0 Jerusalem! Jerusalem! How oft would I
have gathered thee as a hen gathereth her brood
beneath her icing, but ye would not!"
He is speaking today with the voice of ten thousand thousand cannon. He is speaking through
plagues and pestilences, through blood, fire, and
vapor of smoke. His footsteps are echoing on the
hilltops and through the valleys with no uncertain
342

HAST THOU NOT KNOWN ME?
tread. He is walking through the city streets. In
the mansion His hand is again taking the firstborn and in the tenements, mothers' hearts are
bleeding for the sons slain with the sword. His
footsteps are falling with heavy tread through the
battlefield, among those tortured with shot and
shell; His feet are treading softly through the
long, darkened wards of blood and moans and
death. He is leaping upon the hills. He is standing behind our walls. He is looking in at the

lattice. He is standing beside you just now as
you read these words. He is speaking to your
heart, "Believe in Me and thou shalt be saved."
HAVE YOU FAILED TO UNDERSTAND
failed to recognize the Son of God failed to
recognize His dealings in your life? He speaks
sometimes through sickness, sometimes through
the taking away of a loved one, sometimes through
trial and sorrow. Oh, have you recognized your
Lord so lony with you and thou hast not known?
He is calling you just now to repentance, calling
you to put away The evil of your doings, to be
washed in the blood of the Lamb. He is calling
you to be filled with the Spirit and to prepare to
meet Him in the air. Once your eyes have been
opened you will see Him on every hand.
If the world cannot see Him in this present
crisis, if it cannot hear His voice now in the din
of battle, it will never understand till it awakens
to stand before the Judge of the quick and the
dead. Then men will call for the rocks and the
mountains to fall on them and hide them from the
face of Him that sitteth on the throne.
O dear heart, tear off the bandage the devil has
put upon your eyes, and see Jesus NOW. Open
your ears and hear Him calling YOU, that you
be not partaker in the punishment of those who
having ears hear not ? and having eyes fail to see
Jesus their Saviour, the Door of Escape.
343

THIS IS THAT
LIBERTY BONDS "OVER THERE."
(Inspired by Our Country's Call for the Third Liberty Loan,

April, 1918.)
The Great World-Wide War The Need of Sacrifice and Funds Patriotic Talk Will Not Suffice;
Actual, Literal Giving Necessary The First, Sec-,
ond and Third Call for Liberty Loans Liberty
Bonds, or Devil Bondage Liberty Bonds and In-,
terest Bearing Security Tlie Only Way to Get
"Over There/'
PRACTICALLY everywhere one looks today
are grim reminders of the world-wide Avar, its
horrors, and the need for sacrifice and loyalty
at this trying hour. Service flags wave to us from
the doors of homes whence loved ones have taken
their departure from "over there." Posters call to
us from the windows of stores and offices. The call
to buy Liberty Bonds speaks aloud to us from the
page-wide adds of every newspaper, reminding the
citizens of our fair land of the vital necessity of
sacrifice and of making liberty loans to the
government.
In return for each liberty loan a liberty bond
is given to the subscriber. This liberty bond is an
interest-bearing security, with the United States
of America behind it. It is being realized more
and more every day that this war cannot be
conducted without sacrifice and money, for back
of the great armies of this nation now going to
France, standing as the great bulwark upon which
the tempest of this war must spend itself, is the
financial strength of the IT. S. A., whose true,
active, numerical terms are Liberty Bonds. Actual
giving is necessary; even the most patriotic talk
will not pay the debts incurred by war. Sacrifice
and giving are absolutely essential.
The herculean struggle the battle to the death
now going on in the worldly realm is analogous
344

LIBERTY BONDS "OVER THERE"
with that now going on in the spiritual realm.
The great, age-old Avar between righteousness and
unrighteousness is being brought to a final climax
in these last days. We fight against a mighty, a
wily and a deceitful foe one who would deceive
the very elect, if that were possible.
Ever since he appeared to Eve in the garden of
Eden, disguised as a serpent, speaking fair words
and Aveaving lies, he has been fighting, lying ane}
deceiving all who would hearken unto his words.
Although the enemy has put up an unceasing fight
from the beginning, there has never been a time
when his demonic troops have been mobilized and
fighting in massed formation as today. The old
devil's time is short, his days of rule and power
are numbered, for King Jesus will soon overthrow
his earthly throne, strip him of his power, bind
him with chains, and cast him into the bottomless
pit. In the meantime the battle will rage with
ever increasing fervor and intensity, as a whirlwind, gathering momentum as it sweeps on and
through the stricken world.
We are in this war as soldiers of Jesus and as
citizens of that land over there. This war will
tax each overcomer to the utmost. We can only
win as we abide in Jesus and sacrifice ourselves,
our all, freely to His service. We are going to
win, but not easily not without paying the price,
and fighting the good fight of faith. We who have
determined by the power of the Spirit to overcome
and conquer till we get over there, must win by a
whole-hearted sacrifice by making great "liberty
loans" unto the Lord and receiving our "liberty
bonds" as eternal security of the promised land
"over there."
Our King Jesus is calling for LIBERTY
LOANS from all His loyal subjects who intend to
go "over there" to rule and reign, crowned as

overcomers, so therefore:
345

THIS IS THAT
BUY of me gold tried in the fire,
crown of righteousness, which the
A (- Lord shall give you at that day.
Stand fast, therefore in the
LIBERTY where with Christ hath made you free.
And above all things put on charity,
which is the
BOND of perfectness.
He who lendeth to the Lord is Avise. He is
calling upon His people to subscribe liberally of
their time, their love, their means, their praise,
their loyalty and patriotism to His kingdom, their
bodies, souls and spirits. Just as our country is
sending out the call for the third liberty loan today, so, through the Holy Spirit the third call for
liberty loans and the buying up of liberty bonds is
going forth in the spiritual realm.
THE FIRST CALL FOR LIBERTY LOANS
went forth during the dispensation of the Father.
Many subscribed liberally of their lives, love and
sacrifice, and in return secured eternal liberty
bonds guaranteeing infinite thousand-fold interest
in that glory land "over there." In response to
the appeal of the Father, many stepped forth,
counting no sacrifice, no loan too great.
Abraham when called upon to contribute of
his unswerving loA r alty and obedience to the call
divine, manifested his supreme love and willing-

ness to sacrifice by laying his only son, Isaac, upon
the altar.
Daniel entered the lions' den.
The three Hebrew children entered the fiery
furnace.
Joseph endured the prison.
Job endured suffering and bereavement. And
so we might go on and on enumerating those who,
during the dispensation of the Father, responded
to the first call for liberty loans and received in
346

LIBERTY BONDS "OVER THERE 77
exchange eternal interest-bearing Liberty Bonds.
We are reminded also of the enormous interest
that was paid on those bonds even in this world.
ABRAHAM made his liberty loan and, instead of
keeping his own liberty and saying:
"No, Isaac is mine, my time is mine; I will not
give this liberty of mine away, but will keep my
son and my life and my time to myself/ 7 he gave
his all as a Liberty Loan unto his God, and received in return a Liberty Bond which began to
bear immediate interest, for the angel declared:
"Because thou hast done this thing and hast not
withheld thy son, thine only son, in blessing I will
bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thee,
thy seed shall be as the stars of heaven, and in thy
seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed,
because thou hast obeyed my voice."
DANIEL. In return for Daniel's great sacrificial
Liberty Loan, wherein he loaned his

all, body, soul and spirit, unto his God and entered
the lions 7 den, he received a Liberty Bond, an
interest-bearing certificate. This interest began
at once; not only was he liberated, but was given
honor and "prospered in the reign of Darius, and
in the reign of Cyrus."
THE THEEE As for the three Hebrew children,
HEBREW they, too, received instant interest
CHILDREN, on their liberty loans. They entered the fiery furnace in Nebuchadnezzar^ bonds, but through their sacrifice and
obedience their bonds fell away, and they were
brought out of the furnace with none other bonds
than Liberty Bonds whose interest began immediately when the King promoted them in the province of Babylon.
JOSEPH. Joseph's sacrifice and liberty loan,
whereby he lost his liberty and was
cast into prison, purchased a Liberty Bond which
347

THIS IS THAT
also paid wondrous interest. Pharaoh said unto
Joseph :
"Thou shalt be over my house, and according to
thy word shall all my people be ruled/' etc., and
Pharaoh took off the ring from his hand and put
it upon Joseph's hand.
JOB was true to God ? and made his great Liberty
Loan, through pain and sorrow, through bereavement and earthly loss, till he, too, received
his Liberty Bond with interest, "for the Lord gave
Job twice as much as he had before. So the Lord
blessed the latter end of Job more than his be-

ginning; for he had fourteen thousand sheep, and
six thousand camels, and a thousand yoke of
oxen, and a thousand she asses. He had also seven
sons and three daughters. So Job died, being old
and full of days/' and went "over there" to reap
his reward and dwell in joy forever.
HANNAH. The great Liberty Loan of Hannah,
when she lent her son, Samuel, unto
the Lord, and many other instances too numerous
to mention, flood our minds as we think of that
first call for Liberty Loans which went forth during
the dispensation of the Father.
SECOND CALL FOR LIBERTY LOANS.
During the dispensation of the Son, the second
call for Liberty Loans went forth. Those who
responded and left all to follow Jesus received
interest on their sacrifice immediately. Those
who left their fish nets received something far
better; they became fishers of men. To those who
left houses and lands and friends to follow Jesus,
He said:
"Everyone that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or fathers, or mothers, or 'wives, or
children, or lands, for my Name's sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit eternal
life." Instead of claiming a right to their own
348

LIBERTY BONDS "OVER THERE"
fleshly liberty in this world, liberty to live their
own self-centered lives, the disciples and followers
of Jesus made their liberty loans unto the Lord
that the great battle might be waged, and thalj
they might attain unto that most excellent glory
"Over There."

Many are called but few are chosen, and
although this call went out to many, comparatively
few responded. The rich young man who was
invited to make his Liberty Loan by selling all he
had and giving to the poor and following the meek
and lowly Jesus henceforth, "went sorrowing
away."
JUDAS, for a petty earthly gain, sold his right to
the eternal Liberty Bond, and his right
to reign "Over There."
Through the short ministry of the Saviour in
this world, however, there were a few who heard
and responded to the call for Liberty Loans, and
left all to follow Him. Out of this number we
might cite a very few cases recorded in the Word.
PETER yielded his liberty unto the Lord, and
leaving all to follow his Master's leadings, secured his Liberty Bond, the assurance of
reigning with Jesus; and neither whippings, manifold stripes, imprisonments, nor even death, head
downward on the cross, could make him part with
that Liberty Bond, and his hope of going "Over
There."
STEPHEN made his Liberty Loan unto the Lord,
contending even unto death for his
freedom and liberty "Over There," a freedom and
liberty purchased by Jesus on the cross. Shortly
before he kneeled upon the ground and the stones
were flying through the air, and raining with a
sickening thud upon his valiant body, his soul,
gazing through the windows of his vision, saw
"the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing
349

THIS IS THAT
at the right hand of God" He had seen a vision

of the land "Over There."
PAUL made a Liberty Loan unto the Lord, and
instead of reserving his liberty to live his
own life and walk in favor and honor with the
people of his land, he gave up this liberty for the
Saviour who had called him "as one out of due
time." He received in exchange his Liberty Bond
as security and declared that "neither death nor
life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor
things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor
depth, nor any other creature should be able to
separate him from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord;" and rather than part
with his Loberty Bond, his written agreement and
promise of an inheritance incorruptible, "Over
There,' 7 as revealed through the Word of God, he
endured the lash, the prison chains, the dungeons,
the nakedness and the peril, yea, even death itself,
rather than be disloyal to his heavenly country
and King. He besought his brethren that they
should present their bodies a living sacrifice, assuring them that this was their reasonable service.
On and on we might mention case after case of
those who made Liberty Loans unto the Lord,
giving freely of their love, their praise, their time
and means during the second call for Liberty
Loans.
THIRD CALL FOR LIBERTY LOANS.
Just as the third call for Liberty Loans is
going forth in our land today, so it is in the spirit
realm that the third call is going forth.
With the ushering in of the dispensation of the
Holy Spirit began the sounding forth of the third
call for spiritual Liberty Loans. For nineteen
hundred years the Spirit has been sending forth
the call for men and women who would present
themselves unto the Lord, men and women who
would sacrifice their liberty unto His cause, men

350

LIBERTY BONDS "OVER THERE"
and women who instead of using their liberty to
do as they pleased and live selfishly unto themselves alone, would forego this liberty and make
it a Liberty Loan unto the Lord, reckoning that
they were not their own, but were purchased by a
price, not of silver nor gold, but the precious blood
of Jesus.
This in all probability will not be the last call
for Liberty Loans sent forth from the government
of our nation, but it will be absolutely the last call
sent forth by the King of Heaven.
With the closing of this dispensation, the time
to purchase Liberty Bonds for eternity will have
been fulfilled, for once the good man of the house
has risen up and shut to the door, no man will
ever be able to open it again. Banking hours will
be over, and the Lord will say :
"Wherefore then gavest not thou my money into
the bank, that at my coming I might have required
mine own with usury f" Luke, 19-23.
The time for making Liberty Loans unto the
Lord, and securing these eternal Liberty Bonds, is
almost over, and those intending to surmount
every difficulty by His grace and press on to the
victor's reward and the marriage of the Lamb,
"Over There," should today subscribe to the very
utmost of their ability, of possessions, time, love
and praise, that they may secure their liberty
bonds entitling them to be among the number
when the brave soldiers of the cross come marching
down the golden streets of the New Jerusalem, for
those who are unwilling to leave father and
mother, houses and lands for His sake are not
worthy to be called His disciples.

Since this great third call for Liberty Loans has
been sounded forth through the power of the
Spirit, thousands have responded and given up all
for Jesus. Martyrs have been burned at the stake
fed to the lions tossed to the bulls in the
351

THIS IS THAT
arenas torn limb from limb on the rack guillotined eyes burned out tortured in unspeakable ways, yet through all the dangers they have
stood firm and fought the good fight of faith, and
have marched on as a glorious army "Over There."
THE LAST GREAT FIGHT BETWEEN THE HOSTS OF DARKNESS AND THE HOSTS OF LIGHT IS RAGING TODAY
as never before. Victory is coming, through our
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, for the "kingdoms
of this world" shall "become the kingdoms of our
Lord and His Christ, and He shall reign forever
and ever." Eev. 11 :15.
If you long to be over there when the soldiers
go sweeping through the gates, and up the golden
streets in triumph, while the angelic host of
Heaven cheer, and the bands of music are bursting
forth into the triumphant march
If you would join the everlasting song of the
redeemed
If you lay any claim to the right to salute the
blood-stained banner of Jesus Christ no price
will be too great no sacrifice too costly no
Liberty Loan too great to make for the cause of
Jesus Christ today.
You will make your Liberty Loan freely, and
with the "love that seeketh not her own." You

will give all your body, soul and spirit to His
service today, and cling to your liberty bonds, yea,
you will "stand fast therefore in the Liberty
wherewith Christ hath made you free" and will
not be again entangled with the yoke of bondage.
(It is either Liberty Bonds or Devil Bondage.)
You will secure your Liberty Bonds not because
they pay big interest, not because they are the
safest investment on earth, but because of love for
Him who died for you and gave Himself freely
for your redemption, Heaven's greatest. Liberty
Loan Jesus.
352

MODERN WARFARE -"OVER THE TOP."
MARCH, 1918.
Enlistment Good-bye to Everyone Change of
Garments The Training Camp Embarkation on
the Battleship of Faith Enemy Ships The Submarine The Airships Munitions and Supplies
Trench Digging Mortars for the Heavy Artillery
Poisonous Gas and Gas Masks Over the Top to
Victory.
THE GREATEST battle the enemy has ever
waged is being fought today. This battle is
raging between the children of God who have,
determined to go through with Jesus, and every
demon in hell, for all are arrayed against them at
this time. The enemy, knowing that his time is
short, is putting forth every effort within his power
and it is only as we keep low at the feet of Jesus and
under His blood that we will ever be able to withstand his terrific onslaughts.
Every known tactic and device of modern warfare is employed in this great final struggle of
today. The consummation of the age is at hand,
a ndwhatsoever the enemy is going to do must be
done quickly. Therefore, now as never before, we

should watch and pray, be wakeful, be vigilant,
and obey our leader, the Holy Spirit, who was
sent by the Father to endue us with power during
this last herculean struggle.
ENLISTMENT.
Everywhere one turns today, posters calling for
enlistment into the Army and Navy are to be
found. The children of God are called upon by
the Holy Spirit to enlist in the Army of King
Jesus and fight as good soldiers who are sure of
certain victory. The Lord is not calling for conscription or forced service in His army, but demands voluntary, whole-hearted enlistment into
His service. *$%
353

THIS IS THAT
GOOD-BYE TO EVERYONE.
Those who have heard the call and are willing
to obey it must say good-bye to their old world,
good-bye to the old realms of sin, good-bye to
worldly companions, good-bye to pleasure, business, relations, everything that would hinder or
deter their going forth unhampered into the Army
of the Lord.
MODERN WARFARE.
It is a call to a life of separation, a life where
we are in the world and yet not partakers of its
worldliness or frivolity.
CHANGE OF GARMENTS.
After saying good-bye to old associations, we
are called to strip off all civilian clothing. Each
earthly and sinful garment must be laid aside
forever, whether it is a robe deep-dyed with sin

stains, or a white- washed cloak of morality; they
must be left behind before the whole armor of
our God is put on.
"Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of
God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil
day, and having done all to stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and
having on the breast-plate of righteousness; and
your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel
of peace; taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye
shaM be able to quench all the fiery darts of the
wicked, and take the helmet of salvation, and the
sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God."
Ephesians 6:13-17.
THE TRAINING CAMP.
Next comes the life in the Training Camp. This
training camp may be in our kitchen, in the office,
in the shop or in the field, but it is just as truly
a training school as though it were filled with
barracks and parade grounds. Long, tedious days
may follow; days of drilling and marching; days
354

MODERN WARFARE "OVER THE TOP"
of practice and study; days of doing the same
thing over and over again until we learn to do it
well and in perfect union and harmony with the
rest of God's soldiers; days when spiritual muscles
unused to withstanding the enemy will ache and
cry for rest. But through all the tests and the
severest trials, if we so see His hand leading and
guiding, if we so lift our eyes and behold "His
banner over us is love" so that there is peace and
contentment and a longing to learn our lessons
well, we are spurred onward to be good soldiers
and victorious in every battle. Oh, those grilling
Training Camp days ! when we are taught that

"he who ruleth his own spirit is greater than he
who conquers a city." Our Captain is taking each
one through this experience.
EMBARKING ON THE BATTLESHIP OF FAITH.
Finally there comes a day when we set sail on
the Battleship of FAITH. All land is out of sight
and we feel our helplessness and utter dependence
upon Him as never before. The Spirit warns us
that there are enemy ships lurking behind yonder
fogs of doubts and carelessness, and a constant
lookout and the setting of a constant guard is
necessary.
ENEMY SHIPS.
Suddenly as we gaze through the glasses of
discernment and care we see a great battleship
bearing down upon us, painted drab, and so innocently melting into the surroundings that without
the warning of the Spirit we should not have
recognized it until too late.
On it conies belching death and defeat at
every loophole, but the returning shots from the
broadside of the Word of God is sufficient and
terrible enough when fired by the big guns of
"FAITH" and "HUMILITY" to sink any ship
that can come against the children of God.
355

THIS IS THAT
THE SUBMARINE.
At times the enemy comes openly, riding on
top of the waves of our daily life; but more
often, as the perilous, evil days continue, he comes
to us beneath the waves in a hidden, subtle, submarine manner. It is only the earnest, wakeful
child of God whose eye is searching the wave that

will detect the rising of the little periscope, as
the enemy seeks to find his range, and discharge
his torpedoes of discouragement, doubts and overwhelming temptations. But Hallelujah to Jesus,
He has a few submarine destroyers that can
divert and explode every trick of the devil.
There is the submarine destroyer of "Prayer,"
the destroyers of "Hope," "Faith," and "Love,"
the destroyer of "Praise," and the great Word oij
God, these put every foe to flight, and without
these protectors you cannot withstand one attack
of the enemy in these last days.
Ships are sending up distress signals, ships are
sinking all about us today because of their lack of
watchfulness, or because of their lack of prayer.
There is no escape, no other pathway that leads
to the overcomer's goal, for the only pathway leads
through the war zone. God is calling overcomers,
not cowards, to reign with Him upon His throne.
Watch and pray. Pray without ceasing and in
everything give thanks. Let your eyes be anointed
with spiritual discernment, and no matter how
the enemy may seek to camouflage his ships or
territory, you will never be deceived.
THE AIRSHIPS.
At times the sky above you on land or on sea
may be filled with aeroplanes of the enemy, for
the principalities and powers of the air are today
arrayed against us as never before ; but if we abide
in Him and obey Him in humility, there is not an
enemy who can swoop so low or drop a bomb of
deceit, evil suggestions, false teaching or discour356

MODERN WARFARE "OVER THE TOP"

agement but will be brought low and caused to fall
in flaming defeat by the guns of watchfulness and
prayer mounted on the power of Jesus' name and
turned heavenward.
There are days when we reach the land, and our
pathway leads over shot-torn battlefields. There,
with saddened hearts we see the remains of many
a former comrade lying strewn about us, but our
Leader speaks, saying, though a thousand may
fall on one hand and ten thousand upon the other
that He will take us through if we will seek His
face and hide in Him.
MUNITIONS AND SUPPLIES.
Before entering the great battlefields we should
make sure that we are taking with us plenty of
ammunition and plenty of solid nourishing food.
Light surface blessings and effervescent joys do
not make good fighting food for soldiers. Wheat
and fats are necessary. Be sure you take with
you, therefore, a goodly supply of the wheat of
God's Word, and are feeding in a fat pasture upon
the deep things of God.
TRENCH DIGGING.
There will be many long days of trench digging
as you go down in humility and prayer, hiding in
Him. There will be days of seeming inactivity
when all that can be done is to watch and hide
ever closer in His depths. There are days ot
quick action and storming the enemy's trenches;
but locked in this struggle as His people are today, Jesus will prevail against all the powers of
the enemy and cause those who put their trust
in Him to be more than conquerors.
MORTARS AND HEAVY ARTILLERY.
How we need the guidance of the Spirit and His
strength in all things, whether our fighting is done
with the long distance guns of faith and interces-

sory prayer, or whether it is a hand-to-hand fight
357

THIS IS THAT
with the bayonets of patience and long-suffering
and love amidst trying circumstances. In firing
off the heavy artillery be sure that you have laid a
solid mortar foundation, for if your guns of faith
and prayer waver in uncertainty you must not expect to hit the mark or rout the enemy. Do not
place your guns upon selfishness or self-centered
aims, for this foundation will never hold.
POISONOUS GAS AND GAS MASKS.
Beware of poisonous gases of spiritual slumber
and slothfulness, drifting over on the winds of
deception from the enemy's trenches. These poisonous vapors of smoke are foretold in the Word
and would cause you to sleep, as did the ten
virgins of old and as the disciples in the garden,
until you forget to watch and pray and cease your
constant vigilance. When you see these clouds of
poisonous gases of carelessness coming toward you
put on the gas-mask of triple-plied wakefulness,
prayer and praise and you will be unharmed.
Never exalt or raise yourself high in your
trenches, as when your head appears above ground
you will be a sure and certain mark for the
enemy's missiles. Keep low at Jesus' feet and
you will be safe.
OVER THE TOP TO VICTORY.
Finally be of good courage, fellow-soldiers, for
there is nothing to fear, while you watch and pray
and live in obedience to the commands of our
leader, who will surely win the day.

Some day, very soon, the battle will be over, the
last grim foe conquered, and the crown will have
been won. Some day, if we are faithful and have
overcome even as He overcame, He will take us in
triumph to reign with Him upon His throne forever and forever.
Throw aside all weights, all slumber, and press
on "Over the Top." Why, the end is in view ! The
victory is in sight already.
358

THE RED CROSS.
No Man's Land The Shell-torn Battlefield
High Explosives and Means of Death The Red
Cross the Only Hope of the Wounded Stretcher
Bearers First Aid Equipment The Ambulance of
"Prayer" The Red Cross Hospital Atop Calvary's
Hill Its Door Open, Cleanliness, and Skilled Tender Hands Removing Stained and Muddied Garments Bathing the Wounded Soft White Robes
Operations, Amputations and Probing for Hidden
Shot and Shrapnel Ever Constant Vigilance
Food and Rest, Love and Safety of the Red Cross
"Let ME be a Red Cross Worker."
BLEAK, barren, filled with deep shell holes
and constantly churned and harrowed by
tons of high explosives poured into it from
the fortifications of the enemy, there lies
a narrow strip of country between the front line
trenches of the Army of Righteousness and the front
line trenches of the devil and His Satanic hosts that
might well be termed No Man's Land, for those who
are found in this land do not belong to Jesus, nor yet
does the devil fully own them in the strictest
sense of the word, till he has conquered body,
soul and spirit, and cast them into the dark,
eternal prisons of Hell.

The great battle (wherein hostilities were
opened and the first shot fired when Satan was
cast out of Heaven; and the second when Satan
ruthlessly attacked God's dearest creation, Mankind, in the Garden of Eden) has never abated,
but has swept on and on like a tornado, gathering
strength and momentum and ever growing in
intensity.
359

THIS IS THAT
Throughout the length and breadth of the entire
spiritual "War Zone'' there is no region so filled
with danger, so unprotected, so swept with shot
and shell; for whilst the soldier of King Jesus
digs deep and securely entrenches himself in the
strongholds of his Saviour's love ( Psalm 61 :3 )
and of His power, the sinner is left alone in No
Man's Land at the mercy of the enemy, whose
heavy artillery, machine guns, shrapnel, barrage
fire, liquid fire and poisonous gases pulverize,
scorch or choke all who come within their reach.
High overhead the shells of overwhelming evil,
pressure and influence from the devil's heavy
artillery, scream as they tear through the air,
intent on some mission of destruction and death.
Shot from the rapid-firing machine guns of incessant temptation whine and spit in the dust on
every side. "Not a pleasant place to dwell," you
say? Yet this is just the position of every sinner.
Each moment spent outside of the lines of the
Lord's Battalions is fraught with the gravest
danger of death yes, death eternally.
Whenever the devil can get a favorable wind
(evil influences or companions) blowing in the
sinner's direction, he sends out his poisonous
gases, causing all who breathe them unprotected
by the gas-mask of resistance in Jesus' name, to

strangle and finally pass into the slumber from
which few awaken. Through the smoke-laden air
can be discerned the dead and the wounded. The
former lie still and cold; the latter sprawl painfully and helplessly, torn, bleeding, some with
eyes put out with shrapnel, others with limbs torn
away, shattered shoulders and thighs, some
wounded in the head, while in others the shot has
buried itself deep into the flesh. There they lie,
unable to help themselves, unable to help each
other. In order to reach them with aid and succor
one would need to be willing to sacrifice his own
life. WHO will go?
360

THE RED CROSS
THE RED CROSS HOSPITAL ON CALVARY'S HILL.
Many of the wounded have lain, mangled and
bleeding, for long hours, longing for someone to
come who could bring relief and carry them to
some place of refuge. EEFUGE? Could there be
a place of R-E-F-U-G-E within traveling distance
of this bedlam of suffering and death? Ah! Yes,
just back of the lines .of the Army of Righteousness stands a hill called Calvary, and its top is
crowned with a glorious hospital where woes are
wiped away, and the balm of Gilead is applied.
This hospital is known as the Red Cross. It is
none other than the old, rugged cross, stained red
with the blood of Him who died that we might
live, whose heart was broken that He might heal
all broken hearts, who was wounded on the
blood-stained cross that He might heal, through
His wounds, forever, all the wounded who came
unto Him. (Jer. 30:17). Yes, there in the "open
door" (Rev. 3:8) stands the great Physician
Himself; but who will go after and bring in the
wounded and dying from the great shell-torn
battlefields of No Man's Land?

THE CRYING NEED OF RED CROSS WORKERS.
It is an easy matter to rescue those who are
wounded or fall behind the lines (Psalms 37:24),
but who will be willing to go without the camp,
and outside of the lines, willing to lay down his
life to rescue the wounded brother and become a
worker for the Red Cross? The hospital cannot
come to the wounded, therefore there is vital need
for human instrumentality, Red Cross workers
with the Red Cross seal upon their foreheads and
upon their left arms, and equipped with bandages,
lint, gauze, sets of tourniquets, splints, restoratives, etc., go forward with the ambulance of
"Prayer" and the stretcher of "Faith."
Out there, on the fields of sin of No Man's Land
361

THIS IS THAT
lie hundreds and thousands of wounded souls
( Isaiah 1 :6 ) , looking, calling^ perishing, dying for
the need of Red Cross workers to carry them to
Jesus in Faith and Prayer. There are those
amongst the wounded who cry aloud in agony of
spirit, and there are those who keep back the cry
of suffering between set teeth, that the on-looker
should not know the secret torture. Others lie
unconscious of their grave danger and nearness to
eternity's black night, without Jesus.
THE COMING OF THE AMBULANCE.
Shot and bursting shell fragments are falling
all around, threatening to extinguish the last spark
of life and hope. Will no one heed the call? "Ah,
Yes!" cries a voice, "I see a little procession
coming down from Calvary's Hill. They are
coming with their ambulances and help."

"How do you know it is not some ammunition,
or supply conveyance?" asks another sufferer,
grown skeptical from long waiting.
"I know it is help coming speedily because I
see the sign on the side of the car. It is composed
of a pure white background (the spotless
righteousness and purity of Jesus) and on the
white background is a big KED CROSS (Col.
1:20).
Nearer and nearer the ambulances come. Other
cars and supply trucks have dashed by on the
other side unheeding (Luke 10:31-32), but the
ambulance comes right to^ the spot where the
wounded lie ( Luke 10 :34 ) . Leaping from the
car, the workers of the Ked Cross, bearing their
stretcher of faith, pass by the dead, now beyond
aid (Jas. 1:15) and press on to the wounded
(Matt. 22:32). Opening their "First Aid" equipment, they kneel beside the soul suffering from
the wounds of the devil.
First and most important, the worker of the
Ked Cross carries a set of tourniquets of all sizes.
362

THE RED CROSS
These are made to adjust to any part of the
wounded man's body where an artery may spurt.
The first glance at the wounded man tells the
bearer whether blood is being lost in dangerous
amount. The bearers have instructions to lose
not a second where this instrument can be used.
Prevailing prayer, coupled with the Word of God,
and the authority and power in the mighty Name
above every name, can be so firmly wrapped
about the wounded limb that the life-giving flow
that is ebbing away will be stayed. There is a
portion of God's eternal Word and a prevailing

prayer that can fit any part of the body or soul,
no matter what conditions . or circumstances may
be.
An array of mental splints formed of Faith,
Hope and Love is second in the bearer's pack.
Often the wounded man is so shattered that he
cannot be moved without killing him unless reinforcements are attached to his mutilated limbs.
Lint, gauze and bandages ( Ezek. 34 :16 ) supplement these. Each bearer should have a thorough
training in bandaging (Rom. 12:15), (Isaiah 1:6).
Restoratives (Jer. 30:17) are administered and
the wounded man laid gently upon the stretcher
of "Faith," carried to the ambulance of "Prayer"
and the motor of "Love," whose power is supplied
by the oil of the Spirit is started. The car is
turned toward the Red Cross hospital on Calvary's
Hill. Tender and skillful handling and driving
are necessary, as often rough handling and unwise
treatment kill the little spark of life left in the
patient.
Up and up, nearer and nearer the dear old Red
Cross Hospital on the Hill, in the Ambulance of
Prayer, the wounded man is carried till at last he
is brought to the "Open Door" (Rev. 3:8), where
the Great Physician (Mark 2:17) is standing with
a smile of tenderness to receive the suffering, sin363

THIS IS TPIAT
sick soul. Within, all is shining with immaculate
cleanliness, for this
HOSPITAL FOR THE HEALING OF BODY,, SOUL AND SPIRIT
is none other than the "Fountain of Blood" drawn
from EmmanuePs veins.

Tender yet firm hands are ready there to help
the weak soul and support him within the interior
of this refuge, while his sin-sick soul is throbbing
forth the prayer:
"Blessed be the fountain of blood,
To a world of sinners revealed,
Blessed be the dear Son of God,
Only by His stripes we are healed.
Saviour, to that fountain of Thine,
Leaning on Thy promise I go,
Cleanse me by that washing of Thine,
And I shall be whiter than snow."
Upon his arrival at the Bed Cross Hospital (the
fountain of blood that flowed from the bloodstained cross of Jesus) before much treatment
can be given, or wounds be dressed, the verminous,
stained and muddied garments of sin and uncleanliness must be removed (Jude 23). Gently
each garment of the world is taken or cut away.
(Workers of the Ked Cross should use great care
in performing this task, and deal gently, ofttimes
leaving this work to the Head Physician Jesus
Himself for if rough handling is given and the
earthly garments and habits jerked off in our
conscientious, but crude, unwise way, death may
result to the weak man. Jesus can remove each
garment that is stained by sin, and strip him
almost painlessly, if the patient will be pliable and
yielding in His dear hands. )
THE OPERATING ROOM.
As soon as the old worldly garments have been
stripped away, the patient is bathed and thoroughly cleansed from head to foot, and indeed the
364

THE RED CROSS
blood of Jesus cleanseth from ALL SIN. Many a

time the wounded man has to be placed upon the
operating table and portions of shot or the devil's
shrapnel that have been buried within the flesh,
must be probed for, no matter how painful, till
all foreign matter has been removed. But as the
Physician applies the knife and the probe He
whispers, "Be still, My child, faithful are the
wounds of a friend ( Prov. 27 :6 ) and I wound that
I may heal." And He probes deeper and deeper
till the shell is reached and removed.
AMPUTATIONS.
There are times when some member of the body,
perhaps an arm or a limb, has to be amputated
(something that has marred and hindered our
spiritual life, perhaps a dear one or a treasured
possession) but through the pain the Physician
explains while the hand or foot is being cut off
that "It is better for thee to enter into life halt or
maimed than having two hands and two feet to
be cast into hell." Many have had one eye so
badly blinded or hurt that it had to be removed,
but through it all the Saviour's voice goes on :
"It is better for thee to enter into life with one
eye, rather than having two eyes to be cast into
Hell." (Matt. 18:8,9.)
Sometimes as His dear hands are dealing with
the injured man, cleansing wounds, applying His
ointment, and assuring him that he will heal him
of his wounds (Jer. 30:17) and applying the bandages, according to Psalms 147:3, which says He
healeth the broken in heart, and bindeth up their
wounds, the patient looks up and sees that the
hands of the Great Physician Himself are
wounded, and he cries out in amazement: "What
are these wounds in thine hands?" Then He
answers: "Those with which I was wounded in
the house of my friends." (Zach. 13:6.) "Not
only my hands, but my feet, my side and my brow
365

THIS IS THAT
were wounded for your transgressions." And
shamed before His great sacrifice and love, his
murmuring dies away and he cries : "O Lord,
continue your dealings, no matter what it means.
I trust you, Lord."
REST AND FOOD.
The operating room experience over, the patient
is soon placed in bed to rest (Psa. 23:2), but first
he is arrayed in fine linen, clean and white (Rev.
19:8). Then as the weary finds rest, wounds
bound and beginning to heal already, clean in
body and soul, he whispers : "I icill lay me down in
peace, and sleep; for Thou Lord only maketli me
dwell in safety." ( Psa. 4 :8. )
Here in the Red Cross Hospital are found food
and rest and love and safety. The Physician is
always on call, and ever watches in vigilance
over him, for He never slumbers nor sleeps. (Psa.
121:3.)
(The food for convalescents, nurses must remember, should not often be given as strong as
to well people, but the milk of the Word, the wine
of the Kingdom, the bread of Life, and later, as
the patient grows stronger, the strong meat may
be given under the direction and supervision of
the Great Physician.)
Those who dwell within the fountain of blood,
which is indeed a hospital where Avoes are soothed
away and broken hearts healed, located at the
foot of the red, blood-stained cross of Jesus ? are
safe and immune from danger (Rom. 8:38,39).
Above it, unfurled to the breeze, flies the bloodstained banner of the cross, the Red Cross on its
background of the pure white holiness of Jesus,
and though the devil's airships, principalities and

powers of the air may soar aloft above us,
though demons may rage, and great long-distance
guns may fire their great explosives and shell all
about us, he is safe who abides under the protec366

THE RED CROSS
tion of the blood, the unfurled banner of the cross,
and the protection of Jesus, his Lord.
"LET ME BE A RED CROSS WORKER.''
Then (growing stronger day by day) with the
return of strength, conies the great over-whelming
love of the Ked Cross and all it has meant to him.
The shuddering, awful thought of the field from
which he has been rescued the firing of the
cannon, the smoke of battle, the moans and heartrending cries of misery fill the soul with a newborn desire and determination to himself be
marked with the insignia of the RED CROSS.
Provided with an ambulance of prayer and the
stretcher of Faith, carrying the Word of God, and
his First Aid to the wounded kit, he would go
forth to sacrifice even life itself. The cry of his
whole heart is, "O that I might go and bring in
other souls, even as I was brought to the cross !
O, that others might know of the balm of Gilead,
and the hospital a-top blest Calvary's Hill ! O,
Dear Saviour, let ME be a Red Cross Worker!"

367

THE TWO HOUSES.
THE HOUSE ON THE SAND AND THE HOUSE ON
THE ROCK.

EVERY man, woman and child throughout
this world is erecting a building. "Except
the Lord built the house, they labor in
vain that build it." Ps. 127 :1.
The great army of house-builders is divided into
two classes, namely, the sinner and the saint.
(Bight here let us make it plain, that each individual is either a sinner or a saint. It is impossible to be both; it is impossible to be neutral;
there is no half-way business with God. Either
you are the child of the Lord or you are serving
the devil there is no middle territory.)
Just as there are only two classes of housebuilders, just so there are but two foundations,
the sandy foundation of sin and unrighteousness,
which lies in the devil's domain, and the solid
Rock, which is Jesus Christ.
THE MAN ON THE SAND GATHERS HIS MATERIAL.
The sinner is building day by day. His mind is
not troubled by the lack of foundation. He does
not deem it at all necessary to dig deep, but begins erecting the edifice of his life by bringing up
the stones of unrepentance, and wilfulness; the
stones of sin and unbelief; and piling them, moment by moment, hour by hour, day by day, year
by year, one upon another, on the sands of this
life.
The stones of evil thoughts and distrustfulness
are piled up day by day. The stones of pride, selfishness and hardness of heart toward God take
their places in the building, which is growing
moment by moment into a life and structure which
will surely fall in the great day, when God's judgments are poured out upon the world.
368

WHERE ARE YOU BUILDING ON THE SHIFTING
SANDS OR THE ROCK OF AGES?

THE TWO HOUSES
THE MAN ON THE ROCK DIGS A FOUNDATION AND
GATHERS HIS BUILDING MATERIAL.
While in New York City sometime ago, I was
very much impressed with the great world-famed
sky-scrapers. For many weeks, yes, months, I
saw a high board fence built around a certain lot.
Behind this board fence, and above it, I could
see great cranes and derricks, and hear the steel
drills.
Dozens of men were working there, drilling and
digging, and blasting down into the solid rock;
down, and down, and down they went, digging a
foundation for the great steel sky-scraper Avhich
was soon to be erected, and one of the men assured me that the higher the building was to be
the deeper the foundation must be sunk into the
solid rock.
After having been away for a short visit and
returning again to the city, my eyes opened wide
Avith surprise as I saw the steel building so
quickly taking shape, and towering with imposing
grandeur above its neighbors. Why, it really
seemed that it took longer to build the foundation
than to put the steel frame-work of the building
together.
This is a very apt illustration, it seems to me,
of the Christian's life, as he prepares to build
upon the solid Rock, Christ Jesus.
First of all he -digs a deep foundation of repentance, and goes down in humility into Jesus,
his Lord. He plunges into the foun-

THE tain filled with the blood. He falls
FOUNDATION prostrate at the dear, pierced feet of
his Master; for indeed the way down
is the way up, in our spiritual life. "He that
Inunbleth himself shall be exalted."
His neighbors may laugh at him and tell him
this digging deep, this weeping and mourning over
369

THIS IS THAT
his sins is not at all necessary; but the work goes
on. The great boulders of hindrance must be
blasted by the love and power of God. Every obstacle must be removed, and a solid, settled, foundation made. He must dig deep into the atoning
work of Jesus, before the building of his Christian
life can be constructed. "But h't every man take
heed how he buildeth thereon, for other foundation
can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus
Christ."
The foundation having been laid, the building
begins to take shape. Upon the stones of repentance and Godly fear, are laid the stones of mercy
and divine tenderness. The boundless grace and
love of Jesus Christ, the stones of sincerity and
truth, the stones of thanksgiving and glorious
praises to the Lord of his salvation, are added to
the building. Love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness and temperance are piled moment by moment, day by
day, year by year, one upon another.
The stones of love and unselfishness, a longing
for souls, and a yielding to the will of God, a
desire to live like Him and abide in His presence
are added again to these; and so the work goes
on, by each word, and deed and thought, here a
little and there a little, precept upon precept,

line upon line, tier upon tier.
"Jesus Christ being the chief corner stone, the
building is fitly framed together, and groweth into
a holy temple in the Lord, for a habitation of God
through the Spirit."
Next in importance in the house comes the door
through which admission is gained into the house.
As for the sinner who builds upon the
THE sand "Sin lieth at the door" the devil,
DOORS who is the controlling agent of his willpower, is the door-keeper; thus the door
swings on its hinges to admit the worldliness, and
370

THE TWO HOUSES
sin, and evil thoughts and companions, who
occupy the rooms within.
The door is ever shut and locked against God as
He is manifested through the great love of Christ
ever shut and barred to the wooings of the
Spirit and the rappings of that gentle hand. His
ears are closed to the voice that is saying, "Behold, I stand at the door, and knock; if any man
wilt open, I will come in and sup with him and
he with Me" closed to the warnings of the Saviour who would plead with him to leave this sandy
foundation, and this perishable building, which
can never stand the storm, and to the invitation
to him to come over and build upon the solid Rock,
Christ Jesus.
The door of the child of God who builds upon
the rock, is not so; but righteousness, through the
power of the Spirit, standeth as doorkeeper. The
blood of the slain Lamb is sprinkled upon the
door-posts and the lintels. The door is ever open
to admit the leadings of the Lord, the dealings of

His Spirit, His righteousness, and all His blessed
will, and swings shut to bar out the things of the
Avorld, the flesh and the devil, which are displeas*
ing to the Lord, his Maker. Thus his rooms are
occupied by faith, and hope and love.
Next in importance come the windows in the
two houses. The windows of the sinner are darkened with the things of this world, and
THE his vision impaired. He can not realWINDOWS ize his own danger, and his viewpoint
is distorted. He cannot foresee the
awful storm of wrath which is soon to break.
"When the keepers of the house shall tremble, and
the strong men shall bow themselves, and the
grinders cease because they are few, and those
that look out of the windows be darkened"
The windows of the saint are illuminated with
the glory of God, as revealed by the Spirit. His
371

THIS IS THAT
view is clear as he gazes into the future and beholds that
"There's a land that is fairer than day,
And by faith he can see it afar,
For the Father waits over the way,
To prepare him a dwelling-place there."
Those who stand without his walls see the light
of the Lord shining through, for
"Behold, he standeth behind our wall, He looketh forth at the windows, showing himself through
the lattice. Song of Sol. 2 :9.

In his dining-room the sinful man who is building upon the sand, is feasting upon the things of
this world; he says to his soul: "Soul,
DINING thou hast much goods laid up for many
ROOMS years; take thine ease, eat, drink and be
merry." But God is saying unto him:
"Thou fool! This night thy soul shall be required
of thee; then whose shall these things be which
thou hast provided." Luke 12 :19-20. He feasts
upon things that can never satisfy the hunger of
the soul that is craving after God. He is as one
that "dreameth, and behold, he eateth; but he
awaketh and his soul is empty." Isa. 29 :8.
In his dining-room, the child of God is feasting
on the milk, and the honey and the wine. The
fruits of Canaan are spread before him. The
bread of life is his, and for him the glorious crystal waters flow from the throne of God. The voice
of the Bridegroom is heard speaking:
"I am come into my garden, my sister, my
spouse; I have gathered my myrrh ivith my spice;
I have eaten my honeycomb with my honey; I have
drunk my wine with my milk: eat, friends*
drink, yea, drink abundantly, beloved." Song
of Sol. 5:1.
While the sinner is feasting upon the applause
of his fellow-men, and the treasures of this world,
the children of the Most High are dining at the
372

THE TWO HOUSES

table of the Lord dining upon his righteousness
and love; upon the joys and fruits of the Spirit,
and their souls are filled to overflowing, as He

leadeth them through the green pastures of His
Word.
The inmates of the house which is builded upon
sand are dancing to the tunes of this world and
its applause dancing to the strains of
DANCING earthly popularity, and self-centered
HALLS aims. Outside, threatening storm-clouds
of death's dark night are gathering, and
the rolling thunders seem to cry aloud in warning.
The wrath of God is soon to be poured out, but
unheedingly they dance on and on, ever nearing
the brink of destruction and hell.
The inmates of the house on the rock are dancing, too. You remember as the brother of the
prodigal son approached his father's house, he
heard the sound of music and dancing. Some
folks seem to think the devil has a monopoly on all
the dancing and joy; but dancing and joy really
belong to God, and as the devil cannot steal it he
has tried to counterfeit it.
Within the heart of him whose hopes are built
upon the solid foundation of Christ and His righteousness, there is joy unspeakable and full of
glory, for: "His mourning has been turned into
dancing," Ps. 30:11, and "There the virgins rejoice in the dance, both old and young together."
Jer. 31 :13. They "Praise Him with the 'timbrel
and dance," Ps. 150 :4, and cry : "Let them praise
His name in the dance." Ps. 149 :3.
"For the children of the Lord have a right to shout
and sing,

For the way is growing bright, and our souls are
on the wing, ,
We are going bye and bye to the palace of the
King.
Glory to God, Hallelujah!"
373

THIS IS THAT

As for the sinner his bed is so short that he cannot stretch himself upon it, and the covering so
narrow that he cannot wrap himself
BED- in it. Isa. 28 :20. When he lies down
CHAMBERS at night there is an unrest in his heart,
for he is unprepared to meet his God;
his conscience is troubled as the Spirit of God
strives with him, assuring him that "Whatsoever
a man soweth that shall he also reap" and his
covering of self-righteousness and excuses cannot
cover or conceal him from the eye of God.
As for the child of God, his rest is sweet in the
Lord. He hears the voice of the Psalmist ringing
down through the ages: "I remember Thee upon
my bed, and meditate on Thee in the night
watches" Ps. 63:6. Let "the saints be joyful in
glory. Let them sing aloud upon their beds."
Ps. 149 :5.
O, the peace that belongeth unto the child of
God, to know that if his eyes never open again,
"to be absent from the body is to be present with
the Lord," and "to live is Christ, and to die is
gain."
The Word tells us that "Where your treasure is,

there will your heart be also." The worldly man
is storing up treasures of this world's
TREASURE goods, heaping to himself riches,
ROOMS houses and lands. He tears down his
barns and builds greater, and there bestows his fruits and goods. He bids his soul take
its ease, because he has much goods laid up for
many years. But God is speaking to him through
His word, saying: "Thou fool, this night thy
soul shall be required of thee: then whose shall
these things be, which thou hast provided?" He
has laid up treasure for himself, but is not rich
toward God. "For what shall it profit a man if he
gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?"
The worldly man takes no thought of the great
374

THE TWO HOUSES
tomorrow, and does not seem to realize that he
cannot take one penny away with him. Born
into this world naked and without a penny, he will
have to enter into the next world in the same
condition.
The child of God is laying up treasure above
"where moth and rust do not corrupt, and where
thieves do not break through nor steal/' The poorest child of God, who lives in the humblest cottage
in the dell, and has laid up treasure in the world
beyond is richer than an ungodly king that sits
upon his throne, with all his splendor, for his
riches are laid away in Heaven, and will not pass
away throughout the endless ages of eternity.
The Lookout Tower of the sinner, and the Lookout Tower of the saint are totally different. Both
look out upon life, but from
LOOKOUT TOWER very different viewpoints. The
AND Search-light of the sinner's vis-

SEARCH-LIGHT ion goes through all the earth,
searching for earthly possession, earthly treasure, earthly pleasures and popularity. From his lookout tower, the searchlight of the sinner's eye is ever turning expectantly and inquiringly, from one end of the land
to the other Searching, searching, SEARCHING, ever searching for new amusement, new
pleasure or gain, ever seeking something to still
that gnawing hunger that is eating into his heart;
ever endeavoring to satisfy the longing in his soul,
which, if he but knew it, nothing but God can satisfy.
DARK CLOUDS APPROACHING STORM GOD'S WRATH.
The dark clouds of the approaching storm of
God's wrath are filling the sky above the sinner's
head. He refuses to see them, for he has eyes
only for earthly things. Then, though the thunders crash with deafening roar about him in these
375

THIS IS THAT
last days of war and tribulation though the
lightnings flash and strike round about him he
refuses to believe that this is more than a passing
shower, and his search-light still continues to wander restlessly throughout the earth for new
achievements and honors.
The wise man, who has built his house upon
the rock has his search-light constantly turned
upward toward the Heavens. God is his high
tower, in which he is safe from the enemy. He
has set the watchmen of Vigilance and Prayer
upon his walls, of whom he is ever enquiring:
"Watchman, what of the night?" Is. 21:11. The
watchman's answering voice can be heard saying:

"The dark night of God's wrath is breaking over
the w r hole world. The hour of storm and tribulation is at hand; the great ocean of God's love,
which has floated on, calm as a river and deep as
the sea, through the many centuries of sin and
unbelief, is noAv being churned into a mighty
storm of wrath."
The storm signals are all set, the danger signals
are up, and woe to that man whose house is built
upon the sand. Everything that can be shaken,
will be shaken, and only those things that cannot
be shaken will remain.
"Watchman, what of the night?" and again the
answer comes :
"Wars and rumors of wars, plagues and pestilence, blood and fire and vapor of smoke." The
storm is raging, but the children of the Lord arcj
preparing for the coming of their Redeemer.
Upward, ever upward, turns the searchlight of
the child of God, searching, ever searching. In
each new cloud that brings sorrow to the sinner,
he sees another sign of the coming of the Lord,
for has he not said: "When ye shall see these
things come to pass, rejoice, for the coming of the
Master draweth nigh"?
376

THE TWO HOUSES
The rain is falling falling upon the just and
the unjust. The rain increases to a downpour.
Unto the man whose house is built upon
THE RAIN the sand the rain brings terror and
is FALLING destruction, and the beginning of the
wrath of God; but to the man whose
house stands on the rock, it brings floods of blessing. It is to him the Latter Rain falling on the

earth, and "his heart is filled with song, and
praise and mirth."
The clouds of darkness that are gathering over
the sinner are bright clouds to the saint. He is
looking for Jesus to come in the clouds, and fully
expects to be caught up in the clouds to meet Him.
The lightning of God's wrath which brings
sure and certain destruction to the sinner, brings
power and glory to the child of God. God sitteth
on His throne. Out of the east proceedeth forth
thunder and lightning. The sinner quails beneath
this power, but the man whose house is built upon
the rock sings aloud:
"O Lord, send the power just now,
And fill us, every one."
And through all the storm the child of God is in
his watch-tower of prayer and vigilance, his searchlight ever gazing above:
"He is looking for Jesus from glory to come,
That Jesus who died on the tree,
A cloud of bright angels to carry him home,
To that glorious eternity."
He seeks to warn the man who has long been
building upon the sand, but the latter refuses to
take warning. Ah, if he could but see already the
great billows that are sweeping over this earth
today, lashing at the stones of his shaky foundation, causing even kingdoms and thrones to totter
and fall !
377

THIS IS THAT

Each sinner, both small and great each soul
who has rejected God, and failed to build upon the
solid rock ? Christ Jesus shall surely fall in ignominious shame and death, and the place wherein
he stood shall know him no more, but throughout
the endless ages of eternity he will mourn his disastrous folly in neglecting to build upon the solid
rock: "For what shall it profit a man if he gain
the whole world and lose his own soul?"
HOUSE ON THE ROCK STANDS ETERNALLY SECURE.
and though winds may blow and the storm may
beat upon that house, it will not fall, for it was
founded upon a rock:
"All they that put their trust in God
Can never be removed,
They stand secure like Zion's mount,
By many ages proved.
Though fierce the storm in fury beat.
And awful thunders roar,
The children of the Mighty God
Are safe forevermore."
While the sinner's house sinks down to the IOAVest pits of hell, the house of righteousness, founded upon the rock, will stand eternally in the
Heavens, in that land where storms never come
and tears never flow.

378

CONCERNING
THE HOLY SPIRIT

LOST AND RESTORED.
AS I SAW IT IN MY VISION.
THE following message was given under the
inspiration of the Holy Ghost, in London,;
England. The text, which was given by the
Spirit was as follows :
LOST
"That which the Palmerworm hath left hath
the Locust eaten; and that which the Locust hath
left hath the Canker-worm eaten; and that which the
Cankerworm hath left hath the Caterpillar eaten."
Joel 1 :4.
AND RESTORED.
"And I will restore to you all the years that the
locust hath eaten, the carikerworm, the caterpillar,
and the palmerworm, My great army which I sent
among you." Joel 2 :25.
While in London, England, waiting for the boat
in which to embark for China, I was asked by a
certain preacher one day if I would not speak
to his congregation that night. Inquiring of the
Lord, I felt it was His will, and told the man
that I would go. That evening a beautiful limousine, with liveried attendants, called for me, and
I entered with weak and self-conscious steps, crying: "Oh, Lord, do help me do Thy will tonight."
On the way I gazed upon the beautiful streets and
buildings, till at last the car stopped in front of
an imposing and spacious edifice.
As we went up the steps and into the side door
of this immense building, I remember taking a
hurried glance at its size and vaguely wondering
whether some small room therein was used for a
mission. Great was my surprise therefore, when

being led through the door and on the platform,
380

OF THE

AS I SAW IT IN MY VISION

LOST AND RESTORED
I found that this whole building was packed with
people, and I was to speak to them at once. My
attendant whispered into my ear that we were late,
and then I heard the voice of the man on the platform saying: "Now our sister will speak to us
and bring the message."
Before I realized it, I was standing, dazed and
confused before the largest audience I had ever
spoken to. The gallery, the balcony, the pit and
the rostrum were all filled; and to add to my confusion, just then the footlights flashed into brilliancy all around me ? and there I stood, a slip of
a girl, with my Bible in my trembling hands. I
had prepared no sermon, trusting God to speak
through me at the moment. But not a thought
came to me. Lifting my heart to God in silent
prayer, I said:
"O God, if you ever helped me in my life, help
me now!"
Just then something happened The power of
God went surging through my body, waves of
glory and praise swept through my soul, until I
forgot the throng of eager faces that had, a
moment before, seemed to swim before me, forgot

the footlights, and the learned men with their
long-tail coats, forgot that I was only a child of
eighteen, and that many there with their gray hair
knew more in a moment than I in the natural
course would know in a lifetime, and "I was in the
Spirit."
All this takes a long time to write, but it happened in a moment, for those Avho put their trust
in God shall never be put to shame. My mouth
opened; the Lord took control of my tongue, my
lips and vocal organs, and began to speak through
me, not in tongues, but in English. The Spirit
spoke in prophecy, and as He spoke, I did not
know what the next word was to be; certainly the
water did flow, not from my head but from the
381

THIS IS THAT
innermost depths of my being, without my having
aught to do with it.
As I spoke thus for one hour and a quarter,
there did not seem to be a stir in all that vast
audience, and as I spoke I saw a vision of a great
circle, composed of ten smaller circles, as shown
in the preceding picture. This big circle seemed
so big that its top reached the sky ; it was the dispensation of the Holy Spirit, from its opening on
the day of Pentecost to its closing at the coming of
the Lord Jesus. The vision was so indelibly
stamped upon my mind that I have had my husband draw it from my description that all may see
it as simple and plain as the Lord showed it to me.
Before starting to speak, I opened my Bible with
closed eyes, trusting God for my text, and my
finger was guided to a certain verse; when I opened
my eyes and read it this was the verse the Lord
had given me:

"That which the palmerworm hath left hath the
locust eaten; and that which the locust hath left
hath the cankerworm eaten; and that which the
cankerworm hath left hath the caterpillar eaten."
Joel 1 :4.
Just so when I came to the bottom of the circle,
and the dark ages were pictured in their horror,
my hand automatically turned the page over to
the second chapter and placed my finger upon the
following verse:
"I will restore to you the years that the locust
hath eaten, and the cankerworm, and the caterpillar^ and the palmerwvrm, My great army which
I sent among you." Joel 2 :25.
I have, in the following pages, written the message as it was given. It is He, not I, who is
worthy of praise forever.

382

THE THREE DISPENSATIONS.
JUST as there are three in the Godhead : Father,
Son and Holy Ghost, so there have been three
separate and distinct dispensations or periods
of time.
First came the dispensation of the Father, as
recorded in God's Word throughout the Old Testament, from Genesis to Malachi. Throughout
the dispensation of the Father, He promised that
at the close of this dispensation He would bestow
a great gift, even Jesus, His only begotten Son,
upon this earth, as our Redeemer and the propitiation for our sins. At the close of that period of
time God the Father kept His word, and true to
His promise, gave Jesus, as His great Love Gift to

the sinner.
Secondly came the dispensation of the Son, as
recorded in the four Gospels, Matthew, Mark,
Luke and John. Now, just as the Father had a
gift to bestow upon the world, even as Jesus, who
is our salvation, tells us over and over again that
He longs to bestOAv a gift upon all those who believe on Him, even the gift of the Holy Spirit. All
throughout His ministry upon this earth, with ever
increasing emphasis, Jesus depicted to His followers the importance of their receiving this gift
which He was to bestow upon them when He went
away.
Jesus seemed, to a certain degree, to be limited
in the scope of His ministry, was sent only to
the lost sheep of the House of Israel, was able to
be in only one place at a time, etc., and declared
in John 16 :7 : "It is expedient for you that I go
away, for if I go not away the Comforter will not
come unto yon; Imt if I depart I will send Him
unto you." Plainly Jesus thought it more important for us to receive the Holy Spirit than for
Himself to stay upon this earth. Thus, just as
383

THIS IS THAT
the Father kept His promise and sent Jesus, His
love gift to the sinner, so now in turn Jesus kept
His word and prayed the Father to send the Holy
Spirit, His gift to the believer.
Thirdly came the dispensation of the Holy
Spirit, which opened on the Day of Pentecost.
(Acts 2.) This dispensation we are still living
in and will be living in until Jesus comes for His
waiting Bride.
The days of Jesus' tender ministry upon earth

were over. He had eaten the last supper. He
had been tried in the sinner's stead and had died
in the sinner's place. He had been laid in the
lonely tomb, resurrected in power and triumph,
had walked forty days upon earth after His resurrection. He had promised for the last time that
He would not leave His little ones comfortless,
but that He would pray the Father that He would
send another Comforter, even the Holy Spirit,
who when He was come would in His office work
take of the things of Jesus and reveal it
unto them (John 16:13);
lead them into all truth (John 16:13) ;
not speak of Himself but of Jesus (v. 13) ;
show them things to come (-13) ;
glorify Jesus (-14) ;
reprove of sin, of righteousness and of
judgment (-8)
teach them all things (John 14:26)
testify of Jesus (John 15:26) ;
endue them with power from on high
(Luke 24:49);
pray through them with groanings that could not
be uttered. The last words of Jesus before His
ascension, before the clouds received Him out of
their sight, as recorded in Luke 24:49, and Acts
1 :8, were concerning the importance of tarrying
for and receiving the Comforter whom He would
send.
384

LOST AND RESTORED
TARRYING FOR THE COMING OF THE HOLY SPIRIT.
With glowing hearts, and the Master's command, "Tarry until ye be endued with poiver from
on high" still ringing in their ears, the little flock
of about a hundred and twenty wended their way
to the "upper room" in Jerusalem, to await there
the advent of the Holy Spirit, the opening of this
great, new dispensation of the Spirit sent from
Heaven. For ten days they waited. They "continued with one accord in one place in prayer and
supplication.'' One accord, O what unbroken harmony is depicted in these simple words! Thomas
was not saying to Peter :
"Peter, what are you doing here. You denied
the Lord thrice, you cursed and swore; the Lord
will never baptize you with the Spirit." Peter
was not saying to Thomas :
"Well, Thomas, what are you doing here? You
always were an old doubter anyway; don't think
you will receive anything from the Lord." Ah,
no! they were with one accord in one place in
prayer and supplication.
THE COMING OF THE HOLY SPIRIT.
(Acts 2:4.)
"And when the day of Pentecost was fully come
they were all with one accord in one place. And
suddenly there came a sound from Heaven" (and
bless God, there has been a sound ever since when
the Spirit falls and comes in). "From Heaven"
(Yes, thank God, in spite of what man may say,
undoubtedly this sound is from Heaven). "Like
as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the
house where they were sitting. And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire,
and it sat upon each of them. And they were all

filled icith the Holy Ghost, and began to speak
with other tongues as the Spirit gave them
utterance."
385

THIS IS THAT
I have often tried to picture the sudden consternation and excitement which surged through
the streets of Jerusalem when the hundred and
twenty men and women were filled with the Holy
Spirit, and burst out shouting and talking in
other tongues, so filled that they acted like drunken people (Acts 2:13). I can seem to see the
crowds running up this street, and that, windows
flying open, heads thrust out, doors opening,
everybody running, devout men gathering up their
long ministerial robes and forgetting their dignity, running with the rest to swell the one
great question :
WHAT MEANETH THIS?
"And when this ivas noised abroad the multitude came together," (Beloved, if the Holy Spirit
is falling in your midst you will not need oyster
suppers or box socials or Xmas trees to bring the
multitude, your only trouble will be to find seats
for the people) "and were confounded," just as
you have been, perhaps, "because that every man
heard them speak in his own language." They w r ere
amazed, they marvelled, they were in doubt. Soberminded folk asked the question :
"What meaneth this?" Mockers declared:
"These men are full of new wine" O, what an
uproar ! What an excitement ! you dear people who
dislike confusion, and demand things to be done
"decently and in order" would have been scandalized.

"But Peter" a new Peter, no longer afraid of
the opinions of people, "standing up," (the Holy
Spirit, when He endues you with power, puts a
real stand up for Jesus spirit within you, and
takes the cowardice out) "said: these are not
drunken, as ye suppose, but this is that which was
spoken by the prophet Joel. And it shall come
to pass in the last days, saith God, that I will
pour out of My Spirit upon all flesh." Then as
386

LOST AND RESTORED
Peter preached that mighty sermon under the
power of the Holy Spirit, among other things he
told his vast audience to
"Repent and be baptized, every one in the
Name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins"
and that they, too, would "receive the gift of the
Holy Spirit" Furthermore, just as though he
looked away ahead through the coming years, and
saw the doubts in some of your minds, Peter declared that "the promise is" not only "unto you"
but "unto your children and unto them that are
afar off" that means you, brother, sister, for he
goes on to say, "even as many as the Lord our God
shall call." Now, if God has called you, the promise is unto you. How glad I am that the Spirit,
through Peter, drove these nails and clinched them
on the other side till there is not the shadow of a
loophole for you to thrust the wedge of doubt
into.
CIRCLE I.
THE USHERING IN OF THE DISPENSATION OF THE
HOLY SPIRIT ACCOMPANIED BY MIGHTY

SIGNS AND WONDERS.
On the day of Pentecost some three thousand
souls were saved. Then we see Peter and John,
going up to the temple to pray, pass a lame man
at the beautiful gate, who asks alms of them.
Peter ansAvers :
"Silver and gold have I none" (I do not think
the Pentecostal people ever were or ever will bo
overly blessed with silver or gold) "but such as 1
have I give unto thee; in the Name of Jesus Christ
rise up and walk." The lame man was healed instantaneously, and whether the priests in the
Temple believed in manifestations or not I Itnow
not, but at any rate the man went into that
Temple walking, leaping and praising God.
In Acts 5:16 we see the multitudes out of the
cities round about Jerusalem bringing sick folks
387

THIS IS THAT
and those that were vexed with unclean spirits,
and they were healed every one. Sick were
brought forth into the streets and laid on beds
and couches that at least the shadow of Peter
passing by might overshadow some of them. Signs
and wonders were wrought everywhere by the
hands of the Apostles, true to the word of Him
Avho had said:
"Greater works than these shall ye do because ]
go to My Father."
While the tree seen in Circle One stood in its
perfection, the Church stood blazing with the full
Pentecostal Power and Glory of the Holy Spirit.
Jesus' words were fulfilled, and in deed and in
truth they were endued with power from on high.

Timid Peter, who had once feared a little girl who
asked him if he knew Jesus, was timid no longer.
Illiterate men and women were turned into flaming evangels.
The outpouring of the Holy Spirit was not unto
the Jews alone, but also unto the Gentiles. In
Acts 10 we see Peter answering the voice of the
Lord, who spoke to him through a vision, going
down to preach Jesus unto the Gentiles. "While
Peter yet spake the Holy Ghost fell on all them
which heard the Word;" the Jews who came witb
Peter were astonished that on the Gentiles also
was poured out the gift of the Holy Ghost, "for
they heard them speak with tongues and magnify
God."
Again in these wonderful days of the former
rain outpouring of the Holy Spirit, we see Saul,
on his way to Damascus to persecute the Christians, slain and prostrated in the road by the
power of the Spirit, hearing the voice of Jesus
saying :
"Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou Me?" Later
we find Paul not only converted and baptized with
the Holy Spirit, with the Bible evidence of speak388

LOST AND RESTORED
ing with other tongues (I Cor. 4:18), but himself preaching salvation and the Baptism of the
Holy Spirit. In Acts 19, Paul, finding certain disciples at Ephesus, asks them \vhether they have
received the Holy Ghost since they believed. They
tell him "No." They have not even heard whether
there was any Holy Ghost. "And when Paul had
laid his hands upon them the Holy Ghost came on
them and they spake in tongues" and magnified
God. This marvelous manifestation of speaking in

other tongues accompanied the infilling of believers with the Holy Spirit everywhere. Simon offered money for the power to bestow that which
he saw and heard.
THE TREE WITH ITS PERFECT FRUIT.
Every gift and fruit of the Spirit was manifested in the Church till the nine gifts and the nine
fruits of the Spirit hung as eighteen perfect apples
upon the perfect tree. "For to one was given by
the Spirit the Word of Wisdom, to another the
Word of Knowledge, by the same Spirit, to another Faith, by the same Spirit, to another the gift
of Healing, by the same Spirit, to another the
working of Miracles, to another Prophecy, to another Discerning of Spirits, to another divers kinds
of Tongues, to another Interpretation of Tongues/'
The sick were healed, miracles wrought, and when
messages were given in other tongues in the assembly, some one gave the interpretation. (I Cor.,
14:37.) Each of the nine fruits were in the
Church Love, Joy, Peace, Gentleness, Goodness,
Faith, Meekness, Temperance, Longsuffering, thus
we have the perfect picture visualized in "Circle
I" of the Chart.
Thus ends the first chapter of the early Church
History, leaving the tree rooted and grounded in
the faith of Jesus, every limb, branch, leaf and
fruit in perfect power and strength.
389

THIS IS THAT
CIRCLE II.
THE PALMER WORM AT WORK.
O glorious days of harmonious love and unity,
days when none called aught that he had his own,

days when the children of the Lord had all things
in common, days when prison bonds were broken,
signs and wonders Avere wrought, how we have
often wished they might have continued!
These puny minds of ours only feebly grasp
events of the past, and are utterly unable to probe
the depths of mystery shrouding the future. Unlike us, however, the great mind and eye of the
Almighty God beholds the future as clearly as the
past. Before His burning eyes of Fire, and the
Glory of His presence, darkness turns to day, and
the deepest mists are rolled away. Looking thus
ahead with clear, unerring eye, God saw, and
moreover prophesied through the prophet Joel,
that the Church would not always retain this
glorious state of Power, saw that the palmerworm,
the locust, the cankerworm and the caterpillar
were going to rob and strip and mutilate and destroy this perfect tree with its gifts and fruits. He
saw that the Church, or tree, was going to lose
gradually more and more, till it would be left
desolate, barren and despairing. The falling away
and destruction of the perfect tree did not occur
in one day. It was a gradual deterioration accomplished day by day and stage by stage.
One day the palmerworm appeared, eating and
destroying as it went, until as the years went by
the gifts and fruits of the Spirit began to disappear from view. Not so many sick were healed as
of yore, not so many miracles were performed,
faith was on the wane, when some one in the assembly had a message in tongues there was no one
who had the gift of interpretation, messages in
prophecy were not so frequent as of yore. The
fruits of unselfish love and joy and peace were
390

LOST AND RESTORED

also attacked by the palmerworm, who grew bolder
and bolder day by day. Gradually the eighteen
apples began to disappear from the staunch and
upright tree which had stood so gloriously heavy
laden for many years after the day of Pentecost.
This state of fruitlessness was indeed a condition worthy of lamentation, but the pity of it all
is that the devastation did not stop with the havoc
wrought by the palmerworm. Other years, and
other worms took up the work of destruction
where the palmerworm had left off, and "that
which the palmerworm hath left hath the locust
eaten."
CIRCLE III.
THE LOCUST AT WORK.
The work of the locust is, of course, wrought
upon the leaves. Sweeping over vast territories
of country he strips and lays barren all that he
touches. Thus not only were the gifts and fruits
of the Spirit lost sight of by the vast majority of
believers, but the personal incoming and indwelling of the Holy Spirit, accompanied by speaking
in other tongues, was also in a great measure lost
sight of. The oldtime seeker's meetings, the earnest prayer and praise meetings were disappearing;
formality and sectarianism were taking their
places.
As humility, godliness, and the manifestations
of the Holy Spirit vanished persecution and reproach vanished also. As meetings of the older
order were converted into dignified services of a
more orthodox form, the Holy Spirit, as a gentle
dove, was quenched and grieved and stifled till He
silently withdrew His wonder-working manifestations, and joy and gladness were withheld from
the sons of men.
Because it meant too great a sacrifice, too much
emptying out and humbling in the dust before
God, too much seeking and waiting, the Baptism

391

THIS IS THAT
of the Holy Spirit was not received as of old.
Then came men who professed to have the Holy
Spirit in a new way, i. e., without the Bible seal
or evidence of speaking with other tongues as the
Spirit gives utterance. This simplified matters
greatly, and the professor no longer needed to be
a possessor. Thus the Baptism of the Holy Spirit
was lost sight of by many, though there always
was a remnant of a faithful few Spirit-filled saints
through whom God manifested Himself in a real
and supernatural way.
It was a sad day when the leaves were thus
stripped from the tree, and the locust had done
its work, but days that were still more sad were
to follow, for we read "that which the locust hath
left hath the cankerworm eaten."
CIRCLE IV.
THE WORK OF THE CANKERWOBM.
After the fruit and the leaves had been destroyed, the cankerworm immediately made his
appearance and began his work upon the branches
and tender shoots of the tree, making cankerous
and unsound that God-fearing walk of Holiness
above the world and sin, so long enjoyed by the
children of the Lord. As the sap, the life of the
tree, was consumed and the branches became more
and more cankerous, and unsound things that
used to seem sinful appeared sinful no longer, the
world that used to be barred outside the doors of
the Church now leaned back in contented languor
in the cushioned pews, or sang in the choir.
Christians let down more and more the high

standard of Holiness unto the Lord, which they
had been holding aloft, and now it trailed bedraggled and unnoticed in the dust. Quickly upon the
trail of the cankerworm followed the caterpillar,
and we read that "that which the cankerworm hath
left hath the caterpillar eaten."
392

LOST AND RESTORED
CIRCLE V.
THE WORK OF THE CATERPILLAR.
We are now nearing the bottom of the large
circle. The perfect tree is perfect no longer,
stripped of her fruits, denuded of her leaves, her
branches made white, laid clean bare, it was not
long till the trunk and the roots began to decay
and the caterpillar made his nest in the decayed
and rotted hollows of the tree.
No tree can eke out its existence long without
leaves through which to breathe, and branches
and limbs through which the sap of life courses
through its veins. For a believer to live without
the Holy Spirit, the breath of life, or the Holy life
of Jesus as revealed by the Spirit, coursing
through his veins, is to eke out a meager, barren
existence nowhere recorded in the Word of God.
And now, in circle five, we see the tree in the
most lamentable condition yet described, fruit
gone, leaves gone, branches bare, trunk decayed
and rotten, a nest for the caterpillar. In other
words, the gifts and fruits of the Spirit gone, the
Baptism of the Holy Spirit gone, separation and
Holiness gone, justification by Faith gone. Well
might the Angels lean over the battlements of
Heaven and weep ; of the noble Church, the perfect
tree, which had once stood clad with the Power
and Glory of the Holy Ghost, there remained now

naught but a -name, not even a remnant of its former splendor, as she entered into the DARK AGES.
CIRCLE VI.
THE DARK AGES.
No wonder they are called the dark ages. Ah!
dark indeed is the night without Jesus. He is the
Light of the world, and when the Church lost sight
of justification by Faith, lost sight of the atonement, the blood of Jesus, there was a total eclipse
and the face of the Sun of Righteousness was ob393

THIS IS THAT
scured, and the succeeding years that followed
are known as the dark ages.
Men and Women groping in this gross darkness
tried to win their way to Heaven by doing penance, by locking themselves up in dungeons, walking over red hot plowshares in their bare feet, and
by inflicting unnameable tortures upon themselves
and upon one another, blindly trying by some work
or deed of theirs to pay the debt that had already
been paid on Calvary's rugged cross. They had
lost sight utterly of the fact that
"Jesus paid it all,
All to Him we owe;
Sin had left a crimson stain,
He washed it white as snow."
The great arroAV you see in the chart had been
steadily going down and down, pitilessly and relentlessly going down, as I saw it in the vi.sion,
till it seemed as though it would never reach the
bottom. And now it had struck the bottom, the
church had lost all, the tree was dead.

Angels might have wept, mortals might have
wrung their hands, and their souls have failed
within them in utter despair, but GOD, Hallelujah,
looking on ahead into the future still, had spoken
through the prophet Joel (Joel 2:25), saying:
"I will restore to you the years that the locust
hath eaten, the cankerworm, the caterpillar, and
the palmerworm, My great army -which I sent
among you/' O beloved, do you see it? Then
shout aloud and praise Him. Why that was aU,
ALL,, think of it, All that had been lost was to be
restored. Hallelujah! What is impossible with
man is possible with God.
Now the Church had not lost this "all" at one
time. The restoration came as "meat in due season' 3 as line upon line, precept upon precept, here
a little and there a little, till today we are nearing
the completion of this Restoration, and Jesus is
394

LOST AND RESTORED
coming soon to take His perfect Church, His
Bride, His fruit-laden tree, unto Himself, where,
transplanted from earth to Heaven, the tree will
bloom and yield her fruit by the great River of
Life, forever.
No, God did not restore to the Church all at
once what she had lost. He was willing to do so
to be sure, but they did not have the light at that
time. Therefore the last thing that had been lost
was the first to be restored. They had a name
that they did live, but were dead, and therefore
must needs repent and do their first works over
again before taking any higher step.
CIRCLE VII.

THE YEARS OF THE CATERPILLAR RESTORED.
Just before the arrow began to ascend, and the
work of Restoration began, we see the scene of
ruin depicted by Joel in all its awfulness, in the
first chapter of Joel, the meat offering and the
drink offering cut off, the field wnsted, the corn
wasted, the new wine dried up, garner laid desolate, barns broken down, the beasts groan, the
herds of cattle are perplexed, the sheep are made
desolate, the rivers of water are dried up, and the
fire has devoured the pastures of the wilderness.
Then one day amidst all this desolation God began
to move, the treading of His footsteps was heard,
and in Circle VII we see the roots of the tree again
sinking deep into the earth, and Justification by
Faith restored. This is the way it all came about :
MARTIN LUTHER.
Martin Luther one day was walking up the steps
of the cathedral on his hands and knees over
broken glass, endeavoring to do penance, thereby
seeking to atone for his sins. As he was toiling
painfully and laboriously up the steps in this
manner, blood trickling from his hands and knees,
cut by the broken glass, he heard a voice from
heaven saying:
395

THIS IS THAT
"Martin Luther, the Just shall live by Faith."
At the words, a great light fell from Heaven.
It banished the darkness and doubts, it illuminated
the soul of Martin Luther, and revealed the
finished work of Calvary and the blood that
alone can atone for sin.
"For nothing good have I,
Whereby Thy grace to claim,

Fll wash my garments white
In the blood of Calvary's Lamb."
The days that followed were eventful days,
epoch-making days, fraught with self-sacrifice and
suffering. The Lord had spoken, and promised
that all the years that had been eaten should be
restored, and out of the seas of travail and suffering that followed the preaching of Justification by
Faith there was born a little body of blood- washed,
fire-tried pilgrims, willing to suffer persecution for
His Name's sake.
You have read, perhaps, how Martin Luther and
his folloAvers were turned out of the churches,
spoken against falsely, and accused of all manner
of evil. As Martin Luther, Calvin, Knox, Fletcher
and many other blessed children of the Lord, stood
firm for the truths of salvation and a sinless life,
they suffered all manner of persecution. God's
Word says, "They that will live Godly shall suffer
persecution." (If you or your church profess to
live Godly and yet never suffer persecution, if you
have become popular and the shame and reproach
of the cross is gone, there is something radically
wrong somewhere, for those who live Godly still
suffer persecution.)
As the noble tree again put down her roots of
justification into the fertile soil faith, as life
again began to surge through the trunk and the
limbs of the tree, every demon in Hell seemed to
be raging and howling against those who saw and
396

LOST AND RESTORED
accepted the light of salvation. Martyrs were
burned at the stake, stoned to death, swung from
public scaffolds, suffered the tortures of the inquisition, their eyes were put out with hot irons,

they were beaten till great gashes were cut in their
backs, salt was rubbed into the wounds and they
were cast into the dark dungeons, still true and
unflinching for Jesus. They were tortured in
unspeakable ways, beheaded, sent to the guillotine,
the covenanters were driven from hill to hill and
often had to hide themselves in caves in order to
pray or sing the praises of the Lord, hunted and
harassed at every turn.
But God had said ; "I will restore the years that
have been eaten/' and in spite of the burning
stake, in spite of the blood and fire and the deep
waters of tribulation^ in spite of the raging of the
demons in hell, the great arrow that had so long
been going down had at last started upward and
was never to stop till it reached the top and the
tree was again restored to its perfection.
Persecutions cannot stop God. Floods cannot
stay His step. Fire cannot delay His progress.
So line upon line, precept upon precept, here a
little and there a little, the work of restoration
has been going on. Not only did the Lord restore
the years the caterpillar had eaten but
CIECLE VIII.
THE YEARS OF THE CANKEEWORM ARE RESTORED
An entire consecration, and holiness unto the
Lord were preached; God called out a still more
separated people, with a deeper realization of what
it meant to live a life wholly given up and consecrated to the Lord. The people a step lower
always seem to fight the people a step higher.
Nevertheless as the work of sifting and separation
went on, God led His people forth to higher
heights.
397

THIS IS THAT
As one church grew cold, lost their first love,
or fought higher truths, they lost out spiritually.
As soon as one creed would refuse to Avalk in the
light, as given by the Lord, or begin to organize
and set up man rule, the Lord simply stepped over
their walls and left them to their forms and ceremonies, and took with Him the little "called out,
out of a called out" flock. In many instances the
recording angel had to write upon the door of the
fashionable churches:
"Thou hast a name that thou livest, and art
dead," or "You have a form of godliness, but deny
the power thereof." But the work was not stopped ;
somewhere people were praying, somewhere hungry
hearts were meeting in little cottage prayer-meetings, or on the street corners, and the tender
shoots and branches were being thrust forth on
the tree. Consecration and holiness were being
preached and the years of the canker worm being
restored.
JOHN WESLEY
Was a man with a message. He, too, suffered
persecution. Preaching on the street-corners in
those days, faithful followers were stoned, and
rotten-egged. They were fought but not defeated.
The power of God was manifested in the dear old
Methodist Church, also in Charles Finney's meetings, in a wonderful manner. Men and women
were slain under the power of God. At times tho
floors were strewn with the slain of the Lord.
Signs and wonders accompanied those who
preached the "meat in due season."
While these churches lived godly, prayerful,
mighty lives in Jesus, they suffered persecution.
But when they too began to drift into the same
cold, formal state as the others before them, the
power and manifestation of the Spirit began to
lift from their presence. When supper rooms take

the place of upper rooms, and concerts the place
398

LOST AND RESTORED
of prayer meetings, the Spirit is grieved away.
As each body began to organize and throw up walls
of difference, God simply stepped over them again
and called out another separated people, willing
to suffer and sacrifice for Him.
Then came the day when William Booth was
called upon to decide whether he would compromise or would follow the greater light God gave
him. As he hesitated a moment his wife called
from the balcony of that thronged church: "Say
No! William."
And William Booth said "NO," and refused to
compromise, went forth preaching the message
that had been given him. In the early days of the
Salvation Army they were unpopular, suffered
persecution, were a peculiar people, just as the
others before mentioned had been in the beginning.
They too were stoned and imprisoned. Some were
even martyred, but neither the devil nor his angels
could stop God and His work of restoration. In
these early days of the Army it was nothing uncommon to see men and women slain under the
power of God. Some of their number received
the Holy Ghost and spake with other tongues.
All night prayer meetings, dancing before the
Lord, and mighty power was manifested in their
midst. True to prophecy, while they lived this
separated, holy life, they were persecuted and
unpopular with the world. Then came the Holiness churches, wonderfully blessed of God, and
the Lord moved in their midst in a mighty manner.
These dear people, many of them, thought that
the Lord had now restored all He was going to

restore to the Church, and believed that they had
all the Lord had for them. But not so! God had
said,
"I will restore the years that the locust, the
cankerworm, the caterpillar and the palmerworm
hath eaten/' This necessarily meant A-L-L. Now
399

THIS IS THAT
so far, only the years eaten by the caterpillar and
the cankerworm had been restored. What about
the years eaten by the locust and the palmerAVorm?
When God says "ALL" does He mean all or only
half? Why, He means all, to be sure. Therefore
next
CIRCLE IX.
THE YEARS OF THE LOCUST ARE RESTORED.
Although in previous years several saints had received the Holy Spirit and spoken in tongues as in
Bible years, yet upon the church at large the years
which the locust had eaten (in Circle III), the baptism of the Holy Spirit, in other words, had not
been restored in any great measure. Therefore
this was the next to be restored. Peter in quoting
from the prophet Joel says:
"In the last days, I will pour out my Spirit upon
all flesh." Joel says that He who gave us the
"former rain" moderately, will cause to come down
for us the rain, both the former and the "Latter
Rain" in the first month.
LATTER RAIN.
It Avas just a few years ago that this latter rain
began to fall. Perhaps you recollect the great

Welch Revival, where, under the preaching of
Evan Roberts, the fire fell. Many were saved, and
baptized with the Holy Spirit, those who received
the Comforter, the Holy Spirit, spoke with other
tongues.
Over in Mukti, India, a missionary, Pandita
Ramabai, was praying with a band of Hindoo
girls. They had spent days and nights in prayer,
when suddenly the Spirit was poured out in their
midst, as He had been on the day of Pentecost.
Visible fire is said to have been seen upon one
girl's bed, and when the other girls went for water
to extinguish the fire it was discovered that this
was the fire of the Holy Spirit, such as Moses saw
in the burning bush that was not consumed. These
400

LOST AND RESTORED
dear Hindoo girls who received the Holy Spirit
spake with other tongues as the Spirit gave them
utterance, when they received the Holy Spirit.
One girl spoke in the English language (Avhich
she had never learned ) 9 and this is the message
which was spoken through her:
"Jesus is coming soon, get ready to meet Him.' 7
And the great revival spread on and on. Almost
simultaneously the Spirit was poured out in our
own United States of America, in England, in
Canada, in Africa, upon missionaries in China,
and in the islands of the sea. Never was such a
world-wide revival known to spread so quickly
and simultaneously. The Spirit was poured out
upon praying bands in numberless places, who had
never heard before of the incoming of the Holy
Spirit. In every instance, without exception, those
who received the Holy Spirit spake in other
tongues, exactly as those who had received in
Bible days had done. The latter rain was falling

on the earth.
In order to receive the Holy Spirit one had to
be empty, and humble. Poor and rich, black and
white, the mistress and the maid alike received the
Holy Spirit when they humbled themselves, and
sought with all their hearts. Those who received,
praised the Lord and magnified His name, as no
one but Spirit-filled saints can do. Waves of glory,
floods of praise swept over assemblies who had
received the Holy Spirit. There was no way of
stopping this great revival, it seemed.
LATTER RAIN TRUTHS FOUGHT.
Just as demons and men had fought the restoration of the years eaten by the caterpillar and
cankerworm, so now they fought with renewed
vigor the restoration of the years that had been
eaten by the locust. Again history repeated itself,
and the saints a step lower, unwilling to humble
themselves, fought those who had gone a step
401

THIS IS THAT
higher, and many refused to walk in the light.
They failed to realize that God really meant what
He said when He promised to restore "ALL" that
had been lost. They lost sight of the fact that the
Lord was coming for a perfect church clad with
all power and the glory of the Spirit. Some even
declared that the baptism of the Holy Spirit was
not for these days, and did not understand that we
are still living in the dispensation of the Holy
Spirit, and will be till Jesus comes.
Preachers jumped to their pulpits and began to
condemn those who had received the Holy Spirit
in the Bible way; they cried "Wildfire! Excitement ! ! Hypnotism ! False Teaching !" etc. All sorts

of names were flung at them, and O the blindness
of these dear prosecutors' eyes. They who themselves had been persecuted for the light of a few
years previous, were now themselves persecuting
those who were moving on into greater light.
Papers were printed to condemn the outpouring of
the Spirit, great preachers mounted their platforms and denounced it, but they could no more
stop God from restoring the Baptism of the Holy
Spirit and pouring out the latter rain than the
former persecutors had been able to stop the restoration of Salvation and Holiness unto the Lord.
THOSE WHO FIGHT THE HOLY SPIRIT LOSE OUT.
Those who fought the Holy Spirit, barred their
doors, or put up umbrellas of unbelief, began to
dry up spiritually, immediately. Assemblies and
churches who once were on fire for God, and
preaching Holiness, without which no man shall
see the Lord, the moment they rejected the Holy
Spirit they began to lose their power. O why could
they not see that this latter rain outpouring of the
Spirit was just what they needed and had been
pining for ! Why could they not just have humbled
themselves and let the Spirit, who had been "with
them" now come "in" them, making them the
402

LOST AND RESTORED
Temple of the Holy Ghost? All the fighting and
persecution, however, was unable to quench the
outpouring of the Spirit, upon those who sought
earnestly with pure and humble hearts.
To fight the outpouring of the Holy Spirit, accompanied by the Bible evidence, speaking with
other tongues, according to Acts 2:4, was just like
a man with a broom in his hand, endeavoring to
sweep back the tidal waves of the Atlantic Ocean.

While he is sweeping it back in one place it rolls
in in countless others ; moreover, if he remains long
where the full tides are rolling in and does not
withdraw, the waves will soon flow over him, and
he will be "one of them." Hallelujah !
A broom cannot stop the tide of the ocean,
neither can fighting stay the falling of the latter
rain, for God hath spoken it. "In the last days I
ivill pour out My Spirit upon all flesh." O stop
fighting God and open up your heart to receive
and welcome His gift, the Holy Spirit.
During the past twelve years hundreds of thousands of hungry seekers have received the Holy
Spirit, and when and wherever He came in, those
who received Him spoke with tongues and glorified
God.
Thus, in Circle IX on the chart, I saw in my
vision the leaves which had been eaten by the
locust were again restored to the tree. Just as
many in Circle 7 and 8 had believed that when the
Lord had restored full Salvation and Holiness
they had all there was for them, so now many
who had received the baptism of the Spirit believed
that they had all the Lord had for them. They
conscientiously believed that once they had been
filled with the Spirit and had spoken with other
tongues, they really had all the Lord had for them,
and stopped seeking for more.
This, however, had not been all the church had
lost, and was therefore not all that was to be
restored.
403

THIS IS THAT
CIKCLE X.

THE YEARS OF THE PALMER WORM RESTORED.
Just as the Father bestowed the gift of His
only Son Jesus to the world, and just as Jesus
bestows the gift of the Holy Spirit, the promise of
the Father upon the believer, so now in turn, the
Holy Spirit has gifts to bestow upon those who
receive Him. The nine gifts and fruits of the
Spirit seen in Circle one are again being restored
to the tree. Many blessed children of the Lord
stop short at salvation and consecration and fail
to receive the Holy Spirit, also many who have
received the Holy Spirit stop short and fail to
covet earnestly the best gifts.
In seeking more of God's will to be wrought in
our lives, after having received the Holy Spirit,
do not ask for more of the Holy Spirit, because
if you have received Him you have received all of
Him. He is not divisible. Either you have, or
have not received the Holy Spirit. Therefore if
He has come in and taken up His abode and
spoken through you with other tongues, as in
Acts 2:4, pray that you may be more yielded to
the Spirit who dwells within.
Some one says "O do not seek the gifts, seek
the giver." But, beloved, if you have received
the Spirit you have received the giver, and Paul
says:
"Covet earnestly the best gifts. Seek that you
may excel to the edifying of the church. Let him
irho speaketh in an unknown tongue pray that he
way interpret, that the church may be edified;
covet to prophesy " etc. There is a real genuine
gift of prophecy even though the enemy has tried
to imitate it. Discerning of spirits is needed;
gifts of healing, etc., should be in our midst. The
gift of tongues is also given. All who receive
the baptism of the Holy Spirit speak with tongues
as the Spirit gives utterance, but very few receive
404

LOST AND RESTORED
the real GIFT of tongues so that they are enabled
to speak at will to foreigners. Thisi gift, however,
has been bestowed upon some, and we have met
people who have received it and speak languages
to foreigners and are understood though they never
studied the language in their lives. In such instances the message is of Jesus and His soon
coining.
THE GIFTS AND FRUITS ARE AGAIN APPEARING UPON
THE TREE.
In Circle 10 we see the fruit not yet fully
mature, perhaps, but as we pray and yield ourselves to the Spirit, He will divide to every man
severally as He will, and cause the gifts and
fruits of the Spirit to be visible in our midst.
JESUS IS COMING SOON.
Coming for a perfect church, clad in power and
glory, for the perfect tree with every gift and
fruit hanging in luscious, mellow, developed perfection upon her branches. O let us wake up and
press on to perfection. The winter is over and
gone, the spring with its former rain has passed,
the summer is passing, and the latter rain has
long been falling. The harvest is at hand and
the Master is searching for ripened, developed
fruit. Praise God for the roots and trunk of
salvation. Praise God for the firm, strong limbs
and branches of holiness and consecration. Praise
God for the green leaves, for the Holy Spirit, but
the Master demands fruit from His tree these
last days before His coming. Not green, immature
fruit, but perfect fruit. He is whispering just
now:
I Will Restore All the Years That Have Been

Eaten.
Dear ones, there is land ahead to be possessed.
Let the fruit of Love be wrought out in your life,
with Joy, Peace, Longsuffering, Gentleness, Good405

THIS IS THAT
ness, Faith, Meekness, and Temperance. Let us
get back to Pentecost, and on to the fulness of
Pentecostal power and glory recorded in God's
Word, for Jesus is coming soon, very soon, for
His perfect waiting church, His bride, unspotted
with the world; His tree with its unblemished and
perfect fruit. Soon He will lift us up and transplant us to the heavenly garden where our leaves
shall not wither, neither shall the fruit decay.
The arrow is almost to the top now, the hour
when Jesus will burst the starry floor of heaven
and descend for His beloved is at hand. The great
clock of time has almost reached the appointed
hour. Let nothing hinder the work of preparation
in your life. Let us beware that we quench not
the Spirit.
Watch that we do not fall into the same snare
which other people formerly used of God have
fallen into; snares of formality, of coldness and
organization, building walls about ourselves and
failing to recognize the other members of our body
(for by one Spirit are we all baptized into ONE
BODY). If ever we put up walls and fall into
these snares of formality God will step over our
walls and choose another people as surely as He
did in days of yore. He will not give His glory to
another, but will take the foolish to confound the
mighty, the weak to confound the strong.
Press on therefore to perfection, do not stop

short of God's best. If you lay down your crown
another will take it up, the number will be complete, none will be missing, only those who have
pressed on all the way to His standard will be
caught up. If you have been doubting God doubt
no longer. He is waiting to restore all the years
that have been eaten, and cause you to stand forth
in that glorious perfect tree company ready and
waiting for Jesus. AMEN.

406

YOU NEED THE HOLY SPIRIT.
LIVING as we are today in the closing hours
of the dispensation of the Holy Spirit, it is of
utmost importance that the work and incoming of the Comforter should not only be preached,
but understood and received.
Is it necessary for the saints of today to receive
the baptism of the Holy Spirit, you ask?
Is it necessary for the roses to receive rain as
well as sunshine?
What the SUN is to the flowers, Jesus the Son
of Righteousness is to His blood- washed children.
As the RAIN to the thirsty, parched gardens, so
is the Holy Spirit to the growing child of God.
Salvation is not the baptism of the Holy Spirit.
Sanctification is not the baptism of the Holy
Spirit.
Salvation and sanctification (whether you have
been taught holiness as one or two definite experiences or not), all must agree, are wrought through
Jesus and His precious, atoning blood.

The baptism spoken of by John the Baptist,
(Matt. 3:11) and by Peter (Acts 2:38), is the
coming of the Comforter into the cleansed, empty
vessel which makes the body of the recipient the
temple of the Holy Ghost. He comes to exalt and
glorify Jesus, to equip the soul for service, to endue with power from on high, power to testify,
power to pray, power to overcome as never before,
and to prepare that soul for the coming of the
Lord. It is the blood of Jesus that cleanseth from
all sin ; the Holy Spirit longs to enter the cleansed
and waiting heart.
Some have thoughtlessly declared
"I have Jesus, and I do not need the Holy
407

THIS IS THAT
Spirit." But you do need Him, dear one. Jesus
Himself said:
"Receive ye the Holy Ghost," and "If you love
Me keep My commandments and I will pray the
Father and He shall give you another Comforter
that He may abide with you forever."
For you to start out independently to meet the
Lord, denying your need of the indwelling Spirit,
is like a child insisting that it has wisdom and
education enough, and needs no tutor to teach it
to read or write; or like boarding a vessel bound
for Liverpool, and insisting on steering the ship
yourself, with no need of the captain's experienced
hand or chart.
Without a doubt, dear Christian, this literal,
tangible, incoming of the Holy Spirit is just what
you need and have been longing for for years.

Thank the Lord for salvation, for Jesus who shed
His precious blood, but remember that just as it
took three stories to complete the ark which
lifted Noah and his family above the waves, just
so it has taken the combined efforts of the Triune
God, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, to form the
ark that shall catch up His people above the
waves of tribulation that shall soon sweep o'er
this earth.
The dispensation of the Father, as recorded in
the Old Testament, from Genesis to Malachi, is
past; the dispensation of the Son and His walk
upon this earth, as recorded in the four Gospels,
ended; the dispensation of the Holy Spirit, which
opened on the day of Pentecost, Acts 2, and will
not close until the church and the members of
the body have been sealed and caught up to meet
the Lord, is nearing its completion. This age of
the Holy Spirit was promised by the Father
through the prophets in the Old Testament. Isaiah
28 ill declares that with stammering lips and
another tongue will He speak to this people.
408

YOU NEED THE HOLY SPIRIT
Speaking through the prophet Joel, our God
promised the baptism of the Holy Spirit, saying:
"In the last days I will pour out My Spirit
upon all flesh. Your sons and your daughters
shall prophesy. . . . Upon My servants and
My handmaidens I will pour out My Spirit. He
will cause to come down for you the rain, both the
former and the latter rain in the first month."
"Ask ye of the Lord rain in the time of the
latter rain/' another prophet writes, "and He will
send bright clouds and give to every one grass in
the field."

John the Baptist caught the vision and prophesied to the multitude that flocked to him on
Jordan's bank.
"I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance f but He that cometh after me . . . He
shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with
fire."
How significant that John should select this
particular prophecy concerning that which our
Lord should do. He might have said,
"He, when He is come, will heal the sick; He
will raise the dead; He will feed the multitude,
or He will be smitten and nailed to the tree."
But though all these were wonderful and Avorthy
of being declared by such a remarkable preacher,
the thing which God spoke of Jesus through his
inspired lips, was:
"He, when He is come, SHALL BAPTIZE YOU
WITH THE HOLY GHOST AND WITH FIRE."
Then came Jesus, who had been conceived of
the Holy Spirit, and whose life was tenderly
wrapped up and associated from birth to resurrection with the Spirit, and was baptized of John
in the Jordan. Then it was that the Spirit in
bodily form as of a dove came down and abode
upon Him.
If Jesus needed this enduement of power before
409

THIS IS THAT
He began His ministry, how much more do you
and I need the Spirit today. Many have asked
the question :

"Why did Jesus not speak in tongues when He
received the Holy Spirit?" We do not know
whether He did or not. All power was given unto
Him in heaven and in e.arth, but Ave do know that
we have no record of any person ever having
spoken in tongues until the curtain rolled up on
the dispensation of the Holy Spirit on the day of
Pentecost as recorded in Acts 2. Then the very
instant that the Holy Spirit came, those who received Him "began to speak with other tongues
as He gave them utterance."
Have you ever been impressed, in reading the
four Gospels, to notice the ever-increasing emphasis that the Lord placed upon the necessity for
receiving the Holy Ghost? In fact the last words
that He spoke, before His feet lifted from this
earth and He was taken up from them into
heaven, were of the Holy Spirit, as recorded by
Luke :
"Behold, I send the promise of My Father upon
you, but tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem until ye
be endued with power from on high" As recorded
by Mark :
"These signs shall follow them that believe. In
My name they shall cast out devils; they shall
speak with new tongues" etc. As recorded in
the first chapter of Acts :
"John truly baptised with water, but you shall
be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days
hence. . ; ; .- Ye shall receive power after that
the Holy Ghost is come upon you, and ye shall be
witnesses of Me both in Jerusalem and in Judea
and Samaria and unto the uttermost parts of the
earth." The next verse tells us that when He
had spoken these things, while they beheld, He
was taken up.
410

YOU NEED THE HOLY SPIKIT
'Tis as though the last thing that had been
upon the mind of the Lord, and that which He
sought to impress upon His disciples, was the
necessity of receiving the Holy Spirit. Oh, dear
Christian, how can you hesitate any longer? Go
quickly unto the Lord today, and under the
precious blood, lift up your heart in praise and
thanksgiving unto Him ; ask, and you shall receive,
seek, and you shall find, knock, and it shall be
opened unto you, for He is truly more willing to
give the Holy Spirit to them that ask Him than
are our earthly parents to give good gifts to their
children.

411

TARRY UNTIL.
ALTHOUGH there were but twelve apostles,
the Lord whilst here on earth had many disciples and followers. These disciples He
commanded to go into all the world and preach the
Gospel, but bade them tarry first in Jerusalem until they should be endued with power from on high.
Appearing to many after His resurrection, and
He reiterated His command :
"Go, but tarry until you receive the Holy Spirit
whom I shall send you from My Father above."
Just how many heard His command we know
not. There were at least five hunded, but we do
know that out of even that five hundred, three
hundred and eighty knew a better way. Had they
not walked with Jesus? Had they not seen the

sick healed and miracles wrought? Their experience was good enough for them why should they
go up to Jerusalem and tarry ten days for this
promised power?
There were a faithful few, however, about one
hundred and twenty in number, who were simple
enough to believe the Lord implicitly, take Him at
His word, and make haste into Jerusalem, there
to tarry until the Comforter should come.
Have you ever tried to picture that little company hurrying along the streets toward the upper
room, looking neither to the right nor the left;
filled with but one idea, one longing to receive
the Holy Spirit as their Lord had commanded.
Can you not close your eyes and picture Peter
hurrying around the corner, a light of expectancy
and hope in his eyes. Someone may have stopped
him and said:
"Peter, where are you going in such a hurry?"
"I am on my way to the upper room, to tarry
until I receive the gift of the Holy Spirit."
412

TARRY UNTIL.
"Why^ Peter, you don't mean to say that you
need the Holy Spirit?" Have not great miracles
been wrought at your hands. Did you not preach
throughout the land for Jesus? Were not the
sick brought unto you, and did not demons go
forth at your command? Surely you are mistaken.
You do not need the Holy Spirit. Then, too, you
might lose your standing if people see you down
seeking some new experience; they will think you
are backslidden." But I can seem to hear Peter
reply :

"Oh yes, I do, I do need the power of the Holy
Ghost. There is such a lack in my life. Did you
not hear how I denied the Lord? Failed in the
most crucial testing hour. Hinder me not; I
must be on my way. I need the Holy Spirit."
And up the stairs He goes to "Tarry Until"
Before long other footsteps are heard, and
round the corner comes -Thomas.
"Thomas, where are you going in such a hurry
this morning?"
"Going to the upper room, there to receive the
Holy Spirit. My Lord has ascended unto His
Father that He might pour Him out upon us."
"But, Thomas, surely you do not think that an
old doubter like you could ever receive such an
experience."
"Yes, Glory to Jesus. The promise is unto me^
The past is all under the blood. This is just
the power that I need to banish doubts forever
from my heart and mind," and on he hurries, down
the street until he turns in at the upper room
stairway.
Before he has more than vanished from sight,
two soft, earnest voices are heard, and round the
corner in their long, flowing robes, come Mary and
Martha. By the light in their eyes and the
tenderness of their voices it is easy to know they
are talking about their beloved Jesus.
413

THIS IS THAT
"Pardon me a moment, Sisters, Mary and
Martha, but where are you going this morning?"

"We have come to Jerusalem, there to meet and
wait with other hungry hearts in obedience to our
Lord's command, until we have received the
Comforter whom He shall surely send from on
high."
"Oh, Mary," someone expostulates, "surely you
do not mean to admit that you have lived so close
to Jesus, you who have sat at His feet and learned
of Him, need to tarry for another experience.
Now if it was Martha, I might understand, but
you, Mary!"
"Ah, yes, Brother, every fiber of my being cries
out the need of this promised gift of the Father.
'Tis more than an experience, it is the incoming of
the Holy Spirit who shall lead and guide into all
truth, who shall pray through us with groanings
that cannot be uttered, who shall take the things
of Jesus and reveal them unto us, show us things
to come and endue us Avith power from on high.
"Kindly pardon our haste, but we have no time
to lose. Come, Martha, we must away."
What a procession they must have made, that
little hundred and twenty. Yonder goes Mary
Magdalene. From the other direction come James
and John. There is Andrew and Philip, Bartholomew and Matthew, James and Judas but
hark! Again I hear voices and the tread of feet
upon the pavement, and round the corner comes
Mary the Mother of Jesus, leaning upon the arms
of His brethren. Though her head is bent a little
and the lines in her pale face reveal the suffering
and the sword which had lately pierced her heart,
there is a new light and glorious hope shining in
her eyes.
"Be not downcast, nor discouraged, my sons, for
Jesus, your brother and my Son, hath plainly declared that lie would not leave us comfortless but

414

TARRY UNTIL
that if He went away He would send another, even
the Holy Ghost and that when He was come He
would lead us into all truth."
"Why, Mary, thou pure virgin, surely Y-O-TJ do
not need the Holy Spirit, you who were so consecrated and abandoned to the will of God that you
could look up into the face of the angel in the
face of misunderstanding, reproach, persecution,
and the likelihood of being taken into the market
square and stoned to death, as was the custom,
and say:
" 'Behold the handmaiden of the Lord. Be it
done unto me even according to thy word/
"You who have been sanctified through suffering and the death of your Lord, Mary, do you
really mean to say that you feel the need of this
baptism of the HoV Spirit?"
"Ah, yes, never did I feel the need of the Comforter as now that Jesus is gone unto His Father.
But even outside of my feeling the need of thc,
Spirit, the command of my Lord would be enough
for me. He said that I needed the Spirit. He
commanded us to tarry until He came, and surely
Jesus knew best." With a gracious bow they move
on and e'er long lift their voices with those of the
others in prayer and supplication in the upper
room. (Acts 1:14.)
Who can describe or picture the heart-searching,
the humbling, the crying out to be made conformable to the will of God's dear Son, that took place
in the ten days that followed His ascension? We
read that they continued with one accord, Peter
not pointing to the failures of Thomas, nor do we

read that any pointed the finger of accusation at
Peter, saying h r .
"You have no business up here, you denied the
Lord."
The past is all under the blood; past failures
have been acknowledged, confessed and forgiven ;
415

THIS IS THAT
earthly cares and the duties and the stress of the
busy world outside have been shut out. With open
hearts they simply and humbly wait before the
Lord with prayers' and supplications, knowing that
His Word cannot fail and that they that ask
shall surely receive.
"And when the day of Pentecost was fully come,
they were all with one accord in one place.
"And suddenly there came a sound from heaven
as of a rushing, mighty wind, and it filled all the
house where they were sitting. And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire,
and it sat upon each of them.
"And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost,
and began to speak with other tongues, as 'the
Spirit gave them utterance." (Acts 2:1-4.)
They had met the conditions the Lord had
kept His Word the Comforter had come.
Believer, are you tarrying before the Lord for
the promise of Father today? Have you come to
the end of yourself, empty, cleansed, humble, IOAV
under the precious blood of Jesus? Are you
waiting with prayer and supplication as did those
Bible saints of old? If so, the Lord will meet you

quickly. God's time is now. It is not His will
that you should wait until some vague tomorrow
for His Spirit. In the day you seek Him with
your whole heart He will be found of you.
Have you failed in the past? Have you at
times denied your Lord just when you should have
stood most true? Have you been a doubtingThomas? And do you feel your need of strength
and power? Does your soul cry out for a greater
revelation of Jesus and His Word, for a greater
vision and a broader horizon? Then TARRY
UNTIL you are endued with power from on high.
Believer, have you been used mightily in the
past in soul- winning? Have the sick been healed
and demons cast out in answer to your prayer?
416

TARRY UNTIL
Have you, like Mary of old, sat learning at the
feet of Jesus? Has the joy of salvation and the
presence of the Spirit abiding with you, and at
times anointing with gladness until your soul
overflowed with joy, seemed precious?
If so, thank God, but you, too, like Peter and
John, Thomas and Bartholomew, with all the
other apostles, and with Mary the Mother of Jesus,
and the other women with their brethren, need
the Holy Spirit. Oh, how you need Him! Doors
are opening just before you. The land of Canaan
a new land, a land of power and glory, lies just
beyond. Jesus is coming soon. The message
must be spread broadcast, and souls gathered in
before His appearing.
He is calling you to go, preach the Gospel, witness to all about you GO, BUT TARRY UNTIL
the Holy Spirit has come in to abide go, but

tarry first in Jerusalem until you have been endued with power from on high.

417

THIS IS THAT
THE BAPTISM OF THE HOLY SPIRIT.
THE curtains of the clouds which angelic hands
had swept together when, the redemptive
work of Jesus on earth completed, His ascending form disappeared from view, had again been
parted, and the Holy Spirit, of whom Jesus had said
"He will abide with you forever" had been sent
forth from the presence of the Father. No sooner
were they filled with the Holy Spirit than they
began to speak with other tongues as the Spirit
gave them utterance.
And they were all filled with the Spirit.
What was the immediate result and the outward evidence of that filling? They began to
speak with other tongues.
Is there any record of anyone ever having
spoken in other tongues (languages which they
had never learned and were unknown to themselves; see I Cor. 14:2), previous to the day of
Pentecost and the opening of the dispensation of
the Holy Spirit? NO.
The devout Jews who were gathered into Jerusalem at this time, for the religious feasts and
ceremonies, came running together in multitudes,
and, upon hearing the languages of the countries
in which they had been born, spoken by these
simple, unlearned Galileans, they were amazed,
astonished, and in doubt.

At what were the people astonished? At what
did they marvel? At the rushing mighty wind?
No.
The tongues of fire? No; they are not again
mentioned, and it is doubtful whether those who
came together after the one hundred and twenty
had been filled even saw them.
What then? They were amazed and marveled at
the supernatural power that rested upon these
men and women, causing them to reel and stagger,
418

THE BAPTISM OF THE HOLY SPIRIT
Acts 2:13, as though drunken with wine, and
to speak with tongues unknown to themselves.
The spectators who looked upon the out-pouring
of the Holy Ghost on the day of Pentecost were
divided into two classes just as they are today.
One class were the mockers, who said in derision,
"These men are full of new wine. Come on, let's
have nothing to do with these people. They are
fanatics. This is all excitement. ? Tis ridiculous
to create so much noise and excitement over religion; the whole city is in an uproar; nothing
but wildfire. They ought to be arrested/' etc.
The other class were the thinkers the thoughtful, intelligent men and women, who said:
"Wait a moment. There must surely be something behind all this. The ring in these people's
voices the shout in their souls the joy and love,
worship and adoration reflected in their faces
there must be some specific reason for it. They
are certainly not reeling and staggering about

like that for nothing. They must surely realize
that the people who look on will make fun of them
and think they have lost their senses.
If they are not doing it for money nor for
popularity, then why are they doing it? They are
certainly not all fools. If there were only one or
two we might think they were, but here are about
one hundred and twenty; surely they cannot all
be mad. I am going to investigate this matter and
see what there is behind it all.
Tell us, Oh tell us, some of you good, happy
people in there stop your shouting and your rejoicing for a little space, and answer WHAT
MEANETH THIS?"
Then Peter, standing up
"Peter, what are you rising up for? Are you
frightened, Peter? Are you going to run away
and seek to escape from this big, excited, questioning multitude as you did from the little girl that
night you denied the Lord?"
419

THIS IS THAT
"Bun away? Oh no! I will never run away
any more now. I have been baptized with the
Holy Ghost and fire. He has endued me with power
from on high. He has taken fear away and put
a holy boldness within my heart and words
within my mouth, insomuch that out of my innermost being flow forth rivers of living water.''
Acts 4:13.
And Peter, standing up (ah, the Holy Spirit
puts a real "stand up for Jesus" in the timid
soul) with the eleven, lifted up his voice and said:

"Ye men of Judea, and all ye that dwell at
Jerusalem, be this known unto you, and hearken
to my words; for these are not drunken, as ye
suppose, seeing it is but the third hour of the
day, but this is that which was spoken of the
prophet Joel. It shall come to pass in the last
days, saith God, I will pour out My Spirit upon
all flesh. Your sons and your daughters shall
prophesy ... on My servants and My handmaidens I will pour out in those days of My
Spirit, and they shall prophesy. I will show
wonders in the heavens above, signs in the earth
beneath . . . and it shall come to pass that
whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall
be saved.
"Ye men of Israel, hear these words; Jesus of
Nazareth ... ye have taken, and by wicked
hands have crucified and slain."
"Why, Peter, aren't you afraid to talk like that
to this great mob of people? Do you not know
that they gnash their teeth and hiss at the very
name of Jesus? Are you not aware that you are
laying yourself open to the danger of being seized
upon, carried to the whipping post, stripped,
beaten and stoned to death? I thought that you
were a timid man who was ashamed to be knowji
as one of them?"
"Oh no, I will never be ashamed to be called one
420

THE BAPTISM OF THE HOLY SPIRIT
of the despised, persecuted, peculiar few any more.
The Holy Ghost has come to abide in this life of
mine, and the words that I speak I speak not of
myself; the works that I do I do not of myself,
but the Holy Spirit who has come to dwell within,
He speaks the words; He does the works.

This Jesus hath God raised up, whereof we are
witnesses. Therefore being by the right hand of
God exalted and having received of the Father
the promise of the Holy Ghost, He hath shed
fortH this which you see (in the reeling bodies
of those who appear to be drunken), and hear
(in the speaking in other tongues)."
So boldly did this transformed man speak under
the mighty power of the Holy Spirit that his
hearers were pricked to their hearts and said unto
Peter and the rest of the apostles:
"Men and brethren, what shall we do?"
"Then Peter said unto them Kepent, and be
baptized, every one of you, in the name of Jesus
Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.
For the promise is unto you, and to your
children, and to all that are afar off, even as
many as the Lord our God shall call."
What promise is unto all that are afar off, even
as many as the Lord God shall call, Peter?
The promise of the Holy Ghost that which you
see and hear.
But hoAV much of the promise is unto us,
Peter? Surely not all this mighty power, accompanied with the speaking in tongues. Was this
not only the opening of the dispensation and for
the Jews?
But no, says Peter, "The promise is unto them
that are afar off, even as many as the Lord shall
call, for now in Christ Jesus there is neither Jew
nor Gentile; there is neither bond nor free. In
Him we are one and are baptized into the one
body."

421

THIS IS THAT
Acts 10:44, eight years after the day of Pentecost, the door of salvation and the baptism of the
Holy Spirit is opened unto the Gentiles. Walking
into the home of Cornelius, in the 44th verse, we
find a meeting in progress. Cornelius has gathered his household, his servants, and his neighbors
together to hear the Avords which Peter is to speak,
words whereby they may be saved.
"And while Peter yet spake these words, the
Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the
Word.
"And they of the circumcision which believed
were astonished, as many as came with Peter,
because that on the Gentiles also was poured out
the gift of the Holy Ghost.
"For they heard them speak with tongues, and
magnify God."
In all these eight years the manner in which
the Holy Spirit came in had not been changed
the same Bible evidence speaking in tongues,
remained. Even though there were no foreigners
who came from other countries and spoke other
languages, present to be benefited by the speaking
in tongues, the Spirit spoke through them just
the same, as He had on the day of Pentecost,
In Acts 19 a new voice is heard preaching Jesus
Christ and the baptism of the Holy Spirit.
"Have you received the Holy Ghost since you
believed?"
Why, that voice and face seems familiar. Have

we seen or heard this man before?
Excuse me, brother, but is your name not Saul
of Tarsus? Is this really you preaching the
necessity of receiving the baptism of the Holy
Spirit ! I thought you condemned all this, thought
it to be folly and not to be permitted. Did you
not say that you were going to put an end to
all this nonsense, when, after you had looked on
approvingly at the stoning of Stephen, you rode
422

THE BAPTISM OF THE HOLY SPIRIT
away to Damascus with the intention of still
further persecuting these Pentecostal Holy Ghost
people?"
"Yes, I used to persecute these Christians. I
thought that they were all wrong and should be
wiped out of existence, but that was before my
eyes were opened.
Did you not hear how that, when riding on my
way to do them greater hurt, the light of the Lord
shone round about me and I was stricken from
my horse and fell as one dead in the dust of the
road, and how Jesus, whose face was brighter than
the sun, and whose raiment was whiter than the
light, came and spoke to me, saying:
'Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou Me?'
Three days was I blind from the vision of His
brightness. Then was I converted and my name
was changed from Saul to Paul.
Yes, I am one of them today. I will talk with
you later, but now I must go on with my meeting."
After the baptismal service wherein the disciples

are buried in the watery grave, in verse six, we
see Paul laying his hands upon them, and read
that the Holy Ghost came on them and they spoke
with tongues and prophesied. Here, as in Jerusalem and in the house of Cornelius, the first thing
that was mentioned of the souls that received the
Holy Spirit was that they spoke with tongues.
In Acts 8 :17, 18, we find sinful and wicked
Simon the sorcerer, so impressed with the mighty
power displayed when the believers received the
Holy Ghost upon the laying on of the apostles'
hands, that he offered money to the apostles in
the hopes of being able to purchase the same
power, saying:
"Give me* also this power, that on whomsoever
I lay my hands, he may receive the Holy Ghost."
Without a doubt Simon saw and heard the same
things that the onlookers saAV and heard on the
423

THIS IS THAT
day of Pentecost. But Oh, this power could not be
bought. All the money in the world could not
have purchased it, but to those who humble themselves in lowliness and in sincerity before the
Lord shall the Spirit be given freely without
money and without price.
Oh, tell me, Peter and Paul, tell me John and
James, and all you who received this mighty incoming of the Holy Ghost with its attendant
power and glory, may we, in this 20th century, receive .this like precious gift, or did the Holy Spirit
empty Himself of all His power in the apostolic
days? Did you consume all of these supernatural
wondrous blessings, or did you leave enough to
spare for us today?

"Yes, indeed/' they answer in unison. "Heaven
has not gone bankrupt. Heaven's storehouse still
is full. The Holy Spirit has never lost His power,
the promise is unto them that are afar off, even as
many as the Lord our God shall call. Did not
our Lord say: 'When He is come, He will abide
with you forever'?
"Doubt no longer, but with open heart ask ye
of the Lord rain in the time of the latter rain. Remember the words of Joel the prophet : 'It shall
come to pass in the LAST days,' saith God, 'I will
pour out My Spirit upon all flesh.' Remember,
too, that when the high priest went in to the Holy
of Holies the bells rang, and when the high priest
came out the bells rang again.
"When Jesus ascended up on high the bells rang
and the people spoke with tongues and magnified
God. Now this same Jesus, our high priest, is
coming forth again for His waiting church, and
on earth the bells are ringing, the latter rain is
falling, and again those who have received the oldtime power speak with other tongues."

424

WORK OF THE HOLY SPIRIT.
JUST as God the Father promised, with ever increasing emphasis in the Old Testament the
coming time in which His Son should be manifested, so during the latter months of Jesus' ministry He promised when He went away He also would
bestow a gift upon the world, even the Holy Ghost.
As the hour of his departure approached, and Cal :
vary's cross cast its shadow over the fearful hearts
of His disciples, Jesus more and more sought to
impress upon the minds of His people the necessity and importance of receiving His gift the

Comforter.
So many times did the Lord promise the Spirit
and explain the importance of His coming and His
office work in our lives from conviction to baptism, and on to perfection, that time and space
will permit our giving only a few quotations at
this time.
In the 16th chapter of John, Jesus said: "It is
expedient for you that I go away; for if I go not
away the Comforter will not come unto you, but
if I depart I will send Him unto you." Here and
in other places He begins to enumerate the different reasons why we should receive the Holy Ghost,
and to explain still more fully His office work in
this world :
(1) When He is come He will reprove the world
of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment. John
16:8.
(2) Howbeit when He, the Spirit of truth is
come, He will guide you into all truth. John 16 :13.
(3) He will not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak. John 16 :13.
(4) He will shew you things to come. John
16 :13.
(5) He shall glorify ME. John 16 :14.
425

THIS IS THAT
(6) He shall receive of mine, and show it unto
you. John 16:14.
(7) But when the Comforter is come, whom I
w4ll send you from the Father, even the Spirit of

truth, which proceedeth from the Father, He shall
testify of me. John 15 :26.
(8) But the Comforter, which is the Holy
Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name,
He shall teach you all things and bring all things
to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto
you. John 14 :26.
(9) But ye shall receive power after that the
Holy Ghost is come upon you. Acts 1:8.
Jesus' parting words to His little flock after
His death and resurrection, as His pierced feet
were rising from earth as He ascended to His
Father, rang out clear and plain : "Behold I send
the promise of my Father upon you: but tarry
in Jerusalem until ye be endued with power from
on high." Luke 24 :49.
True to His commission, Acts 1 :12 shows the
little band of faithful followers (one hundred and
twenty in number) wending their way to Jerusalem, to tarry until they should receive the promised gift. "And when they were come in, they
went up into an upper room, where abode both
Peter and James and John, and Andrew and
Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew,
James the son of Alphaeus, and Simon Zelotes,
and Judas the brother of James. These all continued with one accord in prayer and supplication
with the women and Mary the mother of Jesus,
and with His brethren. Acts 1 :13, 14.
PENTECOST.
Then just as the Father, true to His word gave
Jesus, His promised gift to redeem the world, so
Jesus at the close of His dispensation fulfilled
His word, and bestowed the gift of the Holy Ghost
426

WORK OF THE HOLY SPIRIT
to abide with us forever. "And when the day of
Pentecost was fully come they were all with one
accord in one place; and suddenly there came a
sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind,
and it filled all the house where they were sitting. And there appeared unto them cloven
tongues like as of fire and it sat upon each of them;
and they WERE ALL FILLED WITH THE
HOLY GHOST, AND BEGAN TO SPEAK IN
OTHER TONGUES, AS THE SPIRIT GAVE
THEM UTTERANCE. Acts 2 :4.
CAESAREA.
The same Bible evidence, speaking in other
tongues (that is; languages they had never
learned), accompanied the incoming of the Holy
Ghost at Caesarea, for we read that while Peter
was preaching Jesus to them and telling them of
His death, burial and resurrection . . . "while
Peter yet spoke these words, the Holy Ghost fell
on all of them which heard the word. . . .
FOR THEY HEARD THEM SPEAK WITH
TONGUES AND MAGNIFY GOD." Acts 10:
44-46.
EPHESUS.
This same sign accompanied the incoming of the
Holy Spirit during Paul's ministry at Ephesus,
for we read : "And it came to pass that while
Apollos was at Corinth, Paul having passed
through the upper coasts came to Ephesus: and
finding certain disciples he said unto them:
"'Have ye received the Holy Spirit since ye believed?' And they said unto him: 'We have not
so much as heard whether there be any Holy
Ghost/ AND WHEN PAUL HAD LAID HIS
HANDS ON THEM, THE HOLY GHOST GAME
UPON THEM, AND THEY SPAKE WITH

TONGUES AND PROPHESIED" Acts 19 :l-6.
Simon the sorcerer, seeing the gift of the Holy
Ghost bestowed through the laying on of the
427

THIS IS THAT
apostles' hands, was willing to pay money for
the power that he saw manifested through the
apostles.
Just as God the Father and Jesus Christ His
Son gave gifts unto the world, so in turn the
Holy Spirit bestows His gifts upon all who receive him and yield themselves wholly unto Him.
The gifts of the Spirit are found in 1st Corinthians 12 :8-10.
(1) Wisdom,
(2) Knowledge,
(3) Faith,
(4) Healing,
(5) Miracles,
(6) Prophecy,
(7) Discernment of Spirits,
(8) Divers kinds of Tongues,
(9) Interpretation of Tongues;
all of which were manifested in their midst, even
as we see them manifested in our midst today.
We are still in the dispensation of the Holy
Ghost; have been ever since the day of Pente-

cost; and will be until the coming of the Lord.
He is still here to convict the sinner of his sin,
for no man can come to the Father, except the
Spirit draw him. He is here to lead the repentant soul to Jesus, to apply the blood to his heart,
to bear witness with his spirit that he is now a
child of God, and has passed from darkness unto
light, from bondage unto liberty, from death unto
life and to rejoice with him in the finished work
of Calvary.
Just as the Spirit was with the sinner to condemn him and convict him of unrighteousness, so
He is noAV with the regenerated heart to lead him
on in righteousness and to baptize him with the
Holy Ghost, and witness that the work of perfection has begun. Jesus said : He who is with
you shall be in you, and Peter said : "Repent and
428

WORK OF THE HOLY SPIRIT
be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus
Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive
the gift of the Holy Ghost ; for the promise is unto
you, and to your children ; and TO ALL THAT ARE
AFAR OFF, EVEN AS MANY A8 THE LORD
OUR GOD SHALL CALL. Acts 2 :38, 39.
The blood washed heart with whom the Spirit is
bearing witness is now a clean, empty temple for
the third person of the Trinity to enter. When we
seek with all our heart, humbly, prayerfully,
praisefully, He will come in to abide, and seal us
unto the day of redemption, giving us today the
same Bible evidence speaking in other tongues,
as the Spirit gives utterance as He did in the
days of old.
When the Holy Ghost comes in to abide He
takes control of body, soul and spirit; out of our

innermost being there flows forth rivers of living
water. Even the vocal organ the unruly member,
the tongue He takes hold of and controls. Jesus
is made so real, and our souls so overflow with
praise as the Spirit reveals the King in His beauty
that here, it seems, our language fails, and we
cry out : "Where, my soul, shall I begin to praise
the name of Jesus !" Then the Holy Spirit himself
rises up w r ithin and glorifies Jesus in a language
that we know not, and as we hear Him speaking
for Himself floods of joy, and billows of glory
sweep over our whole being and we realize that the
Holy Spirit is praising our Bridegroom with more
beautiful praise than we ever could have thought
of.
Oh, glory to Jesus, for wells and rivers of praise
that do not have to be pumped up nor primed, but
gush forth in uncontrollable, ecstatic glory and
thanksgiving !
The baptism of the Holy Ghost is the incoming
of the Spirit as the great leader who is to guide
us from earth to heaven ; who is never to leave us
429

THIS IS THAT
until we meet the Lord in the air. As we yield
ourselves to Him He leads us to higher heights
and deeper depths, and causes us to be
"Changed from glory to glory,
'Till in Heaven we take our place,
'Till we cast our crowns before Him,
Lost in wonder, love and praise."
Oh, dear one, if you have not yet received the
Holy Spirit in His fullness, seek Him with all
your heart, and when He comes in you will have
the same Biblical evidence that they had in Bible

times, speaking in other tongues AS THE SPIRIT GIVES
UTTERANCE. THE LORD HAS NO TWENTIETH CENTURY
MODE OF BAPTIZING PEOPLE IN THE HOLY GHOST, BUT
STILL FILLS AND SEALS IN THE SAME WAY HE DID IN
THE EARLY DAYS.
The latter rain is falling on the earth.
"And I say unto you, ask and it shall be given
unto you, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall
be opened unto you. For every one that asketh
receiveth, and he that seeketh findeth, and to him
that knocketh it shall be opened. If a son shall
ask bread of any of you that is a father, will he
give him a stone? or if he ask a fish give him a
serpent? or if he shall ask an egg, will he offer
him a scorpion? If ye then, being evil, know how
to give good gifts to your children, how much
more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy
Spirit to them that ask Him."

430

A PLAIN TALK TO SEEKERS.
"Ask, and it shall be given you; Seek, and ye shall find;
Knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For every one that
asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that
knocketh it shall be opened. If a son shall ask bread of any
of you that is a father will he give him a stone? Or, if he
ask a fish, will he for a fish give him a serpent? Or, if he
shall ask an egg, will he offer him a scorpion? If ye then,
being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children;
how much more shall your Heavenly Father give the Holy
Spirit to them that ask Him?" Luke 11:9-13.
FROM AN AFTERNOON TALK GIVEN AT THE NATIONWIDE CAMP MEETING.

IF THEKE is any humble little ministry that the
Lord has given me, it has been mainly that of
praying for those seeking the baptism of the
Holy Spirit. Each member of the body should have
its own particular ministry. Some are definitely
led out along the line of praying for the sick, and
when the message comes that someone is ill and
suffering in body, there is that within the child of
God which leaps up with great desire to pray for
the sick one. Others are led out definitely along
the line of casting out demons, and the Spirit rises
up within them, using them with great unction
and power.
As for myself, whenever I hear of someone seeking the baptism of the Holy Spirit with all his
heart, I feel such great drawing power within that
I can scarcely resist leaping over all the others
to get to that person 'to pray for him that he may
receive. Ofttimes I have been invited to go to
meetings far and near without feeling any particular interest in the call until word would com*'
saying :
"O, we have so many here that are just starving
and crying for the baptism of the Holy Ghost; do
come and pray for them." And immediately a
great urging would rise within me to go and pray
431

THIS IS THAT
for those precious seekers. When God gives us
this longing to see seekers filled with the Spirit,
how much more does the Father Himself long to
pour out the Spirit on all those who wait upon
Him.
My heart goes out to all the dear seekers who
are tarrying for the baptism of the Holy Spirit.
How I long to bring you a message from the Lord,

a message of encouragement and instruction that
will help to lift up the hands that hang down and
strengthen the feeble knees, that will cause you to
press on into this glorious realm, this life filled
and controlled by the Holy Spirit !
First of all let us make it plain that God is on
the giving hand, and is more willing
GOD'S TIME to give than you are to receive. Let
is NOW us remember that God's time is now,
not tomorrow, but NOW.
Many people say: "Well, when God is ready,
when my time comes, He will baptize me with
the Holy Spirit." Dear ones, the
WAITING Lord has been ready for many years;
GOD'S TIME it is YOU who have not been ready.
He is waiting above you just now,
longing to pour into your soul great floods of
glory, and to make you the Temple of the Holy
Spirit. If the devil can make you believe that you
are waiting for the Lord to fill you, if he can persuade you to put off definite seeking day after
dav, dav after dav. till Jesus comes and vou will
7 w tf 7
be found still waiting unfilled Avith the Spirit, he
Avill have fulfilled his purpose.
O, dear heart, stop forever making this excuse.
If you are not filled with the Holy Spirit today it
will be your own fault, not the fault of the Lord,
for He is more willing to give than you are to
receive.

Others say, "I would like to receive the Holj
Spirit, but I am afraid I am not ready." Well,
432

A PLAIN TALK TO SEEKERS
beloved, how long would it take God
NOT READY to get you ready? Just one moment,
as long as it takes you to get under
the blood. I have seen sinners come to the altars
in our tent just laden with sin and iniquity. I
have seen them fall on their knees, and throwing
up their hands, cry aloud to God for mercy ; I
have seen the light breaking over their faces and
the glory sweeping over their souls as they passed
from death unto life, and their sins were washed
away. Inside of fifteen minutes from the time
that they came to the altar seeking salvation I
have seen such penitents fall prostrate under the
power of the Spirit, receive the Holy Ghost, and
burst forth speaking in other tongues as the Spirit
gave utterance. I have watched such lives through
the following years, and know that they are standing today declaring the whole Word of God, and
living a holy life before Him. God has no favorites, He is no respecter of persons, we are all on
one common footing before Him. What He has
done for others He will do for you.
If you feel that you are unworthy, that is a
splendid, humble place from which to start seeking. Come empty and be filled. Just tell Father
all about it; ask Him to cover you with the precious blood afresh today, and under the covering
of that blood ask Him to fill you with the Holy
Spirit, that He may lead and direct and fill your
whole life for His honor and glory.
Someone else says: "Well, I have been seeking
for years, and I have never received." But O, a^
I look over the long altar benches

BEEN SEEKING filled with seekers in our taberFOR YEARS. nacle, I find so many that think
they are seeking who are in reality just sitting down at ease, resting theii^ heads
in their hands, elbow propped on the altar bench,
hardly open their mouths to praise God. No des433

THIS IS THAT
perate earnestness or hundred-fold praises, and
they call that seeking. Look up all good gifts
come from above.
I have in my hand a glass, an empty glass. In
my other hand I have a pitcher, filled with cool,
refreshing water. Let us say you
THE PITCHER are the glass, and that Jesus is
AND holding the pitcher filled with
THE GLASS water, which is a type of the Holy
Spirit. We want to fill the tumbler
with water, but it is turned bottom side up, the
mouth is down, just as many of you seekers put
your heads down instead of up. We can pour all
jthe water we like on the bottom of the tumbler,
'but it will never be filled. It will come out from
under the downpour just as empty as ever, wondering why all the other tumblers were filled and
it left empty.
But now let us tarn the tumbler right side up.
Pour the water out from the pitcher and the glass
begins to fill and fill and fill, till the water is
overflowing on the dry ground all about it. Dear
ones, do just like this glass, look up. Lift your
face up toward the heavens, lift up your hands,
begin to praise God with all your soul, and He
will fill you to overflowing.
Another seeker says, "Ah! but I fear I will not

run over or be demonstrative; I am deep, I am
such a quiet sort of a person; I believe
PRAISING in praising the Lord in my heart."
IN HEART Dear ones, there is not one of you so
ONLY deep but what God can fill you. You
may feel that you are big and deep,
but God is bigger and deeper than you, and when
He fills you just so full, you have to run over and
speak, as the Spirit gives utterance, the glorious
praises of Jesus.
Take, for instance, this pitcher filled with water :
it is larger than the glass the tumbler cannot
434

A PLAIN TALK TO SEEKERS
possibly contain all the water held in the pitcher
it must overflow. Just so, God is bigger than
you, and when He pours the Holy Spirit into your
heart you must overflow with His praises.
Now we will suppose that we have a glass which
was marred in the making. There is no way of
filling it, but the glass with the wide
OPEN TO GOD open mouth can be readily filled.
Then we will take a bottle with a
small mouth; it takes a great deal longer to fill
than it does the tumbler. Seekers, "Open your

mouth unde and I will fill it, saith the Lord."
We open our mouths wide as for the latter rain.
O, Hallelujah! Open up every avenue of your
being, every channel of your soul, open your lips
in praise, "be ye lifted up, ye everlasting doors,
and the King of Glory shall come in."
ASK, AND YE SHALL RECEIVE.
Ask, and you shall receive. Here is a definite
promise from God. If you ask, He has promised
that it shall be given you. Remember the widow
who went to the unjust judge; at first he refused
her, but morning after morning we can picture
her putting on her hat, walking down the road to
the judge's office, knocking on the door, and waiting her turn till she could cry out: "O, Judge,
please avenge me of mine adversary." When she
was refused she was still undaunted, and the next
morning found her pressing and pinning on her
hat, walking down the road and up to the judge's
office, waiting her turn again, and saying: "O,
Judge, please avenge me of mine adversary."
Refused again, she was still undismayed, and
the next morning found her again in the anteroom. No doubt the judge said : "Is that woman
here again to weary me?" But again she pled
her cause.
Oh, I believe that when the unjust judge granted
435

THIS IS THAT
her request, he seized his pen and paper quickly,
and wrote off the order, and said : "Here, woman,
take it quick, and get out of my sight. You
weary me with your oft coming."

Ah! dear ones, if the unjust judge heard the
widow's plea, how much more will our just Father
hear your cry. If you ask, you shall surely receive,
yes, and receive quickly, for in such an hour as ye
think not he shall come suddenly and fill His
temple.
SEEK, AND YE SHALL FIND.
Here is another definite promise. Do you remember the woman who swept the floor, lighted a
candle and swept on until she found her lost
money? Oh, dear hearts, be willing to rise early
in the morning to seek, and to seek by the lighted
candle if necessary. Seek till you forget your
meals, till you forget your bed; forget all else till
His gift is received.
KNOCK, AND IT SHALL BE OPENED UNTO YOU.
If the door has not been opened unto you, the
fault is not with God. Perhaps there has been
something amiss with your knocking. Do you remember the man who went to knock at his friend's
door for bread, and he said: "Friend, rise and
give me three loaves; a friend of mine in his journey has come, and I have nothing to set before
him"?
But the man from within answered him :
"Trouble me not. My children are with me in
bed; the hour is late."
Perhaps the enemy has whispered to you : "Come
now, it is eleven o'clock; time you were in bed.
You know you have to get up early in the
morning."
How often have you reasoned like this, and
gone to your rest, but not so with the man who
knocked in the Bible. "Knock, and it shall be
436

A PLAIN TALK TO SEEKERS
opened unto you." Oh, I love these definite assurances of our God. "Heaven and earth shall pass
away, but not one jot or tittle shall fail until all
be fulfilled."
"Rap ! Rap ! Bap !" I can hear that man knocking at the door.
"Trouble me not," says the voice from above.
"Kap! Kap! Rap!" "O, friend, arise and give
me three loaves."
"The hour is late; surely you can come back
another time for bread."
"Rap ! Rap ! Rap !" "A friend in his journey has
come and I have nothing to set before him. Rise
and give me the three loaves."
And so the man knocked and knocked, and
rapped, and called and pled, till at last the man
from above swung his feet out of bed, lighted his
candle, went to the pantry shelf, jerked out three
loaves of bread, and thrust them into his neighbor's hand, and said: "Here, man, here are your
three loaves not because you are my friend, but
because of your importunity. Take them, and go
your way."
How much more then shall Jesus, who is our
friend, the friend above every other friend, rise
and give us the blessed, promised Holy Ghost.
Do you feel ashamed before God this afternoon
for the feeble pretense of your asking and seeking
and knocking? Rise, beloved, and
WITH YOUR seek Him with all your heart, for
WHOLE HEART here is a promise that you can
stand on flat-footed, without waver-

ing or doubting. "In the day that ye seek Me with
your whole heart, I will be found of you" If you
seek Him, then with your W-H-O-L-E H-E-A-R-T,
your whole mind and strength and voice, He shall
be found of you, for "Every one that asketh receiveth."
437

THIS IS THAT
We have heard many people say, "Oh, Sister, I
fear the Holy Spirit is not for me." Now, dear
ones, look at God's Word. Can
THE HOLY SPIRIT you not believe Him? "Every
NOT FOR ME one that asketh receiveth." God
is no respecter of persons. You
are just as dear to Him as any other child.
"Every one." Yes, that means you, dear, discouraged soul. "He thai seeketh findeth, and to him
that knocketh it shall be opened."
Then someone says, "Yes, I would like to receive the Holy Spirit, but I am so afraid when the
power of God falls upon me that it
AFRAID OF A might be my own mind, or the
COUNTERFEIT flesh, or the devil." "I am so afraid
that I might receive something that
was counterfeit and not of God." Here is a promise for you, dear, timid soul. "If a son ask bread
of any of you that is a father, will ye give him a
stone, or if he ask fish, will he for fish give a serpent, or if he ask an egg will he offer him a scorpion ?" In the Eastern countries the loaves of
brown bread resembled very much a stone. The
eel, which is a member of the fish family, resembles very much the serpent. The egg of the
scorpion resembles very much the eggs which are

used in domestic cooking. Now, we do not deny
that there is the counterfeit. The devil is always
trying to counterfeit God's work. We do not deny
that there is the stone, the serpent and the scorpion. But we do deny that our Heavenly Father
gives stones, scorpions and serpents to His bloodwashed children.
Oh, how the Father's heart must be grieved
when you go to Him under the precious blood and
say, "I would like the Holy Spirit, but am so
afraid that if I get down on my knees here at the
altar with these Pentecostal folks and ask for it,
You might give me a serpent, or a demon, or a
438

A PLAIN TALK TO SEEKERS
counterfeit spirit." Are you, then, afraid of your
Father? If this is the kind of father you have, a
father that you are afraid to trust, a father who
would give you a serpent instead of a fish, a scorpion instead of an egg, you had better change your
father and accept God as your parent ? for He gives
good gifts to His children.
If you had ten dollars in your hand, and you
found that one of them was a counterfeit, would
you throw away the other nine dollars and say you
were never going to handle another dollar again?
Why, of course, you would not. If you happen to
have been so unfortunate as to have seen someone who was not genuine, will you then discountenance all that God has done, and say, because this
one had a Avrong spirit, which had never been received from God, that you would henceforth cease
seeking for the genuine gift of the Holy Ghost?
Just suppose you invited me to come to your
house for dinner. You had read my writings, you
had heard people speak of me,

RECOGNIZE THE and now you were writing me a
HOLY SPIRIT letter of invitation to dine and
spend a few days of rest. I accept your invitation and take my suitcase and
travel many miles to get to your home. I rap at
your door and you open to me, and ask :
"Who are you?" I reply, "Why, I am Sister
McPherson. You invited me to come to spend a
few days with you for rest and quiet;" and you
look at me with a doubtful air, and say :
"Well, you do not look just as I thought Sister
McPherson would. I thought she would be a much
older woman. I had pictured her differently. You
are not dressed as I thought Sister McPherson
would be dressed. Your voice is not just the same
as I imagined it would be, and I fear you are not
the woman you claim to be."
439

THIS IS THAT
I reply: "Why, yes, dear sister, I really am the
one you have invited here." But you still hold
the door almost closed, and peer out through the
aperture and say:
"No, I really cannot let you in; I am so fearful. I am afraid that you are not the one that I
invited here. Perhaps I just imagine you are.
Perhaps it might be myself, that just thinks it is
you, or you may be the devil, himself, for all I
know."
How grieved, and hurt, and surprised I should
be. I should probably take up my suitcase, walk
slowly down the steps, and the next time an invitation came to go to your house, I should be just
a little hesitant, perhaps, in moving in that
direction.

Now, how many of you have done just this with
the Holy Spirit? You have read about Him. You
have heard about Him from some who have described His glorious presence to you, and you have
invited Him to come into your house and make
you His Temple. But when He came to your
door, when you began to tremble under His power,
you drew back and said:
"Oh, perhaps this is only myself/' When He
began to knock gently at the door of your lips, to
stammer with His power, or you were prostrated
to the floor, you straightway permitted the devil
to whisper doubts into your ear, and said : "Why,
this is not just as I imagined the Holy Spirit was
to come. I thought He would come as a still,
small dove, or vice versa,, I expected Him to come
as a mighty, rushing wind. Perhaps this is not the
Holy Spirit. Perhaps this is the devil, himself."
Oh, you grieve and wound the dear Holy Spirit,
and He spreads his pinions and passes on to others
kneeling beside you, and fills them instead, and
you wonder why they are filled and you are left
unfilled.
440

A PLAIN TALK TO SEEKERS
So many people I find have got it all fixed up
in their minds just how the Holy Spirit is going
to come to them. Some feel that He
DO NOT is to come to them as a still, small
DOUBT HIM dove, in a gentle way as they sit in
their seats, or as they kneel in a dignified manner at the altar. To such He usually
comes as a mighty, rushing wind, slaying them
under the power and giving mighty manifestations.

Others have it all figured out that the Holy Spirit
is to come to them as a great dynamic, explosive
power, accompanied with a mighty, rushing wind
and tongues of flame and great manifestations.
To these He sometimes comes as the still, small
dove, and quietly fills them, speaking through
them in other tongues softly and tenderly, the
glorious praises of Jesus and the message of His
coming. But in whatsoever form He comes, do
not doubt Him. You have invited Him to come,
now just receive Him.
When you come to the altar, come determined
to praise God. Come not to seek, but to receive.
Do not look miles and miles
ENTER THROUGH THE away for the Holy Ghost to
GATES OF PRAISE come to you, for He is right
near you. Praise and glorify
the name of Jesus with ALL your heart, and He
will pour His Spirit upon you.
Some say: "Well, I am not going to praise the
Lord when I do not feel like it, I do not want to
put anything on." I do not
i DO NOT FEJJL believe there is a person in
LIKE PRAISING HIM the world that dislikes seeing
anybody put anything on more
than I do myself, but bless the Lord, there is one
thing that God's W r ord authorizes us to put on,
and that is to put on praise as a garment. "Well,
but," you say, "I cannot praise Him unless I feel
like it."
441

THIS IS THAT
Is that the way your spiritual life is ruled, by
feeling? Praise Him because He is worthy; because He has washed your sins away. Praise Him
because he deserves all the praise in Heaven and
in earth forever and forever, and you soon will feel
like praising Him. Bless His Holy Name! Do
not attempt to go by feeling. Isaac Avas the only
man in the Bible that went by feeling. Just see
how much he was deceived. He got hold of the
wrong son through feeling the hairy covering that
was upon his son's arm. Do not go by feeling, but
go by faith.
Oftentimes when our altars are filled with
hungry seekers, I stand on the platform for a moment looking over the people, and wondering to
myself, "Where shall I begin? Whom shall I pray
for first ?" And passing by the ones who are sitting down resting their heads on their hands, in a
half-hearted way, I look for that one who acts as
though he were desperately in earnest, who, with
uplifted hands and face, is praising God from the
depths of His heart and seeking with all his might ;
and we workers say to ourselves : "There is someone who is desperately in earnest. Let us go and
pray for that one." And do you know, I believe
that is almost the way the Lord looks down upon
it. And He stands there this afternoon at this
altar, ready and willing to pour out His Spirit;
He is looking for someone who is seeking with all
his heart. This one He will surely fill. Praise
the Lord until you feel his power taking control of
you, until your lips begin to move and tremble
under the power, then stop talking in your own
language and let the Holy Spirit do the rest. You
have nothing to do at all but yield and He will
speak. i- : '< f
In my experience of seeking the Holy Spirit,
there was day after day when He came upon me

442

A PLAIN TALK TO SEEKERS
with stammering lips before
WHEN MAN CEASES He spoke in other tongues.
GOD BEGINS Since I have received the baptism, I can see where I hindered Him from speaking in other tongues a great
deal. Every time that my lips would begin to
tremble and my chin to quiver, I would begin to
praise the Lord with redoubled force, feeling that
if ever I praised Him I must praise Him then, or
He would leave me. This was perhaps a mistake,
as two could not talk at once, and while I was
doing the talking the Holy Spirit could not speak.
We are all too courteous to interrupt another while
he is speaking, and the Holy Spirit is just as courteous as we are. When I got all through talking
and just yielded my lips, my tongue, and all my
vocal organs, the stammering increased, and the
first thing I knew my chin began to quiver and
jerk sideways and up and down, my tongue began to move about in my mouth, and as I gave
Him my voice He began to make strange sounds,
syllables, words, fragments of sentences, and then
like a mighty torrent there flowed forth from my
innermost being rivers of praise, as the Spirit
gave utterance in other tongues. Praise Him,
dear ones, until you feel His power upon your lips,
your vocal organs, then as you have talked all
your life, be still and let the Holy Spirit do the
talking. He can praise Jesus in so much more excellent a way than you can. He has glorious
words that our human minds can never fathom.
Rivers of praise will flow forth, rising and rising
until they ascend to the Father's throne in glorious
tributes of thanksgiving.

443

THE LATTER RAIN.
Falling, falling, 'tis the latter rain.
Coming, coming, Pentecost again.
Hasten, hasten, 'tis the day of power.
Come beneath the Holy Spirit's shower.
WHAT a glorious privilege it is to live in
these last days, the days of the latter rain.
The Holy Spirit is being poured out in a
wonderful manner. Showers of blessing are falling.
Times of refreshing have come from the presence of
the Lord refreshing for the dry and parched
ground, the barren fields, the trees, the grain, everything and everybody, in fact, that comes beneath its
downpour.
There is no excuse or reason for any hungry,
blood-washed child of God to remain in a barren,
fruitless condition, pining for the Holy Spirit. He
is being outpoured as the rain from heaven, and
is willing to baptize, fill, and come in to abide
wherever an empty, hungry, upturned vessel is
found. Turn your cup right side up, and if you
are out in the open where the rain is falling, He
will surely fill you now.
The Lord is no respecter of persons. Old and
young, black or white, yellow or brown, the servant and the maid, irrespective of race or creed,
are invited to ask, that they may receive. "Every
one that asketh rcceiveth; and he that seeketh
findeth."
Latter Rain for the asking. The precious Holy
Spirit for the seeking. Hallelujah !
As Peter stood, filled to overflowing under the

downpour of the moderate former rain lifting
up his eyes and, with the "clairvoyance of the
Spirit, looking away ahead and seeing the latter
rain falling upon our generation, he cried aloud:
444

THE LATTER RAIN
"This is that which was spoken by the prophet
Joel/- and declared that "the promise is unto you,
and to your children, and to all that are afar off,
even as many as the Lord our God shall call."
Ask ye of the Lord rain in the time of the latter
rain; so the Lord shall make bright clouds, and
give them showers of rain, to every one grass in
the field. Poor, drooping, struggling soul, thirsting and wilting in your spirit, look up what you
need is the Holy Spirit, His incoming is as necessary to your spiritual growth and health, as is
rain to the grass and flowers of the field. The
Spirit is being outpoured upon all who come
beneath His doAvnpour. If you are not filled it
is because you are under cover of some sort, or
else your cup is wrong side up or filled with something else.
If you are in a house of theology, forms, ceremonies, preconceived ideas or teachings, the roof
is too thick; it is rain proof; you will never be
filled in that house. Open the door, poor thirsty
soul, and come out into the freedom of the big
outdoors of God's fullness. Can't you hear the
patter of the rain upon the roof? Can you not see
it beating against your window-panes? Rise up
from your seats and pews of prejudice and slothfulness, and get out into the open where the rain
is falling. Do not stop to put up your umbrella
over your head either, but just lift up your hands
in, praise, to heaven ; lift up your face to the falling of this blessed latter rain; lift up your voice

aloud in adoration and glorifying the Lord; lift
up the everlasting doors; open wide the floodgates of praise, and let Him fill you.
O what you have been missing all this time!
What an incomparable loss! Because you have
been taking shelter beneath the Avails of doubtings and questions, instead of taking out God's
Word, and searching whether these things be so.
445

THIS IS THAT
Instead of asking and receiving, you have been
slowly withering and drying up spiritually.
"It shall come to pass, in the last days, saith
God, that I will pour out of My Spirit upon all
flesh. Be glad, then, ye children of Zion, and
rejoice, for He hath given you the former rain
moderately, and He will cause to come down for
you the rain, both the former and the latter rain
in the first month." Glory to Jesus! Dear ones,
we are in these last days. The latter rain, which
is falling upon the earth today, is just as much a
fulfillment of Bible prophecy, and a sign of the
soon coming of Jesus, as the world war, the
plagues and the pestilences now ravaging our
nations.
If you have not yet received your portion, if
your cup has not yet been filled to overflowing,
do not blame God, do not blame your pastor, do
not say: "Perhaps God's time has not yet come."
God's time is always now. There is no one to
blame but yourself. Look up, and be sure there
is no roof over your head, no umbrella of doubts
or unbelief or criticism. Be sure you are empty
and your cup right side up. Lift up your whole
being in praises to the King. Ask rain in the time
of the latter rain, and you will be filled to over-

flowing.
When the Holy Spirit has filled you, and taken
up His abode, you will speak with other tongues
and magnify God today, just as in the days of the
former rain. The Lord did not have one way of
filling people and manifesting that filling in Bible
days, and another way today. No ! this is the
same kind of rain, the same shower of refreshing, the same Holy Spirit. The Lord has not invented a twentieth century outpouring of the Holy
Spirit, but still pours out His Spirit without measure, in the Bible way, with Bible evidence, as in
Acts 2:4. "This old-time religion is good enough
446

THE LATTER RAIN
for me" you have been singing that, but do you
believe it? Then get out into freedom, and be
filled with the Spirit.
Stop complaining that the rain is not falling
today as it was ten years ago it is because you
have gotten under some rain-proof shelter of carelessness, or lack of prayer and confidence. It is
falling today, dear ones. Do not be satisfied with
dried-up, stale pastures. See! The pastures of
the wilderness do spring, for the tree beareth her
fruit, the fig tree and the vine do yield their
strength. Ask, and ye shall receive. Every one
that asketh receiveth!
"And you'll get your portion yet, praise the Lord;
In His storehouse there is plenty,
More than enough for the hundred and twenty,
And you'll get your portion yet, praise the Lord."

447

SHEPHERDS, "FALSE AND TRUE"
"I will feed them in a good pasture, and upon the high
mountains of Israel shall their fold be; there shall they lie
in a good fold, and in a fat pasture shall they feed. I will
feed my flock, and I will cause them to lie down, saith the
Lord." Ezekiel 34:14, 15.
THROUGHOUT the entire word of God there is
not a more beautiful picture presented to the
reader than that of the good Shepherd caring
for and feeding His sheep. He has always been the
good Shepherd; and as we, His sheep, get to
know Him and His voice, we cannot turn a page
of the Bible without seeing Him as the tender
Shepherd of the sheep, leading, guiding, feeding,
seeking, chastising, healing the sheep of His fold.
From the day that this Shepherd first led His
sheep to pasture in the fruitful garden of Eden,
he has been feeding and pasturing richly all who
followed Him closely.
From the day that sin entered that first pasture
field and the good Shepherd walked amongst the
trees of the garden calling:
"WHERE ART THOU?" He has been calling
and seeking wandering sheep. As the pages turn
before us we see Him walking, leading His sheep
through each experience. We hear His stately
steppings as He leads His flock from Egyptian
bondage to Canaan's land. His hand is revealed
as He feeds them in the wilderness, His voice
echoes from every page, reproving, comforting,
correcting, encouraging. We hear His voice speaking from the mount of Sinai, we hear the voice of
the good Shepherd speaking from Calvary's hill
as "the good Shepherd giveth His life for the

sheep." We hear His voice today, wooing, calling,
interceding, and soon, yes, very soon, we hope to
448

SHEPHERDS "FALSE AND TRUE"
hear that dear, beloved voice calling to His sheep
to come up higher to the eternal fold He has
gone to prepare for us. Hallelujah !
The good Shepherd has prepared a wonderful
pasture field for His sheep, a pasture so great and
wide that its supply is inexhaustible and its
boundaries have never been reached. He maketh
the pastures of the wilderness to spring, and the
desert to blossom ,as a rose. The green grass and
the clover have not grown stale, nor have they
withered away; the clear, crystal streams of water
still flow direct from the throne of God, fresh and
sparkling as ever. His pasture fields afford full
salvation from all sin, deliverance from the raven-,
ous beasts of prey, holiness without which no man
shall see the Lord, the Baptism of the Holy
Spirit in the Bible way, with the evidence of speaking in other tongues, according to Acts 2 :4. Even
this is not the end of the richness of His pasture,
for as His sheep press on, the land of Canaan
lies ; before flowing Avith milk and honey. There
are the fruits and the gifts of the Spirit, healing
for the body yes, the human mind and pen fail
to describe the glories that He hath prepared and
laid up for them that love Him and will follow
where He leadeth.
In the employ of the great and good Shepherd
are many under shepherds, shepherds false, and
shepherds true, shepherds who have volunteered
to feed the sheep through ulterior motives and
hope for earthly gain, and shepherds who have just
for pure love of the good Shepherd and His sheep,
left all to do the bidding of Him who said :

"Lovcst thou Me? then feed My sheep/'
The TRUE under shepherd leads forth his flock
into pastures ever new. He declares that Jesus is
"the same yesterday, today and forever." He
preaches that the Lord still saves His people from
all sin, fills them with the blessed Holy Spirit,
449

THIS IS THAT
speaks through them in tongues, bestows the gifts
and graces of the Spirit, and heals the sick in
answer to prayer. He says :
"Is any sick among you, let him call for the
elders of the church; let them lay hands upon him,
anoint him with oil, and the Lord shall raise him
up." He urges his sheep ever to press on and on
till they are changed into the likeness of the good
Shepherd.
The FALSE shepherd leads his sheep forth no
further than he himself has gone. It is a difficult
problem to lead another into an experience you
have not yourself had or understood. Therefore
he declares that it is foolish and preposterous to
expect the same green pastures, the same clear
water, the same grapes and pomegranates today
that they had in Bible times. He declares wisely
that the baptism of the Ho ly Spirit, with the evidence of speaking with other tongues, is not for
today is absolutely unnecessary. In other words,
the disciples and other sheep of that day ate all of
that pasture up and exhausted God's supply in
that line. We must be content with the left-overs,
and not blame God for running out of stock.
As for Divine healing: "Tut! Tut! Child! that
is not for today. God has given us good common

sense and expects us to use it. Get the doctor if
you are sick. What were medicines made for if
not to be taken? The days of miracles are past,
the early church sheep ate all that clover up, and
drank the last of that miraculous healing power.
Is any sick amongst you, let him run for the doctor, get a bottle of good tonic and a box of pills,
and the doctor will raise him up. You sheep must
not murmur at the little, stale pasture that is
left over or the muddy waters trampled by so
many feet learn with what things ye have, therewith to be content."
"Now as for dancing, shouting, falling under
450

FfcSTURE

TWO PASTURES

SHEPHERDS "FALSE AND TRUE"
the power, and such like, that is all excitement/'
say the false shepherds; "things should be done
decently and in order; the amen corner is out of
date, it is undignified to shout today (unless it is
for some ball game or something for the devil) ;
and this falling under the power is all hypnotism.
You sheep had better keep away from that pasture,
for the grass is surely poisoned." And because joy
and gladness have withered away, and the power
of God not preached, the sheep are scattered on
every high hill and become a prey to the beasts
of the fields, such as the card-parties, dance-halls,
theatres, church entertainments, oyster suppers,
in fact any poor painted bauble that can try to

conceal the real, pitiful absence of the golden
hours of long ago when all-night prayer meetings
used to take the place of suppers and entertainments, when the genuine took the place of the
sham, when men and women used to dance and
shout for the Lord instead of for the devil.
You wonder why so many of your members are
at the different places of amusement rather than
in your prayer meetings? It is because of the
false shepherds who have fed themselves rather
than feeding the flock. It is because the sheep
long for something to satisfy, and if they cannot
find the old-time joy in the church they will go
to the world for happiness and take the devil's substitute, fun.
But God's pasture field has never withered away.
Those who claim that the day of His visitation
and miraculous power is ended have made a hideous and grievous mistake, they have been robbed
themselves, and are robbing their flock, for in His
storehouse there's a plenty, more than enough for
the hundred and twenty. Hundreds of thousands
of His sheep are today feeding in luxuriant pastures not only knee-deep but over their heads.
Glory! They enjoy the fulness of salvation; the
451

THIS IS THAT
Holy Spirit abides within, speaking forth the
praises of the Master Shepherd; they enjoy healing
for their body as in days of old. Cancers, tuberculosis, broken bones, even leprosy have been
healed right in our present day in answer to
prayer, according to the Word.
THE RAIL FENCE DIVIDING THE TWO PASTURES.
A great rail fence divides the two pasture fields.

On the one side where the pasture is waving green
and inviting, and the clover heads are nodding
under the bright sunlight of God's love, there the
sheep are fat and flourishing, their faces radiate
their happiness; they kick up their heels, and skip
and leap and bleat for joy. (Really, you can't
blame a person for dancing and leaping and shouting when we have so much to dance and shout
for. Glory ! )
But at the sight of the joy manifested in the
sheep abiding in the good pasture, the false shepherd, standing on his side of the rail fence, with
a club of unbelief and theological training in his
hand, warns his poor, thin, starved flock to keep
clear of those Pentecostal sheep, and Avarns them,
too, that the grass over there is all poisoned, and
that if ever they should leap the fence and eat of
that grass, they, too, would soon be just as crazy,
kicking up their heels and shouting, Glory! But
in spite of all the solemn warnings, hundreds of
thin sheep, so thin you never hear them say
"Amen" or "Hallelujah," never saw them leap or
dance in their lives for God (poor things, they
have little to dance or shout over), are coming up
to the fence in curiosity to see those "foolish"
Pentecostal sheep dance and bleat for joy, and as
they stand there looking through the rails of doubt
and pride, unbelief, former teaching, preconceived
ideas and public opinion, someAvay even what they
can see through the fence looks so green and fresh
452

SHEPHERDS "FALSE AND TRUE"
and inviting, the water looks so cool and clear
and sparkling, the sheep over there seem so happy,
that they long to leap the fence and be "one of
them." Surely that preacher must have been
mistaken, surely that grass can't be all poisoned, to
make such fat, happy sheep.

Then once in a Avhile, a poor, thin, starved sheep
takes a leap, and over the fence it goes into the
green pastures. Ah! He buries his nose in the
clear water of salvation, and just drinks and
drinks as though he could never get enough. (What
a change from the muddied pools where you just
"hope so' 7 and try in your own strength to be a
Christian. Then he buries his head in the green
pastures, lies down under a shady tree with great
delight; then eats and eats again, and would you
believe it, it is not long till that sheep has grown
fat like his neighbors, not long till he, too, begins
to kick up his heels and dance and bleat for love
and praise of the good Shepherd who provides such
a satisfying pasture.
Standing on the other side of the fence the false
shepherd points to the now joyful sheep and says
to the remainder of his hungry flock:
"There now, what did I tell you? Didn't I tell
you the grass was poisoned over there, and that
those sheep would soon act as crazy as the others
if they went over there?"
But brother, sister, just you go to "one of them"
who have once tasted of the fulness of the Spirit,
eaten of the good pasture, drunk from the living
waters, received the Holy Spirit with the Bible
evidence, speaking in tongues as the Spirit gives
utterance, been healed in answer to prayer, one
whose head has been anointed with oil and whose
cup "runneth over" and see whether you can persuade that sheep to go back to the stale pastures
and the muddied pools of a luke-warm, haphazard,
make-believe experience. They will tell you NO !
453

THIS IS THAT

a thousand times NO! for "Before its is a garden
of Eden, behind a desolate wilderness?"
O, poor, tried, hungry, longing sheep everywhere
peering through the fence today, don't hesitate a
moment longer, but leap the fence, get over into
the good pasture, into the fold of the Good Shepherd. He will satisfy your every longing. And as
for you, false shepherd, you who are declaring that
God has no more of the old-time pastures left, you
are standing in a most deplorable and perilous
position; for thus saith the Lord God:
"I am against the shepherds, I mill require
my flock at their hand."
There was once a miner, who had made a
"lucky strike" after long months of toil in the
gold mines. Having lived many weary months on
canned goods he longed for a real "square meal"
and started, with his pockets filled with gold
nuggets, for a big city where he could find a good
restaurant and the good meal anticipated. Walking along the street he saw a big sign that read
"RESTAURANT." Hastening toward it he opened
the door and seated himself at the snowy white
table; the waiter brought a fine china plate and an
elegant silver knife, fork and spoons, and presented
him with an elaborate bill of fare.
"Roast Turkey, Roast Duck, Roast Goose," read
the hungry man, and his mouth watered at the
prospects.
"I believe I'll have some of the Roast Turkey,"
said he.
"Why, I'm sorry, sir," but the fowl are out of
season here now, sir, and we have none of that,"
apologized the waiter.
"Then I'll have some of your roast beef," said
the man. "Sorry, sir, but it is near the end of the
day now, and we are just out of all our regular

meat orders, as regular dinner hour is passed."
454

SHEPHERDS "FALSE AND TRUE"
"Well, then, what have you got left, anyway?"
cried the exasperated man.
"Well, to tell the real truth, sir, we have not
got much of anything left at this late hour unless
it is some canned goods we can open for you."
At the mention of canned goods the poor miner
pushed back his chair, and laying down the big,
elaborate menu card, hastily left the place in
search of a better service.
How much like the way many preachers preach
the Word. The sign still hangs in front of the
building, hungry travelers on life's journey still
swing the doors wide and seat themselves at the
table, hungry to hear the message of salvation and
the Holy Spirit, and a deeper walk with God; the
snowy linen, and the fine silver, the stained glass
windows and the pipe organ may be there, the
imposing, appetizing bill of fare, the Word of God,
may be presented, and as the traveler reads of the
wonderful feast of good things his soul longs for
its fulness. So he says to the waiter, the preacher :
"Please, Fd like some of that, I'd like the baptism of the Holy Spirit in the Bible way, with the
Bible joy, I would like to dance like David of old
with all my might; I would like to have divine
healing for the body." But ah ! the false shepherd
cannot fill the bill, for he teaches that these things
are not for today.
"I am very sorry, my dear man, but the disciples ate the last of that. These things you are
asking for are now out of season, the day too far

spent; there is not much stock left on hand now,
but a make-believe salvation. Do the best you
can; live a moral life; sign your name on our roll,
and by way of pleasure you can enjoy the canned
goods, the oyster suppers and socials."
Oh, the shame of it all! Hungry soul, the good
Shepherd is calling you, saying :
455

THIS IS THAT
"I will FEED them (not starve them) in a good
pasture, and upon the high mountains of Israel
shall their fold be; they shall lie in a good fold."
Hallelujah! "They shall eat in plenty and be
satisfied/' then over there in that bright tomorrow,
the good Shepherd Avill come walking to meet us
in the clouds of Heaven, will come to call His
sheep and His faithful under shepherds home to
the eternal fold He has gone to prepare.

456

SAULS-PAST AND PRESENT.

, Saul,, icliy persecutest tliou me?" . .
"It is hard to kick against the pricks."
SAUL was filled with indignation and ire as he
hastened along the road that led to Damascus.
Saul, a Pharisee of the Pharisees Saul who
had been taught at the feet of Gamaliel Saul, who
walked uprightly and kept the laAV in all pointsSaul, the holiness man, who endeavored to walk

holy before God Saul, who believed in having
things done decently and in order, was all wrought
up and stirred to the innermost depths. He
breathed out threatenings every time he thought
of those peculiar people called Christians, who
taught salvation through the blood of Jesus, and
had the baptism of the Holy Ghost and spoke in
other tongues.
As Saul hastened on down the long road, riding
upon his high horse accompanied by his attendants
his pockets bulged with papers and accusations
against these people whom he was threatening.
How persistent, audacious, foolish and erroneous
those Pentecostal people were, those so-called
Christians, who claimed to be filled with the Holy
Ghost and spoke with other tongues, those people
who on the day of Pentecost had acted like drunkards and stirred up the whole city into a tumult.
Saul set his face like a flint with ,a grim determination to persecute those fanatics, to warn his people
against them, to put an end to them if that should
be possible. Had he not witnessed the death of
Stephen? While he had not thrown the stones,
yet he had stood by and had believed that he was
doing God a favor and his church a justice to denounce and crush such heresy.
457

THIS IS THAT
News had doubtless reached the dignified, proper
Saul of the unheard-of and shameful doings of
those people on the day of Pentecost in Jerusalem.
Exaggerated reports in all probability poured into
his ears concerning the great stir and seeming
confusion caused in that city when the one hundred and twenty in a little upper room had suddenly seemed to go mad, from a natural point of
view, shouting, talking in languages they had

never learned, speaking in tongues as the Spirit
gave them utterance, reeling and staggering under
the power of the Spirit till the mockers had cried
out in derision.
"These are filled with new wine." True, Peter
had stood up and denied the charge that they were
drunken and had declared it boldly, saying:
"These are not drunken as ye suppose, seeing it
is but the third hour of the day, but this is that
which was spoken of by the Prophet Joel." But
surely evidence had been against them, they had
certainly acted like drunken men and women and
had talked in tongues and glorified the Lord until
when this was noised abroad the multitude came
running together confounded, amazed, and in
doubt as they marveled at the manifestations of
the Spirit upon those peculiar people.
All this was most disgusting and distasteful to
the order-loving Saul, who liked to see religious
services conducted quietly, decently and in order,
in a dignified and ceremonious fashion. Surely
such actions were a disgrace to religion, and
nothing was too hard to say or do against those
erroneous Pentecostal people. He spurred his
horse on as he remembered the many who had been
converted under Peter's preaching and, as it
seemed to Saul, deceived and led astray. Therefore Saul was going down to Damascus that day,
in all his power, yearning to do God the favor and
458

SAULS PAST AND PRESENT
his church the justice of persecuting and putting
an end to all such error and false teaching.
Whether these early Christians were called
Pentecostal fanatics, tongues people, holy rollers,

or any of the other present-day names flung at
them by their opposers and modern Sauls of
Tarsus I know not; but at any rate they were
people who had been filled with the Holy Ghost
with the Bible evidence of speaking in other
tongues they had never learned. Acts 2 :4, 10 :46.
All this was seemingly not only unnecessary,
but foolish and sacrilegious to the wise and
mighty Saul, for the wisdom of God is foolishness
to man. Were there not churches enough or
synagogues enough to worship in without getting
out and separating themselves in these cottage
meetings, etc.?
The whole affair was a seemingly fanatical and
erroneous movement to Saul and he had been
making havoc of the church, entering every house
and haling men and women, committing them to
prison. And yet breathing out threatenings and
slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, he had
gone to the high priest and desired of him letters
to the synagogues of Damascus, that if he found
any of this way, he might bring them bound,
whether they were men or women, to Jerusalem.
But as he journeyed, he came near Damascus,
when suddenly there shined round him a light
from heaven, and he fell to the earth, and heard a
voice saying,
"SAUL, SAUL, WHY PERSECUTEST THOU ME?
He said, "Who art thou Lord?" and the Lord
said, "I am Jesus whom thou persecutest; it is
hard for thee to kick against the pricks." And
he trembling and astonished said, "Lord, what
ivilt thou have me to do?"
O, Saul! Saul! What has happened? Man
never could have convinced him that all this which
459

THIS IS THAT
he had been so industriously fighting, and selfrighteously opposing was of God. Man might have
reasoned and argued forever without availing anything. But suddenly, O how I love those words!
God does do things suddenly. On the day of
Pentecost suddenly there came a sound from
heaven, as of a rushing mighty wind; and now
here to doubting Saul suddenly there shined round
about him a light from heaven.
O ! dear reader, I am just praying as I write,
that suddenly a light may shine upon some fighting, persecuting Saul, riding upon his high horse
of theology, learning and wisdom, as he reads these
words, and that he too may fall to the earth and
hear the voice of Jesus saying "Saul, Saul, why
persecutes! thou me?" *
Saul, lying on his back in the middle of the
dusty road ! Could such a thing be possible? Saul
who thought it unnecessary and shameful to see
people lying prostrate under the power of the Holy
Ghost, himself slain full length, crying, trembling
and astonished, "What wilt thou have me to do?"
Hallelujah ! I can hardly keep from shouting
as I write, for dear, present day Sauls, as you read
this, the very same power will fall on you if you
let God have His way. O how Saul must have
trembled 'and repented when he found to his
amazement that it was Jesus, not the people, he
was persecuting! and indeed "it is hard to kick
against the pricks."
Ah! what a change took place in the heart of
the proud, stiff, self-righteous Saul in those few
moments he lay prostrate under the power of God !
What a mellow, broken, humble Paul arose from
the earth, blinded by the glory of God till he
saw no man. He was led by the hand and after

three days of blindness and fasting he received
his sight and was baptized and meekly abode with
the disciples, and was soon himself preaching
460

SAULS PAST AND PRESENT
Jesus and the Word; but all that heard him were
amazed, saying:
"Is not this he who destroyed them which called
on this name in Jerusalem?" We read that he
increased in strength, and know that he was not
only converted but received the Holy Ghost, and
was one of the despised people who spoke with
other tongues, for he himself writes in I Cor.
14 :18 : "I thank my God I speak with tongues more
than .ye all." Without a doubt Paul became "one
of them" forever.
PRESENT DAY SAULS. i
Since that day there have been many other
Sauls: Sauls that fought Martin Luther and all
the Christians of the dark ages; Sauls that burned
believers at the stake, put out their eyes, tortured
them in unspeakable ways and manners. There
were the Sauls that persecuted Calvin and Knox,
Fletcher, Finney, Wesley and Booth; Sauls that
put martyrs upon the rack and the guillotine, and
thought they were doing right; Sauls that have
thrown stones and bitter words at each new step
forward toward the restoration of the church to
her full power and pentecostal glory. There have
been Sauls that fought the Adventist people when
first they preached the soon coming of Jesus;
Sauls who fought the holiness people when they
preached whole-hearted surrender and holiness
unto the Lord. EVEN NOW we have present day
Sauls, and will have till Jesus comes.

These present day Sauls are fighting present day
truths just as industriously and just as conscientiously as did Saul of Tarsus of old. Our Sauls of
today feel as Saul of old that the manifestations
of the Spirit, such as being slain under the power
of God, speaking in tongues, etc., are not at all
necessary or proper. They stride along on their
high horses of earthly knowledge, theology, formality, and ceremonial and clerical dignity, breath461

THIS IS THAT
ing out threatening^ against the despised Pentecostal people who still preach Salvation, holiness,
and the baptism of the Holy Ghost with the Bible
evidence of speaking with other tongues as the
Spirit gives utterance, exactly as did the disciples
in the early church, with signs and wonders
following.
Many present-day Sauls, feeling that they are
doing their duty, ignorantly pace up and down
their pulpits, breathing out threatenings, and
warning their people to shun these same Holy
Ghost people who are receiving the Holy Spirit
today as in the days of old. Many of them have
papers against them in their pockets, too, I fear,
as did Saul of old. Many of them have their
pockets bulging with tracts and literature condemning these peculiar people, and feel they are
serving God and doing him a kindness to persecute and try to crush them.
To see believers lie prostrate under the power
of the Holy Ghost, or to hear them speak in
tongues, or to see the mighty manifestations of the
Spirit resting upon them, seems just as foolish to
the natural man, seems just as much confusion
and unnecessary to the wise Sauls of today as to
the Sauls of old.

The wisdom of God is indeed foolishness to
man, and God still takes the things that are
naught to confound the mighty, still takes the
foolish to confound the wise, and a worm to thrash
a mountain. But God's arm is not shortened, and
we are still in the same dispensation, the dispensation of the Holy Ghost. God is restoring His
church step by step, through the ages to her full
power and Pentecostal glory. He is again manifesting Himself in mighty power upon and through
humble, yielded vessels of clay.
Many present-day Sauls, who at first fought
bitterly against the Lord, for it is the Lord Jesus
462

SAULS PAST AND PKESENT
and not the individuals they fight, have fallen to
the earth and seen the light shine suddenly from
heaven. They too have received the Holy Ghost
and with the Bible evidence have begun to preach
the word with power and boldness. Many Sauls
whom man could never have convinced that "this
is that" have felt God's mighty power, and themselves have fallen to the earth, crying "Lord, what
wilt thou have me to do?" He would have all stiff
necks and stubborn knees to bend and bow; He
would have you dismount your horse and get down
in humility low in the dust before Him; He would
fill you as He did Saul of old till your name shall
be no more known as Saul but as Paul, the least
of all.
O what a glorious picture to see Paul in the
nineteenth chapter of Acts laying his hands upon
the disciples at Ephesus and saying "Receive ye
the Holy Ghost/' and then to see the Holy Ghost
come upon them and hear them speak with tongues
and prophesy.

Dear ones, He would do for you what He did
for Saul of Tarsus. Why resist him longer? How
can you resist in the face of such overwhelming
light from heaven and from the Word?
"Saul! Saul! why persecutest thou me? It is
hard for thee to kick against the pricks ;" for those
who kick against God's work and His people,
and the outpouring of the Holy Ghost, dry up
spiritually, and find it indeed hard to kick against
the pricks.
Never yet has there been a church or preacher
who fought the little flock of Holy Ghost baptized
people, and persecuted them as did Saul of old,
but soon came into a dry and barren place. No
matter how their fields may have been blooming
and bearing before, as soon as they refused the
latter rain outpouring of the Holy Ghost, and cast
those out of their midst who had received, and
463

THIS IS THAT
unknowingly barred their doors against the Holy
Ghost who longed to come in the Bible way, at
once their fields began gradually to dry up and
wither, their power began to wane and disappear.
The light has shone from heaven UOAV, dear ones.
Read the Word of God on your knees concerning
the coming of the Spirit, and His manifestations
and power upon the people, and then cry out, Lord,
what wilt thou have me to do? He will fill you
till, like Paul of old, you will have to teach this
glad story to others, you will be so full you cannot
keep from shouting His praises aloud, for out of
your innermost being will flow rivers of living
water. Do not resist longer.

464

WHAT ABOUT THOSE MANIFESTATIONS?
DANCING, SHOUTING, SHAKING, FALLING PROSTRATE
UNDER THE POWER, SPEAKING IN TONGUES,
INTERPRETATION.
INTRODUCTION.
THE power was falling everywhere in the tent,
sinners being saved, believers baptized in the
Holy Spirit ( with Bible evidence, speaking in
tongues), sick bodies had been healed, many were
leaping, dancing and praising God, the slain of the
Lord were many ; my heart felt full to the bursting
with joy at the sight, and with uplifted hands I
was walking up and down the aisles amongst the
audience, praising my wonderful Redeemer for the
way in which He was working.
Suddenly I felt a restraining, kid-gloved hand
laid upon my arm, and a dignified, silk-gowned
lady drew me down beside her. Her husband, a
fine, dignified type of man, was seated beside her.
They had snow-white hair, both of them, and every
well-tailored line of their faultless apparel bespoke
refinement and culture. This dear lady seemed so
sweet, and I was so filled with joy, that I remember
I could hardly resist throwing my arms around
her and kissing her and shouting "Glory to Jesus."
Her troubled, agitated look checked this impulse,
however, and as she began to talk to me in her
rapid way, her breast was rising and falling, with
her quick breathing and (I was going to say,
"indignation," but hardly think that would be the
word to apply to such a sweet and proper personage.)

As she spoke, she alternately gazed through her
lorgnette, which hung on a slender thread of gold
from her gown, and pointed with it to some mani465

THIS IS THAT
festations (for the saints wore dancing, shouting,
and praising God), or tapped it lightly upon her
book for emphasis:
"Of course, I believe in the power of God," she
said, "but O, the noise, these awful manifestations !
What is the good of them, anyway? Did not Paul
say that all things are to be done decently and in
order? Now, take, for instance, that dancing and
shaking, it seems like confusion, and is not at all
necessary. And that falling on the floor and lying
for an hour. Do you think that looks dignified or
proper?" she demanded. "As for this leaping and
shouting, why can not these people praise God in
a quiet, orderly way in their heart and give expression to their worship soberly in a quiet hymn
of thanksgiving? You know the world would
think far more of them," she added, "and stop
criticising and persecuting if only they would put
down these awful manifestations. Oh! Oh! I am
so disturbed. Do tell me, what about these manifestations?"
#*#
Knowing that many honest Christians are asking
the same question, might it not be well to look at
this important matter from the standpoint of
God's Word today? Let us begin with the seventh
verse in the twelfth chapter of I Corinthians,
which says :
"THE MANIFESTATION OF THE SPIRIT IS TO PROFIT
WITHAL."

Quoting the whole context we read as follows:
"Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same
Spirit. And there are differences of administrations, but the same Lord. And there are diversities
of operations; but it is the same God that worketh
all in all. But the manifestation of the Spirit is
given to every man to profit ivithal." "Yes, but
what is the good of these manifestations?" you
ask. Why, "to profit withal" answers Paul.
466

WHAT ABOUT THOSE MANIFESTATIONS?
"Well, but what can be the profit resulting from
manifestations such as shouting, dancing, shaking,
falling under the power, etc.? 77 you ask.
Just a moment, and we will take these things
up one by one, but first let me say that when the
pOAver of the Holy Spirit is upon ,a person or an
assembly, you can no more stifle the manifestations
without quenching the power of the Spirit than
you can shut off all air from a fire without extinguishing it, or turn off the water- faucet without
stopping the flow of water, or turn off the electric
light switch without putting out the lights, or cut
the telephone wire without breaking the connection.
WHEREVER THERE IS LIVING, VITAL, TANGIBLE POWER,
THERE IS BOUND TO BE A MANIFESTATION.
Turn on the gas-jet of your stove, apply a match
to it and there will be a hot flame. The greater
the gas pressure the greater the flame.
THE KETTLE.
Then take down your shining teakettle that has
stood so long, filled with cold water, on the shelf,

quiet, cold and orderly enough to please any
church member; put it over the hot flame, keep it
there a few moments, and the first thing you
know it will just be obliged to break forth into
singing (if the fire burns low, singing may be as
far as your kettle will get), but keep it on the hot
fire and soon steam and vapor will rise like praise
from a heart that is warmed by His love. The
hotter it gets, the more manifestations there are
in the kettle, till at last it is bubbling and dancing
and boiling all over.
If you do not like manifestations, dear preacher,
turn the gas or power off and you will not be
bothered with the manifestations very long, your
particular kettle will soon sit still enough and
cold enough to suit even your most rigid ideas of
propriety and order.
467

THIS IS THAT
We repeat that where there is power there is a
manifestation of that power. Put your church or
your assembly or self on the hot flame of Jesus'
love and the Spirit's power, and you, like yonder
kettle, will soon break forth into singing, and the
vapor of praise will rise, not from outside sources,
but from within the innermost depths of your
being, and as the fire burns brighter there will be
a bubbling and dancing in your soul. Amen. Try
to put the lid on tightly if you will, but 'twill only
boil over through the spout. Stop up that and
keep it on the fire, and there will be an explosion
(hat will blow the cover off, and the bubbling and
dancing will go on as long as the kettle stays on
the fire. Hallelujah !
The wind is invisible, but there is a power there,
and when it blows through the trees there is a
manifestation, the leaves begin to shake. The

harder the wind, the more the power, the greater
the manifestation; the branches, the limbs, and
even the trunk sway. I have known greater trees
than you to be slain prostrate beneath this visible
power of the invisible wind.
We might mention many more instances wherein
the workings of nature are analogous to the
workings of the Spirit. Let us turn, however,
from these comparisons in nature to the Word
of God. Let us ascertain what saith the Scriptures
pertaining to the subject of manifestations, and
let them be the authority on the subject.
DANCING.
Is dancing in the Spirit Scriptural in the light
of God's Word? Yes, the Word is full of it.
Dancing belongs to the Lord. The devil has
simply tried to imitate it and has made as poor
an imitation of this as of most of the other things
he has tried to counterfeit. If you read carefully
what the Scripture says about dancing you will
find that singing, music and dancing have their
468

WHAT ABOUT THOSE MANIFESTATIONS?
place in the Lord's church. I am wondering if
you who disapprove of dancing in the Spirit today
disapprove also of Exodus 15 :20, 21, where : "Miriam, the prophetess,, took a timbrel in her hand,
and all the women went out after her with timbrels
and with dances. And Miriam answered them,
Sing ye to the Lord a new song, for He hath
triumphed gloriously." The whole multitude of
women and Miriam, the prophetess and leader,
went forth praising the Lord with dancing, shouting and music.
I am wandering if you approve of Moses, who

also led the hosts in the same way, with music
and dancing; whether you approve of David in
II Sam. 6 :14, where "David danced before the Lord
with all his might/ 7 His wife disapproved, you
remember, as she stood behind her window. I
have always believed, however, that if she could
only have been outside where the full tides of
praise were flowing, could she but have heard
the music, she, too, would have wanted to dance
and praise the Lord. Oh, come outside of the
window of self and formality and remember that
David's wife was stricken Avith barrenness to the
day of her death because she disapproved of and
fought manifestations. Did you ever know of an
individual or an assembly who fought the manifestations of the power of God without being
stricken with barrenness and leanness? I never
did. Remember, too, they who laid their hands
upon the Ark to steady it were consumed immediately by the indignation of God.
Psalms 149 :3 says : "Let them praise His name
in the dance; let them sing praises unto Him until
the timbrel and harp." Psalms 150:4, "Praise
Him with the timbrel and dances." Jeremiah 31 :13.
"Then shall the virgins rejoice in the dance, both
young and old together." Acts 3:8 tells us that
when the lame man was healed, "He, leaping up,
469

THIS IS THAT
stood, and walked, and entered into the temple,
walking and leaping and praising God."
This same Redeemer which was theirs is ours
today. He heals in the same way. HOAV can we
keep from dancing and praising such a Saviour?
SHOUTING.

It seems almost impossible that any Bible
student should question for a moment the right of,
the children of the Lord to shout His praises, the
Word is so filled with it. You recall that "When
the Ark came into the camp, all Israel shouted
with a great shout so that the earth rang again,
and when the Philistines heard the noise of the
shout they said, What meaneth the noise of this
great shout in the camp of the Hebrews ?" I Sam.
4 :5. Again we read that "David, and all the house
of Israel brought up the Ark of the Lord with
shouting and with the sound of the trumpet."
II Sam. 6 :15. Psalms tell us, "0 clap your hands,
all ye people, shout unto God with a voice of
triumph!"
"There's a shout in the Camp. Hallelujah !
Glory to God!
There's an echo in Heaven. Hallelujah !
Glory to God !
Truly, "the children of the Lord have a right
to shout and sing." We are in the same battle
today as that we read of in Joshua 6:5, where it
came to pass that "When they made a long Hast
with the ram's horn, and heard the sound of the
trumpet, that all the people shouted with a great
shout and the wall of the city fell down flat."
There will be a wonderful shout some of these
days, for we read that "The Lord Himself shall
descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice
of the archangel, and with the trump of God."
Why, even the Lord shouts, and He is our great
example.
470

WHAT ABOUT THOSE MANIFESTATIONS?
Truly, we have something worth shouting over.

Joy always manifests itself. The shouts at ball
games, races, political celebrations, etc., are accepted as a usual and expected thing. The day
would be considered tame and with something
radically Avrong and missing without it. Remember how the announcement of peace was met right
here in our own country, how they tied down the
horns and the whistles, how every conceivable
noise-making device was brought forth to SAvell
the sound of jubilee. Now we have heard the
proclamation of everlasting peace, from the King
who has won the greatest battle ever fought. How
can we keep from shouting? There are so many
shouting for the devil with none to hinder, that
we thank God for those who shout for Jesus.
When shouting is in the Spirit it comes from
such depth and rings so true and genuine that
none can mistake it. The devil will try to imitate
the shout in the camp of the Hebrews, but there
will be a hollow, forced sound that does not ring
true. There are many who do not like the noise
of the shouting, but we advise all such to let
Jesus fill them with the same power and glory, to
put a shout in their soul, for this is by far the
quietest world they will ever live in. In heaven
John heard the shouting and praising of the
multitude as they cried, "Holy, holy, holy, salvation and honor and dominion belongeth unto Him.
till the voice and shouting of the people was as
the sound of many waters, and as the voice of
great thunder." Surely those who dislike shouting
would dislike heaven, or must learn to join the
song. O, how can you look upon such a wonderful
Saviour without shouting His praise? And as for
those who are cast into hell, "there shall be weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth.-' That will
surely be a noisy place, and I would much rather
hear the noise of shouts and rejoicing than weeping. Wouldn't you?
471

THIS IS THAT
O, Beloved, thank God for the shout and the
dance and the sound of joy. Let us never be
ashamed of it. How many denominations once
had God's power resting on them in this same
way, and became too proud and haughty and
dignified to remain yielded to His will. Soon the
pow r er left, the Amen corner left, and, as Joel 1 :12
put it, "The vine becomes dried up, the fig tree
languisheth; the pomegranate tree, the palm tree
also, and the apple tree, even all the trees of the
field are withered because joy is icithholden from
the house of your God/ 7 Each of the churches
that once had the power and glory of God resting
upon it, and later fought this power, is barren
today. The enemy would like Pentecost to do
the same as those who have gone before, but if we
ever do this thing God will cause the cloud of
glory to lift from us, and mil call another people
who will be willing to go on and who are not
ashamed to let Him have His way. We will be
left to our creeds and ceremonies and forms as
surely as were our predecessors.
The outpouring of the Holy Ghost on the day
of Pentecost, Acts 2 :4, stood for a mighty manifestation of the power of God; men and women
reeled, staggered, talked in tongues, were accused
of being drunken. Did it turn the people away?
No. Three thousand souls were added to the
church that day. // we call ourselves Pentecostal,
if we have the sign "Pentecostal" over our assembly door, let us stand behind all that it means,
or else change our name, take the sign "Pentecostal" from our door, and go back to church forms
and ceremonies. The Holy Spirit never intrudes
nor forces His way and manifestations where he
is not wanted. Many flourishing assemblies once
filled and swayed by the power of God, have
quenched the Spirit, criticised and checked thu
manifestations, until today they have no manifes-

472

WHAT ABOUT THOSE MANIFESTATIONS?
tations to quench or to bring reproach upon them.
It is not difficult to rid an assembly of this
outward working of the supernatural power of
God. Just a little criticism and disapproval, and
the gentle dove will spread His wings and pass on
to some other abode where He can find a people
humble enough to let Him have His way, and not
ashamed of the manifestations.
Thank God we have not come to the place
where we have to try to be popular or pleasing to
the world. Even if Ave are a gazing-stock, or a
spectacle, let God and His Spirit have the right
of way, whatever the cost may be.
SHAKING AND TREMBLING UNDER THE POWER.
As for the shaking and trembling under the
power, very often when the great power of the
Eternal, Omnipotent, Almighty God comes in
direct contact with, or moves upon a weak, earthly
frame, there is quaking and trembling, not of fear
as men count fear, but of power. Moses said,
"I do exceedingly quake and tremble." In Acts
we read of one place where the house wherein they
sat was shaken.
Heb. 12:26 says: "His voice then shook the
earth, but now . . . once more shall I shake,
not the earth only, but also heaven." See Acts
9 :9, how Paul trembled in the presence of the
Lord. Daniel tells us that he did exceedingly
quake and tremble, and in speaking of those who
were with him, says that a great quaking fell upon
them. Sacred history tells us that this manifestation has not been uncommon all down through
the ages, and coming to modern days we note
that the Quakers came by their name because of

the way they shook and quaked under the power
of God. We might mention the shaking Methodists, etc. This is the same power which we see
in our midst today.
473

THIS IS THAT
BEING PROSTRATED UNDER THE POWER.
"What about this being slain, prostrated, lying
under the power?" You do not think it looks at
all dignified or proper, you say. I wonder whether
Peter looked dignified or proper when he lay in
the trance on his housetop and saw the vision of
the sheet let down, etc. (Acts 10:9 to 16), or John,
on the isle of Patmos, when he lay at His (Jesus')
feet as one dead, or Daniel, as he lay in a vision,
or Saul, when he fell from his horse in the dust
of the road as Jesus revealed Himself to him. It
was as though Jesus, when He conquered, got
both of SauFs shoulders to the ground, and he
surrendered there and then. 'Twas not at all
dignified or anything for the "Flesh' 7 or "Pride" to
boast over, I agree; in fact they were so ashamed
and mortified they gave up in despair and died
there and then; but O, the Spirit Life of Humility
and Knowledge of God's pOAver that took their
place !
We might go on to mention Isaiah, Jeremiah,
and others who fell prostrate before Him. We
might mention the prostrations in the early
Methodist church, the Salvation Arnw, the Welch
Revival, and today, throughout the world, wherever God is pouring out His Spirit, and when I
get to heaven I expect to see angels and men
before Him prostrate fall as they "bring forth the
royal diadem and crown Him Lord of all."
SPEAKING IN TONGUES AND INTERPRETATION IS
SCRIPTURAL.

In Isaiah 28:11 we read, "With stammering
lips and another tongue icill He speak to this
people." Jesus Himself said, "These signs shall
follow them that believe . . . they shall speak
with new tongues" Mark 16:17. In Acts 2:4
those who were filled with the Holy Ghost began
to speak with other tongues as the Spirit gave
them utterance. Likewise Acts 10:46, Acts 19:6.
474

WHAT ABOUT THOSE MANIFESTATIONS?
And Paul tells us (the 14th chapter of I Cor.)
"Let Mm that speaketh with an unknown tongue
pray that he may interpret" and that, in the
assembly, "if any man speak with an unknown
tongue, let it be by two, or at most by three, and
that by course, and let one interpret."
GENUINE AND COUNTERFEIT.
Are manifestations of the Spirit scriptural?
Y-E-S. Are ALL manifestations scriptural? N-O.
How can we tell the difference? It is easy to
discern, in the Spirit, between the real and the
counterfeit. There is a different shine on the face,
a different ring in the voice, a majesty and holiness. There will be that which edifies and builds
up (but just here remember that your conception
of edifying manifestations and that of God may
vary. Had you seen the hundred and twenty reeling and staggering like drunken men Acts 2:13,
15 you might not have thought it edifying, yet
God was in it, and Peter said they were filled
with the Spirit, and three thousand souls were
added to the church that day).
But do we claim that all manifestations are in
the Spirit? you ask. We answer, No, for the
devil has tried to imitate manifestations as he

has everything else. There are also some manifestations in the flesh by those who are anxious
for God to manifest Himself and use them, who
run before the Lord.
BUT WHAT SHALL WE DO IN OUR ASSEMBLY WHEN WE
FIND MANIFESTATIONS THAT ARE NOT OF GOD?
Shall we quench the Holy Spirit for fear of that
which is not of the Spirit? Not at all. Do as
Aaron did when the enemy sought to counterfeit;
you remember, he threw down his rod and it became a serpent. Straightway the magicians
threw down their rods and immediately they became serpents. Did Moses and Aaron begin to
475

THIS IS THAT
wail and regret that they had obeyed God, thus
giving the enemy an opportunity to manifest himself? Why, no, their God was bigger than the
devil. Their serpent opened up his mouth and
swallowed up all the other serpents until they
were out of sight completely. So will the true
Holy Spirit, if we let Him have His way, swallow
up and spoil every trick and tactic of the enemy,
If you let Him have His way YOU will have no
need to fight in this battle, HE will do it all, and
get greater glory to Himself than as though there
had been no struggle. The counterfeit makes the
genuine to shine the brighter. When the Ark
is in the midst all earthly goods must fall and be
broken before it. Hallelujah!
MORE THAN A MATCH FOR THE ENEMY.
Many leaders seem to fear the enemy so much
that they almost act as if they had to protect
"poor little God" from the onslaughts of the
"Great, Big D-E-V-I-L;" but Oh, dear ones, our

God is Great and Big and High and Wide. He
sitteth in the heavens, the earth is his footstool,
the seas are in the palm of His hand, the mountains are but as the small dust in His balances.
He is more than a match for the enemy. Let Him
have His way when He will, where He will, how
He will y and the earth will quake and His enemies
be scattered before Him as clouds before the
whirlwind.
He is getting a "sign and wonder" people today,
a people who are a gazing-stock to the world.
The Holy Spirit is His own advertising agent today as He was on the day of Pentecost when the
multitude came running together crying, "What
meaneth this?"
STUPENDOUS MANIFESTATION COMING SOON.
There is going to be a great manifestation some
of these days, dear ones, a greater shaking, a
47.6

WHAT ABOUT THOSE MANIFESTATIONS?
greater leaping and shouting than ever you have
heard or imagined before. The graves of those
who died in the Lord are going to be shaken open
wide and with them the liberated souls of those
who remain are going to leap so high that they
will not return to this earth again for a long, long
time, and shouting! Oh, what a triumphant, victorious, joyful shout will rend the sky as our eyes
behold the Bridegroom descending out of Heaven,
clad in power and might. What a manifestation
there will be that day ! Every band, every stringed
instrument in Heaven will be there. Every mouth
will be filled with the shouts of His praises, as
the saints are swept into His presence. They will
come with songs of everlasting joy upon their
heads.

In the meantime, dear heart, let Him have His
way with thee, quench not the Spirit, but let Him
move upon the waters as He will, for from Genesis,
the first chapter, when He moved upon the waters,
saying, "Let there be light, and there was light"
there was a manifestation. From the moment that
at His Word the moon and the stars sprang into
being, down into the present day on into eternity,
where God is, where God moves, where God speaks,
there will be a manifestation of His presence and
of His power.

477

RECEIVE YE THE HOLY GHOST.
JESUS says "If you love me, keep my commandments." It is one of his commandments that
we "receive the Holy Ghost." The Word of God
repeatedly tells us of the importance of the work
done in the life of the believer by the Holy Ghost.
John the Baptist preached this in the wilderness,
saying: "There cometh one after me, the latchet
of whose shoes I am unworthy to unloose. I indeed baptize you with water, but He shall baptize
you with the Holy Ghost."
Once it is fully understood that we are still
living in the dispensation of the Holy Ghost and
will be until Jesus comes again, the importance of
the work of the Holy Spirit is at once realized.
Jesus the Saviour, who shed His blood to redeem a
world of lost sinners, has ascended into the
Heavens and sat down upon his Father's throne,
until the day when His waiting bride will be
ready to rise to meet Him in the air. But during
this long interval He has not left us comfortless,
but has sent us another Comforter, even the Holy
Ghost, that He might lead us into all truth. How

important it is therefore that we understand
the office work of the Holy Spirit in our lives,
and are led by Him, who has come to take the
things of Jesus and reveal them unto us.
The first work of the Spirit is begun in our lives
while we are yet sinners, for no man can come
unto the Father except the Spirit draw him. The
Holy Spirit is with the sinner, therefore, to convict
or convince him of sin, to show him his helpless
and lost condition without Jesus, and when he is
willing to repent, he leads that penitent one to the
feet of Jesus, the sinner's best friend.
478

RECEIVE YE THE HOLY GHOST
Now the Holy Spirit cannot cleanse away his
sin nor save him, for Jesus paid it all, all to him
we owe, and by faith we cry to Jesus the Lamb of
God who taketh away the sin of the world. The
blood is applied to the sinner's heart, and the
Spirit Himself bears witness with his spirit that
he is now the child of God. It is the precious
Wood of Jesus that cleanseth, and the Spirit that
bears witness to our hearts that the cleansing is
done.
The same Holy Spirit, who was with the sinner,
to convict of sin, is still with the newly converted
soul, to witness of righteousness and lead him on
to perfection. Moreover He seeks to come within
the cleansed soul and make it the temple of the
Holy Ghost.
Right here let me emphasize the difference between having the Spirit "WITH" you and having
the Spirit "IN" you. Jesus told His disciples that
He that is with you shall be in you, then He
breathed upon them and said, "Receive ye the
Holy Ghost."

Someone says, "O, but I know I received the
Holy Ghost when I was saved, for I had such joy
and peace, and such a witness in my soul." No,
dear one, that was Jesus you received as your
Saviour, not the Holy Ghost, Do not underestimate the great work of salvation, for Jesus brings
joy and peace, and the Spirit with you gives you
this witness, but now after salvation and consecration, the Holy Ghost seeks to come in. When
He comes in to abide, you will know it. He will
fill every bit of your being and flood your soul to
overflowing until out of your innermost being there
flow rivers of living waters and you speak in
other tongues (languages you never learned) as
the Spirit gives utterance.
There will be no "think so" about it when yon
receive the Holy Ghost, but you will have the
479

THIS IS THAT
same Bible evidence Paul, Peter, Matthew, Mark,
Luke, John and all the other disciples had, the
same evidence that Mary the Mother of Jesus had,
that they had at Ephesus and Caesarea speaking
in other tongues will follow your infilling with
the Holy Ghost, This incoming of the Spirit will
be so real that never to the longest day you live
will any one be able to make you doubt for the
fraction of a second that you have received the
Holy Ghost, for you can put your finger on the
chapter and verse, Acts 2:4, and say, "I received
the Holy Ghost just like the hundred and twenty,"
or on Acts 10:46, and say, "I received just as the
believers did in the house of Cornelius," or, again,
upon Acts 19:6, and boldly affirm that without a
doubt you received the Holy Ghost as did the
disciples at Ephesus, for you had the same Bible
evidence and spake in other tongues. When the

Spirit comes in you will have this evidence today
just as in the days of old.
Now being made the temple of the Holy Ghost
ever let Him have His way. He will take the
things of the Father and reveal them unto you if
you will close your eyes to all else. You will be
endued with power from on high if you remain
humbly submissive to His dealings. He will pray
through you with groanings that cannot be uttered.
He will rejoice through you with joy unspeakable
and full of glory if you let Him have His way.
O dear ones, you need the Holy Ghost so much
in your lives. If He is tcith you today, open up
your hearts and let Him come in. Seek and you
shall find, but never stop short of the real Bible
experience in the Bible way, accompanied with the
Bible evidence.

480

ACCORDING TO THY WORD.
And Mary said, Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it
unto me according to thy Word. Luke 1 : 38.
IT was the Virgin Mary (whot later became the
mother of Jesus) that spoke the above words:
The angel of the Lord had spoken to her concerning God's will for her, namely that she, a
virgin, should bring forth the Christ Child. No
doubt many thoughts flashed like lightning across
the mind of Mary, the reproach, the misunderstanding that this would bring to her. Mother
would not understand, Father would misunderstand, Joseph, her espoused husband would think
evil of her, neighbors would falsely accuse her,
and worse still, flashed a vision of herself, perhaps standing in the public square, as was the

custom of the day, degraded, hissed at and stoned
to death in the most ignominious manner. Yet, in
the face of the future, Mary, knowing that it was
the Spirit of God who spoke through the angel,
looked up unflinchingly into His face and said
submissively :
"Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto
me ACCORDING TO THY WORD."
Ah! There was the secret, A-C-C-O-R-D-I-N-G T-O
T-H-Y W-O-R-D. As long as whatever happens to us is
according to the Word of God, all will be well. Can
you say "Yes" to the will of God today, in spite of
what Husband or Wife, Father or Mother, children,
neighbors or pastor will say?
"No matter what misrepresentation it will bring,
no matter if I am so situated that mv name will
be cast out as evil, Behold, here I am Lord! Be
it unto me according to Thy Word."
Mary did not need to go about forever explaining
481

THIS IS THAT
her position or seeking to vindicate herself; all
she had to do was to say an eternal "Yes" to God's
will and God vindicated His own so wonderfully
that her reproach was turned into glory.
It is God's highest purpose for each of us today
that we, like the Virgin of old, should bring forth
the Christ life to those round about us. We have
been made virgins, clean and pure in heart through
the atoning blood of Jesus Christ our Lord, but in
order truly to bring forth and reveal the Christ to
the world about us, we must be overshadowed with
the Holy Spirit, and so yielded in His hands what-

ever the cost, that His dear will may be fully
wrought out in our lives.
The four words, "A-OOO-R-D-I-N-G T-O T-H-Y
W-O-B-D/' strike the keynote of each new Christian experience; God will never work in any other
way than AC CORD IN a TO HIS WORD. When
the sinner comes to Jesus, he must needs come
according to His Word, repenting of his sins,
forsaking the world, being born again through the
precious blood, without which there is no remission
of sins.
He must leave unrighteousness behind, and according to the Word, He, Jesus Christ, is faithful
and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us
from all unrighteousness on one simple condition,
namely, that we confess our sins.
According to the Word, He not only forgives
but cleanses us from all unrighteousness. Indeed,
a sinner who has not yet been cleansed from all
unrighteousness is not yet saved. For all unrighteousness is sin, and he that committeth sin is of
the devil. Again he says, without holiness no man
shall see the Lord; therefore, unless we have been
cleansed and made holy through the blood of Jesus
we shall not enter Heaven nor see God. Therefore,
according to the Word, nothing short of holiness
constitutes a born again experience. Either we
482

ACCORDING TO THY WORD
are righteous or else we are unrighteous, there is
no middle ground; and it is the blood of Jesus
which cleanseth white as snow. Sin is sin,
whether it is inbred sin, Adamic sin, actual sin,
or whatever name you may give it, sin is sin, and
NO sin shall enter there. The blood of Jesus
Christ, God's Son, cleanseth us from ALL sin.

Having been cleansed and made holy according
to His Word, the believer should press on crying:
"O, Lord, fill me with the Holy Spirit according
to Thy Word; not according to how my minister
or church ordinance says I should receive, but
ACCORDING TO THY WORD, LORD."
Do not be satisfied with any other kind of an
experience than is according to His Word and
bears the Bible label upon it. According to His
Word, those who were filled with the Holy
Spirit in the Bible days spoke with tongues and
magnified God (See Acts 2:4, Acts 10:46, Acts
19 :6', I Cor. 14 :18 and 39, etc. ) , and according to
the same Word, God the Father has made the
statement that "I am the Lord God, I change
not." Jesus says: "I am the same yesterday,
today and forever." And we are told that Heaven
and earth may pass away, but His Word shall
never pass away.
O Beloved, do you not long for an experience
that is according to His Word, not some new
twentieth century brand marked "Just as Good,"
but the real, genuine, Bible experience, received in
the Bible way, with the Bible evidence mentioned
in the previous paragraph. Of course you do.
Then as God's angel is hovering about you as you
read these words, just as he hovered over Mary of
old, look up into His face, and in spite of the visions of reproach, misunderstanding and misrepresentations the devil may bring before you to frighten you into refusal, say :
"Yes, Lord, here I am. Behold the handmaid
483

THIS IS THAT
of the Lord; be it unto me according to THY

WORD." And never stop seeking till you receive
an experience that really is according to the
Word, and measures up to like experiences recorded there. Thus will the Christ life be brought
forth to the world and His star be seen afar off.
Then, according to His Word, there is a full
overcoming life, there is divine healing, there is
power and glory, and untold riches in store for
those who live and pray and submit themselves,
A-C-C-0-R-D-I-N-G T-0 T-H-Y W-O-R-D.

484

TWENTY-FOUR QUESTIONS A YOUNG
WORKER IS APT TO MEET, AND
ANSWERS
FROM THE WORD HE SHOULD BE ABLE TO GIVE.
*Notc: The Baptism of the Holy Spirit, with
the Bible evidence, speaking with other tongues,
is absolutely scriptural and founded upon the
Word of God. Nothing could be plainer than the
Word upon this subject; and as you study the
scriptures with your Bible helps and concordance,
you will find that all through the Bible the scriptures fit and dovetail together, and none is left
wanting for a mate.
Q. 1. WHO OR WHAT is THE HOLY SPIRIT?
He is the third spoken of in the Godhead. See
I. John 5:7.
A. "For there arc three that hear record in
heaven, the Father, the Word and the Holy Ghost"

Q. 2. How DO You KNOW THAT THE HOLY
SPIRIT is A PERSON AND NOT AN INFLUENCE?
A. Jesus Himself spoke repeatedly of the Holy
Spirit as a person, for instance in John 14th, 15th
and 16th chapters, not once did He ever refer to
the Spirit as "IT," but always as "HE"
"HE will abide with you forever; even the Spirit
of Truth, whom the world cannot receive,
because it seeth
HIM not, neither knoweth
HIM, but ye know
HIM, for
HE dwelleth in you.
HE shall teach you all things and
He shall testify of me. When
HE is come
HE will reprove the world of sin, of righteousness,
and of judgment.
485

THIS IS THAT
HE will guide you into all truth.
HE will not speak of Himself.
He will show you things to come and
HE will glorify Me.
Moreover, we know that the Holy Spirit
Appoints and commissions His servants Acts 13:
(24), Acts 20:28.
He directs where to preach, Acts 8 :29.
He suffers Paul not to go to Bithynia, Acts 16 :
(6-7).
He instructs Paul what to preach, I Cor. 2 :13.
He comforts, Acts 9:31.

Q. 3. WHY is IT VERY NECESSARY TO BE ABLE TO
PROVE, WHEN PREACHING THE BAPTISM OF THE
HOLY SPIRIT THAT THE HOLY SPIRIT is A PERSON
AND NOT AN INFLUENCE?
A. Because if the Holy Spirit were merely an
influence, He could be received in portions, and
professors would be justified in excusing themselves from seeking and receiving the "ONE baptism 1 ' spoken of in Eph. 4 :5, by saying, "Well, I
have received a measure of the Holy Spirit," and
would confuse the many anointings of the
Spirit with the "ONE Baptism," and the Holy
Spirit would be considered, for instance as a vessel
of water which could be received measure by measure, little by little. This, we at once realize, is unscriptural when compared with the Baptism of the
Holy Spirit as recorded in the Word, Acts 2:4,
.Vets 8 :17, Acts 10 :46, Acts 19 :6.
Immediately, however, when one recognizes the
fact that the Holy Spirit is a person, one realizes
that when He comes in, making the body His
temple, He comes in altogether (not a portion at
one time and a portion at another), and that one
has either received all of the Holy Spirit, or has
received none of Him, i. e., in the sense of His personal, literal incoming. There may be many anointings, but only "ONE Baptism/'
486

TWENTY-FOUR QUESTIONS A WOKKEK IS APT TO MEET
Q. 4. WAS THE COMING OF THE HOLY SPIRIT,
WITH THE ACCOMPANYING OUTPOURING OF POWER
PROMISED IN EITHER THE OLD TESTAMENT OR THE
FOUR GOSPELS OF THE NEW?
A. Yes, His coming was promised in both the

Old Testament and the New promised by both
the Father and the Son.
Q. 5. WILL You PLEASE SHOW ME WHERE I
CAN FIND A FEW OF THESE SCRIPTURES WHICH
REFER TO THE DEFINITE AND LITERAL COMING OF
THE HOLY SPIRIT IN THE LAST DAYS?
A. There are many portions of scripture referring to the dispensation of the Holy Spirit, but
we have space for only a few of them here. In
speaking of his age,
GOD said, through the prophet Isaiah:
"For with stammering lips, and another
tongue will He speak to this people, to
whom He hath said, This is the rest wherewith ye may cause the weary to rest, and
this is the refreshing; yet they would not
hear. Isa. 28: (11-12).
Isa. 28: (11-12).
Through the prophet Joel :
"Be glad, then, ye children of Zion, and rejoice in the Lord your God; for He hath
given you the former rain moderately, and
He Avill cause to come down for you .the
rain, the former rain and the latter rain
in the first month.
And the floors shall be full of wheat, and
the fats shall overflow with wine and oil."
Joel 2: (23-24).
"And it shall come to pass afterward, that
I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, and
your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams,
your young men shall see visions.
487

THIS IS THAT
And also upon the servants and upon the
handmaids in those days will I pour out My
Spirit." Joel 2: (28-29).
Through Zechariah:
"Ask ye of the Lord rain in the time of
the latter rain; so the Lord shall make
bright clouds, and give them showers of
rain, to every one grass in the field." Zech.
10:1.
Through John the Baptist :
"I indeed baptize you with the water unto
repentance; but He that cometh after me
is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not
worthy to bear: He shall baptize you with
the Holy Ghost, and with fire." Mat. 3 :11.
The promises in the Gospels concerning the
coming of the Holy Spirit are plentiful
JESU8 said:
"Nevertheless, I tell you the truth; it is
expedient for you that I go away : for if I
go not away, the Comforter will not come
unto you; but if I depart, -I will send Him
unto you.
And when He is come, He will reprove, the
world of t sin, and of righteousness, and of
judgment." John 16 : ( 7-8 ) .
"And I will pray the Father, and He shall
give you another Comforter, that He may
abide with you forever;
Even the Spirit of truth ; whom the world
cannot receive, because it seeth Him not,

neither knoweth him : but ye knoAv Him ; for
He dwelleth WITH you, 'and shall be IX
you." But the Comforter, which is the Holy
Ghost, whom the Father will send in My
name, He shall teach you all tilings, and
bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto ou." John 14 :

488

TWENTY-FOUR QUESTIONS A WORKER IS APT TO MEET
"But when the Comforter is come, whom I
will send unto you from the Father, even
the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from
the Father, He shall testify of Me:
And ye also shall bear witness, because ye
have been with Me from the beginning."
John 15: (26-27).
"If ye then, being evil, know how to give
good gifts unto your children ; how much
more shall your heavenly Father give the
Holy Spirit to them that ask Him?" Luke
11 :13.
"And these signs shall follow them that
believe: In My name shall they cast out
devils; they shall speak with new tongues;
They shall take up serpents; and if they
drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt
them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and
they shall recover." Mark 16: (17-18).
"For John truly baptized with water; but
ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost,
not many days hence.
But ye shall receive power, after that the
Holy Ghost is come upon you; and ye shall
be witnesses unto Me, both in Jerusalem,

and in all Judaea, and in Samaria, and
unto the uttermost part of the earth."
Acts l:(5-8).
"And behold, I send the promise of My
Father upon you : but tarry ye in the city
of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with
power from on high." Luke 24:49.
Q. 6. How CAN You POSITIVELY KNOW THAT
ISAIAH WAS EEFERRING TO THIS BAPTISM OF THE
HOLY SPIRIT AND THE SPEAKING IN TONGUES IN
ISAIAH 28:11? WHEN HE EEFERS TO STAMMERING
LIPS AND ANOTHER TONGUE?
A. Because Paul plainly tells us so in I Cor.
489

THIS IS THAT
14: (21-22) : "In the law it is written, With men
of other tongues and other lips will I speak unto
this people; and yet for all that will they not hear
Me, saith the Lord.
Wherefore tongues are for a sign, not to them
that believe, but to them that believe not; but
prophesying serveth not for them that believe not,
but for them which believe."
Q. 7. . How DO You KNOW THAT THIS BAPTISM
OF THE HOLY SPIRIT, AS KECORDED IN THE BOOK OF
ACTS is THE ONE JOHN THE BAPTIST REFERRED TO?
(Mat. 3:11).
A. Because Jesus Himself makes this plain
by His words recorded in Acts 1:5.
Q. 8. HOAV DO You KNOW THAT THE DISCIPLES
DID NOT RECEIVE THE HOLY SPIRIT WHEN JESUS
BREATHED UPON THEM? (John 20:22.)

A. Because the Holy Spirit was not yet given ;
Jesus Himself plainly states that before the Holy
Spirit could be sent He (Jesus) must ascend on
high and pray the Father that He would send the
Comforter (John 16:7) ; also the last words Jesus
spoke before the clouds received Him out of their
sight prove this statement beyond a doubt, for the
Word reads :
"And being assembled together with them,
commanded them that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father, which, saith He, ye have
heard of me:"
"But ye shall receive power, after that the
Holy Ghost is come upon you : and ye shall
be witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem,
and in all Judaea, and in Samaria, and unto
the uttermost part of the earth." Acts

490

TWENTY-FOUR QUESTIONS A WORKER IS APT TO MEET
Q. 9. WHAT DID JESUS MEAN, THEN,, WHEN
HE BREATHED UPON THEM AND SAID: "RECEIVE
YE THE HOLY GHOST"?
A. He Avas merely commanding them, as He
had in many other places, such as Luke 24:49,
Acts 1 :4, etc., to receive the Holy Spirit, for whom
they were to tarry until He was sent from the
Father.
Q. 10. WHAT is THE OFFICE WORK OF THE
HOLY SPIRIT?
A. His office work is three-fold (I) to the

sinner; (II) to the new born -again soul; (III) to
the baptized believer.
(I) His office work to the sinner is
a. to convict and reprove him of his sin.
(John 16:8.)
b. To show him his true condition as described in Isaiah 1:6.
c. To prick the sinner to his heart, as He
did in Acts 2 :37.
d. To draw him to Jesus. ( John 6 :44. )
(II). His office work to the newly born again
soul is
a. To bear witness when the work is done.
(The Spirit itself beareth witness with
our spirit, that we are the children of
God. Kom. 8:16.)
(He that believeth on the Sou of God
hath the witness in himself: he that believeth not God hath made Him a liar;
because he believeth not the record that
God gave of His Son." I. John 5:10.)
In other words, He who was with the
sinner to convict him of sin, is now still
with the young Christian rejoicing with
him that the work is done, and endeavoring to lead him on to the place where he
may receive the promise of the Lord
491

THIS IS THAT

which said: "He dwelleth WITH you,
and shall be IN you." John 14 :17.
b. To baptize him with the Holy Spirit according to Acts 2:4.
(Ill) His office work in the baptized believer
a. He is a teacher. John 14 :26.
b. He testifies of Christ. John 15 :26.
c. He guides. John 16 :13.
d. He glorifies Christ. John 16:14.
e. He comforts. Acts 9:31.
f . He searches deep things. I Cor. 2 :10.
g. Our helper in prayer. Read Romans
8 :26, also I. Cor. 14 :2.
Q. 11. Is IT THE PRIVILEGE OF EVERY BELIEVER
OF TODAY TO RECEIVE THE HOLY SPIRIT?
A. Yes, Acts 2: (38-39), "Then Peter said unto
them, Repent, and be baptized, every one of you,
in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of
sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy
Ghost.
"For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as
the Lord our God shall call."
The gifts of God are without repentance; Jesus
said: "And I will pray the Father, and He shall
give you another Comforter, that He may abide
with you forever." John 14:16.
Q. 12. Is IT NECESSARY FOR EVERY CHILD OF
GOD TO RECEIVE THE BAPTISM OF THE HOLY SPIRIT,
EVEN THOUGH GREATLY USED OF GOD IN THE PAST
IN SOUL-WlNNING, HEALING,, CASTING OUT OF

DEMONS, ETC.?
A. Yes, Peter and other disciples, though greatly used in this way, still needed the Holy Spirit
and enduement of power that should not be as an
anointing that should lift, but a baptism that
should abide.
492

TWENTY-FOUR QUESTIONS A WORKER IS APT TO MEET
Q. 13. CAN ONE RECEIVE THIS BAPTISM MORE
THAN ONCE?
A. No, there is but one Lord, one faith, and
ONE BAPTISM. There are many anointings, but
ONE Baptism.
Q. 14. Is THERE ANY WAY BY WHICH THE
SEEKER MAY KNOW WHEN THE HOLY SPIRIT
COMES IN TO TAKE UP His ABODE? IF so, How?
A. Yes, this ONE BAPTISM, which comes
but ONCE to a person, is far too precious and
wonderful to be left without a mark or seal by
which it may be known without the possibility of a
doubt, and sought for until consciously received.
It will be made known by the speaking in
OTHER TONGUES (languages), as the Spirit
gives utterance.
Q. 15. WILL ALL WHO RECEIVE THE HOLY
SPIRIT SPEAK IN OTHER TONGUES TODAY AS IN THE
BIBLE DAYS?
A. Yes, there is but ONE BAPTISM. The
pattern for this Baptism has not changed, but is
the same today as when first outpoured in apostolic days.

Q. 16. DID ALL WHO RECEIVED THE HOLY
SPIRIT IN THE BIBLE DAYS SPEAK WITH TONGUES?
IF so, WHERE WILL I FIND THE SCRIPTURES RELATING TO THE EXPERIENCE?
A. Yes, Scriptures can be found as follows :
Acts 2 :4 : "And they were all filled with the
Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other
tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance."
Acts 8: (17-18) : "Then laid they their hands
on them, and they received the Holy Ghost.
And when Simon saw that through laying
on of the apostles' hands the Holy Ghost
was given, he offered them money."
493

THIS IS THAT
Acts 19 :46 : "For they heard them speak with
tongues and magnify God."
Acts 19:6: "And when Paul had laid his
hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came on
them; and they spake with tongues, and
prophesied."
Q. 17. TAKING THE STAND THAT You DO, How
DO You EXPLAIN THAT IN ONE INSTANCE OUT OF
THE FOUR, viz. ACTS 8:17, IT DOES NOT STATE IN
so MANY WORDS THAT THE PEOPLE OF SAMARIA
SPOKE WITH TONGUES WHEN THEY RECEIVED THE
HOLY SPIRIT?
A. Because if the believers during the eight
years between the 2nd and 8th chapters of Acts
all spoke in tongues when they received the Holy
Spirit, it would be superfluous to mention the
speaking in tongues in every case.

For instance, today we write a report or make
a statement that, say, "ten received the Baptism
of the Holy Spirit last Sunday night." We do not
deem it necessary to add "And they all spoke in
tongues," because this is taken for granted.
Or, in announcing that Mr. B. and Miss D. were
married last week, we do not consider it necessary
to add that a minister performed the ceremony
and a license was granted. If the fact of the believers having received the Holy Spirit is questioned or doubted, however, as it was in the 10th
chapter of Acts, where during the preaching of
Peter the Holy Ghost fell upon the Gentiles, it is
mentioned as convincing evidence:
"For they heard them speak with tone/ties and
magnify God/' just as if the legality of a wedding
ceremony is questioned, the marriage certificate
and the name of the minister are brought forth as
convincing proof.
Besides, we may settle it that the incoming of
the Holy Spirit was attended by unmistakable,
494

TWENTY-FOUR QUESTIONS A WORKER IS APT TO MEET
miraculous, outward evidence, or this old Jew,
Simon the Sorcerer, who was "in the gall of bitterness and the bond of iniquity" would not have
wondered at it and offered money for the pow r er
to bestow this gift.
Then, too, w r e know that the Bible does not in
so many words state that Paul spoke Avith tongues
when he received the Holy Spirit, yet we have
unmistakable evidence that he did, for in I. Cor.
14:18, he said: "I thank my God I speak with
tongues more than you all."

Q. 18. WHAT DID PAUL MEAN WHEN, IN I.
COR. 12:30, HE SAID: "Do ALL SPEAK WITH
TONGUES?"
A. Paul is referring throughout this entire
chapter to the gifts of the Spirit, and is here referring directly, amongst other gifts, to the gift
of tongues, which is subject to the prophets, as
proven by the 14th chapter, 27th and 28th verses,
and not to the Bible evidence (speaking with
tongues), which bursts forth as the Spirit gives
utterance, as in Acts 2 :4.
Q. Is THERE ANY DIFFERENCE, THEN, BETWEEN THE SPEAKING WITH TONGUES AS THE
BIBLE EVIDENCE OF THE INCOMING OF THE HOLY
SPIRIT, AND THE GIFT OF TONGUES?
A. Yes, all who receive the Holy Spirit speak
with tongues, but not all receive the gift of tongues
(or power to speak at will). It is of this latter
gift Paul is speaking when he says :
"For if I pray in an unknown tongue, my
spirit prayeth, but my understanding is unfruitful. What is it then?
I WILL pray with the Spirit and
I WILL pray with the understanding also;
I WILL sing with the spirit, and
I WILL sing with the understanding also.
I. Cor. 14: (14-15).
495

THIS IS THAT
This means he will sing and pray in tongues (in
the Spirit), which he does not understand, and
also in his understanding, (that is with his own

language). And when he says:
"If any man speak in an unknown tongue,
let it be by two, or at the most by three, and
that by course ; and let one interpret.
"But if there be no interpreter, let him keep
silence in the church; and let him speak to
himself (softly), and to God," (I. Cor. 14:
27-28),
he is speaking to saints who have already received
the Spirit and spoken in tongues.
Q. 20. WAS PAUL DISCREDITING OR BELITTLING
THE SPEAKING IN TONGUES IN ANY WAY WHEN,
SETTING THE CHURCH IN ORDER (I. COR. 14:19),
HE SAYS: "!N THE CHURCH I HAD RATHER SPEAK
FIVE WORDS WITH MY UNDERSTANDING THAN TEN
THOUSAND WORDS IN AN UNKNOWN TONGUE"?
A. Not at all, for he has just stated that he
speaks in tongues more than they all, and has said :
"7 would that ye all spoke loith tongues (verse
5). He commands the brethren to
"Forbid not to speak icith tongues" (verse 38).
He is exhorting the people, rather, to covet to
prophesy, and bids them
"Let he who speaketh in an unknoicn tongue
pray that he may interpret" explaining that the
one who speaks in prophecy and the one who interprets are on an equal footing of edification to
the church (verse 5). Were a whole sermon
preached in tongues, and did no interpretation
follow, it would be uninstructive and unedifying.
Q. 21. IF IT is LEARNED THAT THERE is NO INTERPRETER IN THE CHURCH, SHOULD THE SPEAKER,
IF HE FEELS THE POWER UPON HIM, CONTINUE TO
SPEAK ON AND ON ALOUD IN TONGUES?

496

TWENTY-FOUR QUESTIONS A WORKER IS APT TO MEET
A. No. "If there be no interpreter let him
keep silence in the church, and speak to himself
(that is softly, under his breath, so as not to interrupt the preacher), "and to God."
Q. 22. DOES THIS MEAN THAT No ONE SHOULD
EVER SPEAK ALOUD IN TONGUES IN AN ASSEMBLY
WHERE THERE is No ONE UPON WHOM THE GIFT
OF INTERPRETATION HAS BEEN BESTOWED?
A. No, because in the 22nd verse of the chapter
Paul declares that tongues (not interpretation
alone, but tongues) are a sign ... to them that
believe not, Paul, in setting the Corinthian church
in order, merely instructs those who speak much
in tongues to speak (softly) to themselves and to
God, so as not to disturb the exhorter, when they
find the message is not being interpreted, and further, Paul advises such an one to pray that he
may interpret, that the church may receive edifying, explaining that greater is he that prophesieth
than he who speaketh with tongues, except he interpret, that the church may receive edifying.
Q. 23. Is THE SPEAKING IN TONGUES GIVEN TO
THE CHURCH FOR THE PURPOSE OF ENABLING THEM
TO PREACH TO FOREIGNERS, USING THESE OTHER
TONGUES INSTEAD OF LEARNING THE LANGUAGE?
A. No. There is no record in the Bible of
tongues being used to preach in other languages
after the day of Pentecost. We are told that
the apostle Paul spoke with tongues more than
all the others, yet it is nowhere hinted that he ever
used the gift to preach in another language at
will. He may have done so, however, even as many
have been enabled to speak to foreigners in this

day under a mighty enduement of the Spirit, The
Scripture, however, plainly states that it is an
unknown tongue, and that he who speaketh in an
unknown tongue speaketh not unto men, but unto
God, for no man understandeth him, howbeit in
the Spirit he speaketh mysteries.
497

THIS IS THAT
Q. 24. JUST WHAT SHOULD BE THE ATTITUDE
OF THE SEEKER AS HE TARRIES FOR THE HOLY
SPIRIT? A. His attitude should be one of:
Prayerful waiting upon God, and of
Praiseful expectancy that believes the Lord implicitly and takes Him at His word.
When the amazed onlookers, on the day of Pentecost, pricked to their hearts as they SAW (in
the staggering bodies, Acts 2:13) and HEARD (in
the speaking in tongues, Acts 2:4-6) cried out to
Peter and the rest of the apostles: "What shall
we do?" Peter, in simple Avords, said unto them:
"Repent, and be baptized, every one of you
in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of
the Holy Ghost." *
First of all make sure you are washed in the
precious blood of Jesus ; make a Avhole-hearted, unconditional surrender and consecration to Him
who gave Himself for you. Then, as you praise
Him with a pure heart, lifting up holy hands,
claiming the Promise, He will come into His
temple to abide.
"Be ye lifted up, ye everlasting doors, and the
King of Glory shall come in."

"Open your mouth wide and I will fill it," saith
the Lord. Remember, the promise is unto you,
even as many as the Lord our God shall call, and
every one that asketh receiveth.
This filling may be at meeting when amongst the
saints, or in your own home as you wait upon
Him in secret communion, or as you go about your
work. The land of Caanan is before you and
Jesus is coming soon for his Spirit-filled Bride.
Amen.

498

THE COMING OF THE CHRIST.
IF I GO AWAY I WILL COME AGAIN.
ALL down through the long centuries there
had been a faithful few who believed God's
word implicitly, and looked forward to the
hope of the soon coming of the Lord Jesus Christ
from Heaven. With longing hearts and unassuaged
zeal did they look for Him, knowing that He who
was to come would come and would not tarry, for
this God had spoken by the mouth of His holy prophets since the world began. Many indeed cried out :
"Where is the hope of His coming? All through
our lives, and the lives of our forefathers have we
heard His soon coming prophesied, till now they
slumber in the dust, and still He is not come.
Surely you wait in vain. Strain your eyes no
longer in searching the heavens for the sign of His
coining; come eat, drink and be merry in this
world with us."
But through all the stream of unbelief and silent
years, their faith neither waned nor faltered. Their
eyes of faith were still undimmed, and they looked

toward the heavens with untiring hope for the
coining of the Christ, their Messiah.
Then to His faithful few, God began to reveal
that the time was at hand, and that the Lord was
near, even at the door. In Jerusalem there was a
man whose name was Simeon, who was just and
devout, waiting for the coming of the Christ. It
was revealed to him, by the Holy Ghost, that he
should not see death before he had seen the Lord.
Anna, the prophetess, and many others whose eyes
were anointed, began to rejoice with great joy as
the signs were fulfilled all about them, and the
Holy Spirit witnessed, not the day nor the hour,
but that the coming of the Lord was at hand.
499

THIS IS THAT
"And there were in the same country, shepherds abiding
in the fields, keeping watch over their flock by night. And,
the angel of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of the
Lord shone round about them, and they were sore afraid.
And the angel said unto them, Fear not; for, behold, I bring
you good tidings of great joy . . . Unto you is born
this day ... a Saviour, which is Christ, the Lord
. . . Ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes,
lying in a manger. And suddenly, there was with the angel,
a multitude of the heavenly host, praising God, and saying,
Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will
toward men.
And it came to pass, as the angels were gone away from
them into heaven, the shepherds said one to another, Let us
go ... and see this thing which the Lord hath made
known to us. And they went with haste, and found Mary
and Joseph, and the babe lying in a manger." Luke 2: (8-16).
And behold, there came wise men from the east, saying,
where is He that is born King of the Jews? for we have seen
His star in the east, and are come to worship Him. And lo,

the star which they saw in the east, went before them till it
came and stood over where the young child was. When they
saw the star they rejoiced with exceeding great joy. Matt.
2:1, 2, 9, 10.
On and on they trudged, all unmindful of their
footsore and weary condition; the long years of
waiting seemed but as a day now. On they hastened, over the hills and through the valleys, bringing with them their treasures and gifts, gold,
frankincense and myrrh. Still on they hastened,
spreading the joyful news and bearing witness in
their eager search in the country and in the city,
till at last they found Him, and fell down and worshipped Him, opened their treasures and presenting to Him their gifts. God had fulfilled his promise and the weary ones were rewarded, for THE
CHRIST HAD COME.
All this happened over nineteen hundred years
ago, and now the hands on the great clock of time
have revolved until they point to the hour of the
second coming of the Christ foretold by His Word.
As the angel spoke unto the shepherds of old of
the first coming of the Lord; and as the angels
spoke to the watching multitude of His second
coming saying, "This same Jesus, which is taken
up from you into heaven, shall so come in like
manner as ye have seen him go into heaven" (Acts
500

THE COMING OF THE CHRIST
1:17) they are again appearing today to announce
the soon coming of the Christ.
Ever since that day Jesus Himself told the disciples that He would return and that wars and
rumors of wars, plagues, pestilences, blood, fire
and vapors of smoke; nation rising against nation,

famines and earthquakes would be the sign of His
coming (Mat. 24) eager longing hearts of a faithful few have looked and yearned for His appearance. To be sure, many have cried in derision :
" Where is the sign of His coming? For years we
have heard it foretold that His coming was nigh,
our forefathers who preached His second comingno w slumber in their graves, and still He is not
come. Let us eat, drink and give in marriage;
His coming is not near."
But today as in the days of old, the Lord is revealing to His faithful few that His coming is
near even at the doors. "For the Lord himself
shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the
voice of the archangel and with the trump of God
The dead in Christ shall rise first, then we which
are alive and remain, shall be caught up together
with them to meet the Lord in the air and so shall
we be ever with the Lord." Again today anointed
eyes see the signs of His coming fulfilled with
unmistakable vividness on every hand.
Shepherds abiding in the field, keeping -watch
over their flock through the long night while the
light of the world is absent, have looked long and
earnestly with unutterable desire towards the east
for the rising of the sun of righteousness who
would dispel all darkness. At His first coming
a star had appeared, but now they look for the sun
of righteousness to arise and as the sun outshines
the star, so shall His second coming outshine his
first appearing, for this time He will not appear
wrapped in swaddling clothes and in a manger,
but will march forth triumphant, his kingly robes
501

THIS IS THAT
upon Him, His scepter in His hand a king victorious the hope and reward of His people.

Already the hearts of the shepherds are flooding
with joy, for the heavens are filling with the first
rays of morning dawn. The long night of silent
waiting and longing is almost over, and again they
see His sign in the East.
Wise men, wise not as this world counts wisdom,
but wise with the wisdom that cometh down from
above are looking for and hastening unto the coming of the Lord. Even as the wise men of old left
their flocks and ran to meet the Lord with treasures of gold, frankincense and myrrh; so the wise
virgins today leave the foolish virgins behind and
go out quickly to meet him, carrying the treasures of gold, the divine nature of Jesus, and the
frankincense of acceptability to God and praises,
and myrrh with its fragrance, and bitterness of
suffering with Him that they might also reign
with Him that having known Him in the fellowship of His sufferings they may now know Him in
the power of His resurrection.
Beloved, awake and see His light from afar off.
Eise and go out to meet the coming Christ, for He
is near even at the doors. He is coming, and is
even now approaching the portals of this world.
He shall sweep back the heavens as a scroll and
those who are ready shall rise to meet Him in the
air. Already the whole earth is being taxed even
as it was at the birth of Christ when Joseph and
Mary went up to Jerusalem to pay taxes. Every
sign is fulfilled, history is repeating itself and as
soon as He is come and taken his waiting ones
away, tribulation will sweep over this world, as it
did after His first coming. Even now the voice of
Rachel is heard lamenting and wailing for her
dead children, slain by the sword of evil rulers.
Awake! Arise! go ye out to meet the coming
Lord Jesus Christ.
502

THE INQUIRER AND THE WORD TALK
TOGETHER OF HIS COMING.
"If ye will enquire, enquire ye." Isa. 21:12.
INQUIRER: I have heard it said that you have
made many statements and contain much teaching
regarding the literal return of our Lord to this
earth again. Is this report true?
-THE WORD. Absolutely true. Within the 260
chapters of my New Testament alone there are
318 references to the coming of the Lord, i. e.
practically one out of every twenty-five verses.
INQ. Speak to my heart, O Word of God, some
simple word of the Master, whereby I may know
that He is really coming.
THE WORD. "If I go away ... I will come
again. 77 These were the words of Jesus to His disciples. (John 14:3). Did He go away?
INQ. Yes. "While they beheld He was taken
up and a cloud received Him out of their sight.
(Acts. 1:9.)
THE WORD. Then He is coming again.
INQ. But does this not mean that Jesus is here
now first in our hearts as revealed by the Holy
Spirit? Second in our midst Avherever two or
three are gathered together in His name? and
thirdly, refer to His coming for us at death?
THE WORD. No, Jesus, who is soon to come in
the clouds of glory, is now at the right hand of the
Father. (Rom. 8:34.) 'Tis the Holy Spirit who
has come to reveal Jesus during His absence and
prepare us for His coming. He reveals Jesus in
the heart (Jn. 14:23), in the midst of the congregation (I Cor. 14), and lifts us, when life and

death are over, into His presence (Rom. 8:11).
503

THIS IS THAT
Speaking of the Holy Spirit, Jesus said: "I will
not leave you comfortless." (Jn. 14:16.) "But
when the Comforter is come, whom I will send
you from the Father . . . He shall testify of
Me." (Jn. 15:26.) Then, too, He plainly said:
"It is expedient for you that I go away, for if I
go not away the Comforter will not come to you,
but if I depart I will send Him unto you." (Jn.
16:7.)
These scriptures make it plain that it is the
Spirit who is with us today, while if you will turn
my pages to I Thess., the 4th chapter, 16th and
17th verses, you will plainly see that "the Lord
Himself shall descend from heaven with a shout
and with the voice of an archangel, and with the
trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise
first: then we which are alive and remain shall be
caught up together with them in the clouds, to
meet the Lord in the air." We read also (Mat.
24:30) that we "shall see the Son of man coming
in the clouds of heaven with power and great
glory."
INQ. Yes, yes. Your teachings have made it
plain to me that this Jesus who ascended to the
Father and poured out the Holy Spirit (the Comforter who was to abide during His absence) is to
come again. But what will be the manner of His
coming? You surely do not mean, as some have
understood you to say that He will come back in
the body the same, real, tangible Jesus who went
away?
THE WORD. Yes, I mean just that. This same
Jesus who was taken up from you into heaven

shall so come, in like manner a$ ye have seen Him
r/o into heaven. (Acts 1:11.)
THIS SAME JESUS who was taken up not another
Jesus whose body was destroyed, and who is naught
but spirit, as many suppose, but the same Jesus,
the one who, after His resurrection, said : "Handle
504

THE INQUIRER AND THE WORD TALK TOGETHER, ETC.
me and see" ( Lu. 24 :39 ) , who talked and walked
with His disciples, and who did take a piece of a
broiled fish and an honey comb and did eat before
them. (Lu. 24:15, 42, 43.) This same Jesus, who
shall drink anew with us the wine in His Father's
Kingdom, the real, literal Jesus who was taken
up from you into heaven,
SHALL so COME. He who said, "I am the Lord, I
change not, will be seen by His ready, waiting people just as He was when He went away.
IN LIKE MANNER When the company of faithful
disciples who watched His ascension into heaven,
hear the trump of God and rise from their tombs
(I Thess. 4:16) their eyes shall behold the same
Lord descending in the same form as that in which
they did see Him go.
INQ. Will His feet touch the earth again at this
next coming?
THE WORD. No, not at this time. Those who
are ready shall rise to meet Him in the clouds.
(I Thess. 4:17.) He shall return later bringing
His saints with Him. (Jude 14.) Then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven, and
then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn, and
they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds
of heaven with power and great glory. Then shall
His feet touch upon the top of the Mount of

Olives ( Zech. 14 :4 ) and it "shall cleave in the
midst thereof toward the east and toward the
west, and there shall be a very great valley."
INQ. What of the sinful people of the earth and
those who are unprepared, will they see Jesus at
His next coming when He appears in the clouds of
glory?
THE W 7 ORD. No, only those who die ready and
watching. He shall come as a thief in the night.
(Mat. 24:43.) "Two women shall be grinding at
the mill, one shall be taken and the other left, two
505

THIS IS THAT
shall be sleeping in one bed, one shall be taken
and the other left." (Mat. 24:40, 41.)
It is at His final return, when He conies to set
up His kingdom and reign a thousand years (Rev.
20:4) that every eye shall see Him. (Rev. 1:7.)
INQ. Is it possible to know the day and the
hour of His return?
THE WORD. Of that day and hour knoweth no
man, no not the angels of Heaven, but the Father
only. For as in the days that were before the
flood, they were eating and drinking, and marrying
and giving in marriage, until the day that Noah
took them all away, so shall also the coming of
the Son of man be/ (Mat. 24:38, 39.)
INQ. You see that we will not know the day nor
the hour, but is it not given to us to know the
seasons?
THE WORD. Yes. "Of the times and the seasons ... ye have no need that I write unto

you," for "ye are not in darkness, that that day
should overtake you as a thief." (I Thess. 5:1,4.)
There are manifold signs given through my pages,
whereby ye may know when the season is nigh.
INQ. Tell me, Oh thou light unto my path, thou
blest lamp unto my feet, when shall these things
be and what shall be the sign of thy coming?
THE WORD. Many shall come, saying, I am
Christ, and shall deceive many. Ye shall hear of
wars and rumors of wars. Nation shall rise
against nation, kingdom against kingdom; there
shall be blood and fire and vapor of smoke. (Joel
2:30, 31.)
There shall be famines and pestilences and
earthquakes in divers places. When they cry peace
and safety, then shall sudden destruction come
upon them.
Iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall
wax cold. Then shall arise false Christs and false
prophets, and shall show great signs and Avonders
506

THE INQUIRER AND THE WORD TALK TOGETHER, ETC.
insomuch that if it were possible they should deceive the very elect.
Then, too, when the fig tree putteth forth her
leaves ye know that summer is nigh, so likewise,
when ye see these things come to pass, ye know
that the kingdom of God is now nigh at hand
(Lu. 21:31). In the last days, saith God, I will
pour out My Spirit upon all flesh! your sons and
your daughters shall prophesy.
INQ. Why! these are the very things that are
taking place today wars and rumors of wars,

blood, fire, vapors of smoke, are covering the
earth as the fog covers a ship at sea. Six million
have been swept into their graves during the past
few years of warfare, and plague. Almost every
home has been entered by death. Never so many
homes in America in all its history have been entered by the death angel as in the past five years.
Cries of peace and safety, sudden destruction,
coming plagues, pestilences at home and abroad
the fig tree putteth forth her leaf, and the Jews are
today, for the first time in centuries, free to return
to Jerusalem and rebuild their temple. Chariots,
automobiles and ears run like the lightnings and
jostle each other, because of their very numbers, in
the broad ways. ( Nah. 2 :4. )
All about me I see the love of many waxing
cold. Forms and ceremonies are taking the place
of power. So-called Christian Science and Spiritualism has flooded the land with false Christs and
false prophets. Then, too, in these days the Holy
Spirit is being poured out upon all flesh, and in
every land a spiritual company are preparing for
the rapture. Surely, surely, according to your
words, and the signs of the times, the coming of
the Lord must be near at hand, yea, even at our
very doors.
With all these signs being fulfilled and thy word
so plain, why is it that the people of today are so
507

THIS IS THAT
stupid and dull that they do not realize this truth?
THE WORD. For the same reason that the Jews
did not recognize the signs attending His first coming or discover that the Slain Lamb of Isa. 53 and
their crucified Lord were one and the same. Their

eyes are holden by sin. They slumber and are
drunken with the intoxication of the world.
INQ. I thank you for making it plain to me
that the Lord Jesus Christ is soon to come, and
in view of this truth I see that we should quit ourselves like men and stand with our loins girded
about with truth, our sandals upon our feet, with
oil in our vessels with our lamps, ourselves filled
with love and robed with praise, transformed daily
by the Spirit's power into the likeness of God's
dear Son, watching earnestly unto the coming of
our Lord, insomuch that I shall be enabled to pray
the last prayer recorded in the Bible: "Even so,
Lord Jesus, conle quickly."

508

SIGNS OF THE TIMES
"WHAT SHALL BE THE SIGN OF THY COMING?"
MATT. 24 :3.
IN reading the Bible prophecies concerning the
last days, have you not been struck forcibly
with the astounding similarity of conditions as
recorded by the news of the day, and the Word of
God?
I want to take you back in memory just a few
years ago to the great world-wide talk of peace
you doubtless recall the great Hague convention,
where peace was the theme. And universal peace
was talked of continually. Then true to Bible prophecy when they cried peace, peace, suddenly came
gloom and destruction. If you have not recently
read the 24th chapter of Matthew, read it now and
compare it with this present day.
"What shall be the sign of thy coming, and the

end of the world?" In answer to this query the
Lord tells us of many signs whereby we may recognize the season, amongst others He tells us there
will be
WARS and rumors of wars, that nation shall
rise against nation, kingdom against kingdom. We
see this phophecy fulfilled in a startling literal
manner. There shall be
FAMINES we are told. Glance over your paper
again, and run back over the past few months'
famines. Note the prices of food and clothing in
Europe. Consider Belgium, Bulgaria, parts of
Russia, Armenia, Servia, the high prices and potato famine in Germany; read of the small rations
dealt out to starving women and children, the shelltorn, blood-soaked fields that used to bear grain
and vegetables and feed the flocks and you will
509

THIS IS THAT
not fail to agree this sign is fulfilled, in a ghastly
real way.
As for the PESTILENCES he tells of, I have
just looked up Noah Webster and he defines the
word as an infectious or contagious disease, noxious to health and morals. Pestilences and
PLAGUES go hand in hand today. Recall the
accounts of sickness caused from the unburied
bodies on the battle fields, the smallpox epidemic,
the black death, the infantile paralysis, right at
our doors. I suppose you have been reading of
the plague of sharks that are infesting our shores,
of the ships lost at sea, of the thousands of fires,
explosions and accidents, with their train of silent
victims; of the wrecking of homes in Europe, of
the terrible fate and destruction of innocent

women and children, too horrible to even record
or contemplate. No one can help admitting that
the time of famines, pestilences and plagues is upon us, as are the earthquakes in divers places.
FALSE PROPHETS are arising on every hand,
also those who have claimed to be the Christ have
been mentioned at different times in the newspapers. We are told that the false prophets will
have power to do many wonderful things, and
show forth signs and wonders that would deceive
the very elect if that were possible; today we see
Christian Science, Spiritualists and other organizations (which we recognize as false because they
deny the power of the blood of Jesus) working
miracles and healings, seeking to deceive the elect.
True to prophecy, we are told not to marvel at all
these things because they must all come to pass
before the end.
The second chapter of Nahum, in speaking of
this day, says that
THE CHARIOTS SHALL RAGE IN THE STREETS; they
shall jostle one against the other in the broad ways;
they shall seem like torches, they shall run like
510

SIGNS OF THE TIMES
lightnings. Today this has been true not only of the
automobiles in the streets of our own land, but of
the armored cars on European battlefields, and in
Jerusalem, as they dashed through the streets with
the speed of lightning, bearing their swift messengers of death, doing their part to fulfill their share
in the prophecies of the coming of the Lord.
We are told also that there are to be signs in
the heaven and in the earth.

BLOOD God knows there has been enough of
that shed today;
FIRE See accounts of the huge fires on the
battlefield composed of the corpses of the slain,
burning of towns and cities.
VAPOR OF SMOKE The air has been filled and permeated wtih it; smoke from the mouths of cannon,
smoke from burning homes, vapors of poisonous
gases.
The prophet Joel makes some wonderful prophecies, concerning these last days, that are intensely interesting to Christians. You remember that
after aptly describing the DARK AND CLOUDY DAY he
told of the outpouring of the Holy Spirit, describing
it as the former and latter rain. The former rain,
you will recall, began to fall at the day of Pente-,
cost ; today you will observe the
LATTER RAIN is falling on the earth. The
same identical signs which followed the preaching
of the word in the former rain, accompany the
present outpouring. On the day of Pentecost, also
at Ephesus and Ceasarea, and throughout the
Word of God, when the Holy Spirit fell upon them
as in the former rain they all spoke in tongues.
Today in every land the latter rain is falling,
and the people are speaking in other tongues, the
sick are again being healed through the power in
Jesus' Name, demons are being cast out, signs and
wonders being wrought by the Holy Spirit, who
gives all the glory to Jesus. In the law it is writ511

THIS IS THAT
ten, "with men of stammering lips and another
tongue will I speak to this people and yet for all

that, will they not believe."
As for the Jews returning to Jerusalem, many
said this could never be yet one breath from God
and it is accomplished. The Fig Tree today is
putting forth her leaves. Yes every sign is being
fulfilled that indicates His coming, men are marrying and giving in marriage, as in the days when
Noah predicted the flood.
The cry, Behold the Bridegroom cometh; go ye
forth to meet him, is sounding through our land.
Kemember the 25th chapter of Matthew. Wake
up and examine your lamp. See that it is lighted
by the fire of the Holy Ghost; be filled with the
Spirit. Consider these things carefully; compare
the Word of God with the rapid history-making
events of today, and I am sure you will readily
agree with me that we are living under the shadow
of His near approach, of which He spoke, saying,
"In the morning ye say it will be foul leather today, for the sky is red and lowering. ye fools
and hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky:
but can ye not discern the signs of the times?"
Matt 16. Likewise when ye shall see all these
things, know that It is near,, even at the doors.

512

THE MARRIAGE OF THE LAMB.
A VISION MONTWAIT CAMP RELATED UNDER THE
POWER.
"To whom shall I my Love compare?
Fairest of the fair.
Soon I His glory'll share,

In the meeting in the air.
"What are these that are arrayed in white robes? and
whence came they?" Rev. 7-13.
"Who are these that fly as a cloud, like doves to their
windows?" Isaiah 60:8.
THERE is a mighty stir going on in the earth
in these days; not only in the earth, but in
the Heavens also; a mighty preparation for
a swiftly approaching and mighty event. Continuous tremors of excitment are thrilling the Bride
and her friends, as with loving hands, all atremble with haste, she is donning her finely embroidered wedding gown, and minutely inspecting
her trousseau. Her sandals are upon her feet; she
is hastening her final preparations, as the mighty
event approaches an event so mighty and near
that, as it looms and towers above her, the shadow
of its near .approach excludes all else from her
view.
There is a mighty examining of lamps. Vessels
of oil are being investigated, and those whose oil
has either leaked out or been consumed are rushing breathlessly to those who have to sell. Matt,
25. People who intend to be present at the meeting in the air are leaving business, cares of this
life, and earthly duties, and with hasty feet, rushing on trains, in cars, everywhere, to Camp Meetings and tarrying meetings in search of oil for
513

THIS IS THAT
their lamps. There is a great washing of robes in
the blood of the Lamb. Clear, clarion calls are
penetrating the night, commanding sleeping virgins everywhere to awaken, saying:

"BEHOLD THE BRIDEGROOM COMETH."
The Bride is yearning for the Bridegroom. The
Bridegroom is yearning for the Bride. The wife
is making herself ready. A great longing is filling
her soul that naught but He can satisfy. Her
eyes are lifted to the clouds, with an unspeakable
yearning. Her eyes have caught the vision. She
has caught one glimpse of His face; and she is on
tip toe, with upturned face, watching, waiting,
longing to behold Him whom her soul loveth. Her
ears have caught one strain of the Heavenly anthem; she has heard His voice. There are many
faces and voices about her, but they cannot win
even a fleeting glance. She is waiting, looking,
searching the sky, through the darkness and
gloom of the long night, with expectant, teardimmed eye and up-stretched hands.
The messenger whom God has sent, even the
Holy Spirit, to seek and bring the bride for His
Son, the Heavenly Isaac, is gathering together
those who have said: "I will go with this Man"
(Gen. 24:58), and is getting them upon the Holy
Ghost elevator, which is to lift them up to Him,
and will never leave the Bride till she is safe in
the arms of her Lover.
In Heaven also a mighty preparation is going
on. The angelic hosts are assembling. There is
a great tuning of harps, and stringed instruments ;
the heavenly orchestras are learning the Bridal
Song for the grand occasion ; the greatest day ever
known in Heaven, when the Son is to clasp the
wife of His bosom in His arms. All the eyes of
Heaven are gazing upon the Bride. The Bridegroom is overcome of love for her. Sol. Song 6 :5.
514

THE MARRIAGE OF THE LAMB

The very air is tense with expectancy, as the day
approaches.
Suddenly the starry floors of Heaven are split in
twain. The faith of the bride has not been in vain.
He that has promised has fulfilled His word; He
has kept His promise. The Heavens are opened,
and suddenly the rays of light from the throne
penetrate and illuminate the gloom of earth. Her
enraptured, upturned face is transfigured with His
radiance, as she beholds His pierced feet appearing, descending; and then His whole form in wondrous, resplendent robes of light. The whole heavens are filled with clouds of angels, myriads of
angelic hosts. And with leaping, bounding heart,
her eyes at last behold His face.
Every harp, every stringed instrument, every
trumpet in the orchestra of all heaven strikes and
holds one long, sweet note, that shivers the silence,
and explodes with rapturous melody. At the
sound a mighty quaking and trembling stirs the
earth. The graves burst open. The same Spirit
that raised Jesus from the dead, quickens their
mortal bodies; and at the call of that rapturous
music, they rise, clad in white robes of His righteousness, and with upturned faces and outstretched hands, they bound forth and upward
through the air, towards that glorious Form that
is radiating the Heavens and filling them with
splendor.
Another strain of melody bursts forth in such
power that all Heaven trembles with its majestic
splendor. At the sound, those waiting upon the
earth are transformed. The laws " of gravity lose
all control and power to hold them from Him who
waits with outstretched arms, as He descends with
a shout : "Arise, My Love, My Fair One! and come
away" Sol. Songs 2:13. The mortal puts on immortality; the corruptible puts on incorruption.
Her eyes have seen her Lord. She is sweeping

515

THIS IS THAT
through the air to meet Him, and He towards her ;
with outstretched arms they meet. O, that meeting the air! At last He clasps her in His arms;
she for whom He died, and has waited so long.
At last she lays her queenly head upon the bosom
of Him for whom she lived, and has pictured so
often in her dreams. He wipes away her tears.
Their lips meet as they embrace. All Heaven
rocks and sways and trembles as every harp and
musical instrument bursts forth with the might
and majestic splendor of the wedding song, that
rises and falls, echoes and reechoes, through the
air.
All Heaven has come forth to behold the meeting in the air, and to welcome the Bride, saying:
"Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to Him,
for the marriage of the Lamb hath come, and the
wife hath made herself ready" Rev. 19:7. They
rise together; the Heavens roll together again.
Deeper darkness settles on the earth; but beyond
the starry floors of Heaven is great jubilation.
Myriad hosts of angels are banked, tier upon
tier, as far as the eye can see, on either side of the
long path that leads to the throne, upon which
rests a cloud of radiant glory. To the strain of
that wondrous wedding march, which beats and
pulsates in indescribable grandeur, He leads her,
leaning upon His arm, towards the throne, and
presents her unto His Father, spotless, blameless,
in radiant purity, clad in His righteousness and
power.
Then follows a wondrous ceremony, so wonderful
that it is unlawful for man to describe; and then
the marriage supper of the Lamb, where the Bride
and the friends of the Bride are served with joy

unspeakable, by angelic hosts in robes of white.
They drink together the wine of the kingdom. She
has eyes but for one, her Lord, her Saviour, her
King, her Husband.
516

THE MARRIAGE OF THE LAMB
All tears are dried forever. Rev. 21:4. Darkness has vanished away. Kev. 21:23. Naught
from her Lord shall ever sever. She will dwell
in his presence for aye and aye.
Who is this clad in the splendor of the Sun?
It is Jesus, the Holy One.
The rainbow of peace is under His feet,
And in Him the Godhead power complete.

517

THAT WONDERFUL DAY.
JESUS, the Son of God, is soon coming back to
this earth again, and the Holy Spirit is sending forth the last call to the Bride to be ready
to meet Him in the air. There is a mighty stir going on in the earth today, not only among the sinful nations but amongst the righteous saints who
are preparing for the great day of His appearing.
"For the Lord, Himself, shall descend from
heaven with a shout, with the voice of an archangel and the trump of God. The dead in Christ
shall rise first, then we who are alive and remain
shall be caught up together with them to meet
the Lord in the air, and so shall we be ever with
the Lord."

What a wonderful day that will be! The most
eloquent tongue, the most inspired pen cannot bogin to tell of the glory of that great triumphal
day.
There have been some wonderful days since tho
beginning of time, but this day will outshine
them all. It was a wonderful day when God
spoke the world into being a wonderful day when
He set the sun, the moon and stars in the heavens.
It was a wonderful day when He created man in
His own image a wonderful day when man.
having fallen into sin, had been doomed to die and
God so loved the world that He promised to send
His Son Jesus to suffer and die that He might lift
him up from the depths of sin to the highest
heights of Glory. It was a wonderful day when
the wise men saw His star in the East and Jesus
was born a babe in the manger.
518

THAT WONDERFUL DAY
There were many wonderful days in Jesus' ministry when He healed the sick, cleansed the lepers,
raised the dead, cast out demons, performed miracles and fed the multitudes.
It was a wonderful day when Jesus was tried
before Pilate and as a lamb before his shearers is
dumb, so He opened not His mouth.
It was a wonderful day when He was nailed to
the cross and when He took our place and paid our
debt and bore our punishment in His own body on
the tree. It was a wonderful day when they laid
Him in the tomb and a still more wonderful day
when He was resurrected and came forth in triumphant glory and power.

It was a wonderful day when He left the wondering disciples and ascended to His Father in
Heaven and a cloud received Him out of sight.
Ah! there is a still more wonderful day coming,
the crowning day of all other days, when Jesus
shall come back to earth again, when He shall part
the clouds and we shall see Him descending from
Heaven clad in robes of splendor. This time He
is not coming to be spurned and rejected and spit
upon and beaten. This time He is coming back a
King, victorious, to awaken the overcomers, those
who are saved unto the end, who awaken to the
Bridal Call. You, too, are called to be in thai
bridal procession. Make restitution, get under
the blood, for Jesus is coming soon.

519

TOWARD MORNING.
IT is always darkest just before the dawn. Today the world is enveloped with the darkest
shroud of midnight sorrow that has ever been
know r n. Death and misery, slaughter and despair,
destruction and devastation are rampant. In hundreds of thousands of homes mothers and wives are
weeping and mourning as one who refuses to be
comforted, even as I write these words. Plagues
and pestilences have been loosed upon the earth
today, even as in Egypt's darkness of old. And
now, just before morning, the firstborn are being
slain, blood is flowing forth like a river, and few
indeed are the homes and hearths that have not
been touched.
Exodus 12 :29 says : "And it came to pass, that
at midnight the Lord smote all the firstborn in
the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh
that sat on his throne, unto the firstborn of the
captive that sat in the dungeon. And there was

a great cry in Egypt, for there was not a house
where there was not one dead." Then came deliverance, and the children of Israel were led forth
with singing.
Dear tired, troubled, grief-torn heart, look up,
the night is far spent, the long, weary way is almost ended. Weeping may endure for the night
but JOY cometh in the morning. And just as
sure as yonder sun rose over the hills this morning, banishing the shades of night, just so sure
will Jesus, the Sun of righteousness, rise over
the hills in immortal glory to take His people, His
overcoming children, to that land where tears
never flow.
520

TOWARD MORNING
Today, the powers of darkness are closing on
every hand. Wickedness is waxing worse and
worse, till sometimes, as we read of the staggering condition of affairs, the slaughter of our bravest and best, the shot-torn fields, the stricken
homes, the crying of fatherless children, the burning of homes, as we look into the faces blackened
and pinched with hunger, as the photographer
sends the pictures from over there, as we see the
pitiful sight of little children, walking skeletons,
perishing horribly for want of bread, our heads
reel before the appalling spectacle and it all seems
like some hideous nightmare. But no, it is too,
too true, darkness has fallen, fallen also in many
churches where men have become lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God, fallen where lukewarm professors have a form of godliness but deny
the power thereof. But look up, beloved, 'tis almost morning. Hallelujah!
"Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the
feeble knees. Say unto them that are of a fearful

heart, be strong, fear not: behold your God will
come with vengeance, even God with a recompense;
He will come and save you. And the ransomed of
the Lord will return, and come to Zion with songs
and everlasting joy upon their heads; they shall
obtain, joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing
shell flee away."
Sometimes in your daily life, amidst the heartaches, the pressure brought to bear against you,
the weight of the cross, the thorns along the path,
you have almost fainted by the way, but stand
fast a little longer, dear one, press on a little further. See! Just over yonder hill tops the gray
dawn is breaking, Jesus is coming soon. He is
coming to wipe all tears from all faces wherefore comfort ye one another wdth these words.
Were ever words of comfort so sweet to weary
pilgrims? ft 'Jesus is coming soon" the wondrous
521

THIS IS THAT
words lift the drooping head. "Jesus is coming
soon." At that glorious hope the weak hands are
lifted high with renewed strength and hope.
"Jesus is coming soon." The words bring with
them such a vision of glory that even in this vale
of tears eyes are lightened and suffused with rapture because of that glorious morning.
"For the Lord Himself shall descend from
Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God, and the dead in
Christ shall rise first, then we which are alive and
remain shall be caught up together with them in
the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and so
shall we ever be with the Lord. I. Thess. 4 :16, 17.
Let nothing hinder your progress; though discouragements rise overwhelmingly as an impass-

able barrier in your path, press on in Jesus' name
and that barrier will melt away as shadows before the summer's sunshine. Have you ever
walked along a lonely country road at night, and
seemed to "see men as trees walking" ? Do you
remember how yonder crooked stump looked like
some giant ready to spring upon you as you passed,
how yonder innocent fence-post appeared like some
grim spectre of the night, crouching in readiness
for some dire, unspeakable deed even the sounds
of the night seemed different and at the lowing
of the cow or its nibbling at the grass your heart
pounded as you cried, "What's that !" You laughed
at your fears when morning's light drove away the
shadows and revealed the source of the sounds; so
it is with us, dear ones, if we press on through the
gloom all our fears will prove but folly, for in
Him we are safely hidden from all danger.
The lions that roar are in reality chained and
unable to harm you while you walk close to him.
Fear not the grim spectres of the night, no matter
how the enemy may seek to intimidate you. Press
on, 'twill not be long now till all the shades of
522

TOWARD MORNING
night are rolled away and we see Jesus face to
face.
All that we have sacrificed and suffered down in
this old world will be forgotten, yea, will fade into
insignificance before just one look into the eyes of
our beloved who cometh quickly. Go through,
though it means losing every friend on earth,
though it means standing alone, persecution, reproach, death to self, and a daily reckoning ourselves crucified with Him. For He that endureth
to the end, the same shall be saved. Keep low
under the blood; be filled with the Spirit; let

your robes be kept spotless, your sandals upon
your feet, your vessels filled with oil, in readiness
until the day break and the shadows flee away.

523

TEACHING
OF DEEPER TRUTHS

THE PLAN OF REDEMPTION.
IN order to make the great Plan of Redemption
simple and plain to a certain audience, and
that the eye might assist the ear and the understanding of many who knew little or nothing about
God's Word, or of the combined efforts of the Triune God to save a sinful race, I conceived the idea
of drawing "The Plan of Redemption" chart. It
sets forth in a simple, panoramic form the chain
of events from creation and the fall to the final
restoration of all things.
The first three divisions in this chain, as you
will see, represent the dispensation of the Father,
the dispensation of the Son, and the dispensation
of the Holy Ghost, as linked together in their combined efforts to redeem sinful humanity.
FATHER.
Over the first circle is placed a coffin, representing the sin and death that reigned from the time
of Adam to Moses, and from Moses on to Christ.
Satan, who had been cast out of heaven, tempted
our forefathers (the first inhabitants of the earth),
led them into disobedience and sin, thus causing
the downfall of the whole human race. God, in

His holiness, could not look upon sin with the
least degree of allowance, ff wherfore y as by one
man, sin entered into the world, and death by sin,
death passed upon all men for that all have
sinned."
The first chapter of Genesis opens with life .and
creation pulsing everywhere; the last verse of the
last chapter of Genesis ends with a dead-man embalmed and buried in a coffin in Egypt. "The soul
525

THIS IS THAT
that sinneth, it shall die/' was the verdict that God
had given, and His word could not be broken ;
thus the whole human family had gotten themselves into a box, a coffin that they could not get
out of.
The human race began with a perfect man and
woman, fashioned in the likeness of God's own self,
walking together with Him in life and purity
beneath the fruitful trees of the garden of Eden
and ended in a coffin, the sentence of death passed
upon the seed of woman.
God, in His plan of Kedemption, reversed the
whole order of things.
He began with a man (Jesus Christ whose blood
was shed for sinners) lying in a tomb, still and
cold in death, and ends with a perfect man and
woman (Christ and His bride) walking with God
beneath the never-fading trees of the New Jerusalem in eternal life and purity.
Just as Eve was deceived by the fair words of
the serpent, and just as Adam was not deceived,
but took willingly and knowingly of the forbidden
fruit, so it was that when the whole human race

was deluded and deceived by the tempter and condemned to death, Jesus, our second Adam, willingly and knowingly came down and partook of
the fruits of death and stood by the sinner's side
that he might take the sinner's place, bear the
sinner's banishment, die the sinner's death, and
lift him from the fall.
In that fall from grace, mankind fell so low and
descended to such depths, that nothing short of
the combined efforts of the Triune God could lift
him up or reinstate him in the presence of the
Father blameless, without spot or wrinkle or any
such thing. During the dispensation of the Father,
as recorded from Genesis to Malachi, God had repeatedly promised that in the fulness of time He
would bestow a love gift upon this sinful world
526

THE PLAN OF REDEMPTION
that gift was to be Jesus, His only begotten Son.
He, Jesus, was to bruise the serpent's head, and by
His own precious blood on the cross bridge the
gulf 'twixt man and God, rend the veil, and open
a new and a living way into the Holy of Holies.
Through the centuries recorded in the Old Testament, and divided into periods Creation and
Adam ^sin enters flood Moses leads the children
of Israel forth Canaan land minor prophets a
faithful people had been looking forward to the
cross and the day when Jesus would shed His blood
(see types and shadows shedding of blood of
bulls, goats and lambs), just as we who live in
the dispensation of the Holy Ghost today loolc
back to the cross and the blood shed thereupon.
True to His promise, in the fulness of time, "God
so loved the world that He gave His only begotten
Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should not

perish, but have everlasting life."
SON.
The second dispensation (that of the Son), is
recorded in the four Gospels of the New Testament.
It is overshadowed on the chart by the cross, even
as the old dispensation had been overshadowed by
the coffin (sin and death), and is joined to the
first dispensation by the small preparatory link
the preaching of John the Baptist.
In delivering his two great messages "Repent"
and "Behold the Lamb of God," John the Baptist
prophesies the coming of the dispensation of the
Holy Ghost. "There cometh One after me, the
latchet of whose shoe I am not worthy to unloose.
He, when He is come, will baptize you with the
Holy Ghost and fire." It is as though John looked
right straight through this circle upon the chart
the work of the Son and saw the end from the
beginning. There are many things he might have
said about Jesus.
527

THIS IS THAT
He, when He is come, will heal the sick; He,
when He is come, will raise the dead, feed the
hungry multitudes, cleanse the lepers, shed His
blood, and be resurrected the third day; but looking through all of these things, wonderful as they
were, with the clear vision of the Spirit, John looks
ahead and cries :
"He } when He is come, will baptize you with
the Holy Ghost and fire."
The second dispensation, the life of Jesus, taking
in the birth of Christ boyhood rbaptism in Jordan ministry last supper and garden cruci-

fixion and burial and the resurrection of our
Lord, while completely spanning the gulf between
God and man, and bringing salvation from sin
through His precious blood, still needed the work
and dispensation of the Holy Spirit, third person
of the Trinity, to complete the plan of redemption
in its fullest sense. Jesus plainly declares :
"It is expedient for you that I go away; for if
I go not away, the Comforter will not come."
There must needs be a third story to the ark, in
which the sin-cursed multitude might take refuge
to escape the flood of judgment which must fall
upon the iniquities of earth.
HOLY GHOST.
Just as the Father bestowed the gift of Jesus
Christ, His Son, as a love gift to the sinner, so
now in turn, Jesus bestowed the Holy Ghost, the
promise of the Father, His love gift to the believer.
The link which joins the dispensation of the
Spirit to that of the Son is the ten days between
the ascension of the Lord and the outpouring of
the Holy Spirit, wherein the one hundred and
twenty tarried for the promised Comforter. 'Tis
as though the Father joined hands with the Son
and the Son with the Holy Spirit, that by their
unity and oneness of purpose, the plan of redemption might be wrought out.
523

THE PLAN OF REDEMPTION
Just as sin and death overshadowed circle
one and the work of the cross rises high aloft
above any other event in circle two, so now the
Holy Spirit, as a dove, broods over and overshadows
the dispensation of the Holy Ghost.

The dispensation of the Holy Ghost, which began
on the day of Pentecost, we are still living in, and
will be living in, in fact, until Jesus sweeps back
the billowy clouds which curtain earth from
heaven, and takes His bride unto Himself.
Today we live in the closing hours of the dispensation of the Holy Spirit. Looking back through
the centuries which it embraces, since the day of
Pentecost, we see first, the church filled with power
signs and wonders wrought under the downpour
of the former rain which accompanied the first
seed-sowing days loss of the gifts and powerloss of the teaching of the Holy Ghost the days
when the curtains of the dark ages obscured the
light of justification by faith then restoration
begins, and the teaching of the Holy Ghost and
latter rain is flung broadcast.
We stand today on the verge of the coming of
the Lord. Through the power of the Spirit the
church is being restored to the full standard of
Pentecostal power and perfection. A little band
of despised overcomers is coming through blood
and fire, triumphant, purged and made white
through the blood of the Lamb. With uplifted
faces and stretched-out arms, its members are
yearning for the coming of the Lord the bright
and morning star the Son of righteousness who
shall arise with healing in His wings.
"For the Lord Himself shall descend from
Heaven with a shout . .' . the dead in Christ
shall be raised first; then those that are alive and
remain shall be caught up together with them to,
meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we ever be
with the Lord."
529

THIS IS THAT
SON.

While the resurrected and translated saints are
caught up in the rapture to the wedding and marriage supper of the Lamb, link three, the tribulation, sorrow and punishment such as was never
known, leads on to the day in which the Lord shall
descend with His saints, and the government shall
be upon His shoulders. "For He must reign till
He hath put all enemies under His feet."
The dragon, that old serpent, which is the Devil
and Satan, shall be bound a thousand years and
cast into the bottomless pit, where an angel shall
shut him up and set a seal upon him that he
deceive the nations no more till the thousand years
shall be fulfilled, and after that he must be loosed
for a little season.
Then shall be fulfilled the prayer of our Lord
"Thy kingdom come; Thy mil be done on earth as
it is in Heaven." The saints, who have overcome,
who have neither worshipped the beast nor His
image, who have refused to receive his mark upon
their forehead, or in their hand, shall "live and
reign with Christ a thousand years." Rev. 20:4.
Bead Kev. 20 (1 to 15). When the thousand
years have expired Satan shall be loosed out of his
prison for a little season, and shall go out to deceive the nations, inasmuch that they shall gather
round the beloved city and compass the camp of
the saints, but fire shall come down from God out
of Heaven and devour them. The devil that deceived them shall be cast, not into the bottomless
pit again, but this time into the lake of fire and
brimstone, where the beast and the false prophet
are, and shall be tormented day and night forever
and ever.
FATHER.
Then comes the great white throne judgment,
when the dead, both small and great, shall be

530

THE PLAN OF REDEMPTION
called to stand before God, before the face of whom
earth and heaven flee away.
The book of life shall be opened and the dead
shall be judged out of those things which are
written in the books, according to their works.
The sea shall give up the dead which are in it;
death and hell shall deliver up their dead and they
shall be judged, every man according to his works.
Then it is that Jesus "shall have delivered up the
kingdom to God, even the Father" and "shall be
subject unto Him that put all things under Him,
that God may be all in all"I Cor. 24, 28. Thus
the Lord, having subdued His enemies, places the
reins again in the hands of the Father, the plan of
redemption completed.
Kead the chart from left to right Father, Son,
Holy Ghost, Son, Father. Now read it from right
to left it is the same.
The circle has been closed, but the work of redemption is not complete until the vision seen by
John on the Isle of Patmos has materialized and
again the perfect man and the perfect woman
Christ and His bride walk beneath the eververdant trees, whose leaves shall not fade, and
whose fruit shall not decay. The final overthrow
of the devil and his power shall be brought about:
sin shall never enter there.
Oh, the infinite love and patience the sweat
drops of blood the thought the labors the toils
of the Triune God to redeem a fallen world and
bring back unbroken communion with Father, Son
and Holy Ghost !

531

THE BRIDE
IN HER VEIL OP TYPES AND SHADOWS.
AN AFTERNOON TALK GIVEN AT VICTORIA HALL, LOS
ANGELES, CAL V FEB. 9, 1919.
"Come hither, I will shew thee the Bride, the Lamb's
Wife." Rev. 21:9.
THE great Wedding of the King of Kings is
soon to take place. The most colossal preparations are being made, both in Heaven and
in earth. In the angelic hosts above, and in the
Bridal Company on earth, harps are being tuned
and the first superb strains of the New Song the
Wedding Song are flowing forth from love-filled
hearts in liquid streams of praise.
Every Spirit-filled child of God each member of
the Bridal Body, is wide awake and on tip-toe
now, looking for the coming forth of the Bridegroom who is soon to appear in the clouds of glory.
Mortal mind cannot picture nor conceive the stupendous glory and beauty that Avill flood the
heavens at His appearance.
Have you ever stood, spell-bound, in the rosy
glow of early morning, as the rising sun threw
back the shades of night, touching and illuminating each snowy cloud and transforming them into
flaming, livid beauty, until the whole sky seemed
filled with angels' wings of gold and fire and
crimson ?
Have you ever wondered, if the earthly sun
could rise with such attendant glory, what the
coming of the Son of Righteousness, who shall rise
with healing in His Avings, will be?

Yes, the Marriage of the Lamb is at hand. The
Bridegroom, who has gone to prepare a place for
His Bride, is soon to appear.
532

THE BRIDE IN HER VEIL OF TYPES AND SHADOWS
On earth the Bride is making the final preparations: the last finishing touch is being put upon
her trousseau. The days of her purification with
oil of myrrh and with sweet odors are almost
accomplished; the day when she shall be brought
forth unto the King has come.
Even in the natural, a bride is ever an object of
interest and a whispered
"Here comes the bride/ 7 is enough to arouse the
instant attention and smiling interest of an hundred pair of eyes.
In the spiritual the interest in the Bride is intensified a thousand fold, and surely this interest is
begotten by the Spirit, for just as the angel spoke
unto the beloved disciple on the Isle of Patmos,
saying :
"Come hither, I will shew thee the Bride, the
Lamb's wife/ 7 and caught him away in the Spirit
to a great and high mountain, there to reveal her
glories to him, so the Holy Spirit today speaks to
the children of God, saying :
"Come hither (to the Word of God) and I will
show thee the Bride, the Lamb's wife."
Once He has caught us up unto the mountain,
and has begun to unfold the Word before our wondering eyes, we gaze into its pages and see the
Bride in almost every picture.

We see her in the PAST, wrapped in a mist of
types and shadows.
We see her in the PRESENT, emerging from
the types and shadows, coming forth a living,
visible, Spirit-filled, Spirit-led people, humble and
lowly, yet walking with the dignity and majesty
of her coming Lord.
We see her in the FUTURE, reigning with her
Bridegroom upon the everlasting throne, in that
glorious City, where the streets are all pure gold,
the gates are a solid pearl, and where joy and
praises forever echo through His courts.
533

THIS IS THAT
THE BRIDE A RIB COMPANY BROUGHT FORTH FROM
THE WOUNDED SIDE OF THE BRIDEGROOM.
Gen. 2 :21.
Looking into the past where the Word is filled
with types and shadows of the Bride and her
coming forth to meet the Bridegroom, one of the
first types that the Spirit shoAVS us is that of
Adam and Eve.
It was a man and a woman (Adam and Eve)
who first brought sin and death into the Avorld,
and
It will be a man and a woman (Christ and His
Church) who will go forth together, hand in hand,
ruling and reigning, when the last grim foe of sin
and death is conquered. Bless the Lord.
For the FIRST ADAM "there was not found an
help meet" (Gen. 2:20), in all the beautiful garden
of Eden wherein he dwelt. "And the Lord God

caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam" (Gen.
2:21), and while he slept He took out one of his
ribs, and of the "rib ivhich He had taken from man
made He a woman and brought her unto the man."
( Gen. 2 :22. ) Here immediately AVC see a beautiful
type of
The SECOND ADAM for whom, amongst all the
seraphic hosts of heaven there was not found
an help meet. Then came the deep sleep of death
which the Lord God alloAved to come upon Him,
and as He slept, there on the cross, His side was
opened wide and
Hallelujah! From the wounded side of Jesus,
our Second Adam, a rib company is being formed
today and will soon be brought to the man Christ
Jesus, to be His wife and His help meet forever.
THE CLOTHING OF THE BRIDE MUST BE BLOOD-BOUGHT.
Gen. 3:21.
Then comes the day when Adam and Eve
realized their need of clothing. By their own
534

THE BRIDE IN HER VEIL OF TYPES AND SHADOWS
efforts an apron of fig-leaves was made but not
approved of by God. Man by his own works and
by garments of his own self-righteous making, can
never please the Father. His covering must needs
be bought at the price of blood, therefore was the
blood of an innocent creature shed and the Lord
God did make coats of skins (skins typifying the
covering and righteousness of Jesus), and clothed
them.
THE OFFERING OF THE BRIDE MUST BE MADE BY

BLOOD. Gen. 4 :4, 5.
Though CAIN brought the best fruits of the
ground the best results his own works and labors
could make unto his offering the Lord had no
respect.
But Avhen ABEL brought the firstlings of his
flock, the slain lamb, and God saw the blood, He
had respect unto this offering.
Good works and man-made efforts can never win
the respect of God, but when the humblest saint,
upon his knees, comes with an offering made
through the blood of Calvary's Lamb, he, through
that blood, commands the respect and approval of
all Heaven.
PREPARATION OF ARK SEPARATION AND OBEDIENCE
OF BRIDE. Gen. 6, 7, 8.
"Come hither and I will show thee the Bride,
the Lamb's wife/' cries the living Word, as we
turn our eyes upon the Ark, the Noahic Covenant,
and the flood of Avaters that covered the earth.
The Holy Spirit catches up the searchlight of
Mat. 27 :37-39, and turns its blazing light full upon
the mists and shadows that before so shrouded this
Genesis 6th, 7th and 8th chapters as to make it
seem nothing more than a history of bygone days.
The illuminating words of Jesus:
"As IT WAS, in the days of Noah
So SHALL IT BE/ 7 reach out and draw aside the
535

THIS IS THAT

outer veil and reveal the inner depths, until
the pages seem alive again, peopled with the
surging, sinful masses of today. Again the
wickedness of man is great the earth filled with
corruption and violence. Again through raging
storm, through war and plague and pestilence, we
hear the warning voice of God:
"My Spirit shall not always strive with man
. . . I will destroy them with the earth" Again
we see God's little remnant, His infinitely precious
few His Noahs, the just and perfect ones, who,
with their households, walk with God. Again we
see the faithful, whose ears are open to the call
of God, whose eyes have discerned the darkening
sky, overcast with threatening clouds. Then in
their midst there looms the three-storied Ark, with
its one door set within the side, and the one
window, in the top. At the words :
"As IT WAS ... so SHALL IT BE/' the threestoried Ark blazes forth throughout obscurity, and
we perceive that its three stories are composed of
none other material than the combined, united,
three-fold efforts of a loving, Triune God. The
dispensation of the SON was builded upon the
sure foundation of the Father's love (John 3:16) ;
the dispensation of the Holy Spirit was built upon
that of the Son (John 16:7).
The OPEN DOOR within the side that seemed but
common-place before, now fills our hearts with
love our eyes with tears, for the Spirit whispers :
"The Door? Who could it be but Jesus, through
whose wounded side a new and living way was
opened, leading through Himself unto the depths
of the Father's love and the heights of the Spirit's
power?"
Again we hear the call ring in our ears :
"Come, thon, and all thy house, into the Ark"we see the Bridal Company passing through the

Door separated and shut away from the outside
536

THE BRIDE IN HER VEIL OF TYPES AND SHADOWS
Avorld, within the staunch and storm-proof vessel
of the Triune God that will weather every gale.
In the CLOSING OF THE DOOR we see the closing of
the day of mercy.
In the FALLING OF THE RAIN the raging of the
seas the rising of the floods that envelop the
earth and all that therein is (Rev. 16), we see the
coining tribulation and dire sorrow soon to burst
upon this world.
The RISING OF THE ARK, surmounting every wave,
shielding the little, chosen, faithful few from
wind and rain, is Father, Son and Holy Spirit,
enveloping, catching up the Bride, and holding
her on high above the turmoil of coming tribulation's waves.
THE WARNING, HASTY FLIGHT AND ESCAPE OF THE
BRIDE Gen. 19:17-30.
The Bride small in number (Math. 7:14)
despised of men beloved of God how she rises
from each Spirit-filled page, as the Spirit takes
the things of Christ and reveals them unto us.
We turn our eyes upon the destruction of Sodom
and Gomorrah, and again, as the Spirit's hand
sweeps back the curtain, we find ourselves gazing
into the living, surging throngs of today the
vain, sin-filled earth the coming tribulation the
escape of the obedient few and the falling of God's
fiery wrath.

In that wicked city, Sodom, we see our lands
today, wherein wickedness has waxed worse and
worse.
In the humble, obedient Lot, we see the Bride
dwelling in the midst of a perverse and crooked
generation, in the world and yet not of it.
In the coming of the two at i gels at even, and
their warning cry at midnight, we recognize the
"SPIRIT AND THE WORD;" warning of the coming
tribulation and urging instant flight. As soon as
537

THIS IS THAT
the two angels had warned Lot, he, in turn, hastening to warn his sons-in-law, crying:
"Up, get you out of this place, for the Lord will
destroy this city" This is the cry of the CHURCH
today as she prepares to leave this earth.
In the mocking and unbelief of the sons-in-law
we see mirrored the attitude of the world at large
today when warned of the impending \vrath of
God.
As they lingered, the two angels laid hold upon
the hands of Lot, his wife and his two daughters,
and brought them forth and set them without the
city. The Spirit and the Word are today laying
hold upon the hands of God's little children and
bringing them forth and setting them without the
city in a life of real separation unto the Lord.
The cry "Escape for thy life, look not behind
thee, neither stay thee in all the plain escape to
the mountain lest thou be consumed," is the cry of
the Spirit and the Word to God's little family today. "Escape for thy life, destruction is coming,

no time to look back now; neither stay thou in all
the plain" for the Lord is calling a called-out, out
of a called-out, out of a called-out people who will
escape to the mountains (rise up into the heights
of God).
At the hesitation of Lot, the cry of "Haste thee,
for I cannot do anything until thou be come
hither," we find mingled with the cry of the angel
ascending from the east in Kev. 7:2-3, "hurt not
the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, until we
have sealed the servants of our God in their
foreheads."
In the looking back and the turning to a pillar
of salt of Lot's wife, we see the condition of backsliding churches and individuals today, standing,
stiff and frozen, at the very point where they first
looked back. This is no time for looking back,
'tis a time to go forth quickly, Bless the Lord.
538

THE BRIDE IN HER VEIL OF TYPES AND SHADOWS
In the raining upon Sodom and Gomorrah of
brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven
the overthrow of the cities and all the inhabitants
of the cities, and that which grew upon the
ground" we recognize the fiery wrath and indignation and judgment of God, the great tribulation
foretold in Revelation.
Lot and his daughters took refuge in a cave in
the mountain. The Cave in which we hide is
Christ; the Cave is in the Mountain God (Dan.
2:45.)
In the safe refuge of Lot and his daughters in
the cave in the mountain we see the faithful
children of the Lord whose lives are hidden away
with Christ in God, far above the fiery indignation

poured upon the earth.
THE SPIRIT ABIDES WITH AND GUIDES THE BRIDE
FROM THE WELL OF SALVATION TO THE ARMS
OF THE BRIDEGROOM.
Gen. 24.
Turning the pages we open at the story of
Rebecca, the bride chosen for Isaac by Eliezer, the
servant of Abraham.
Again the Spirit holds aloft the light of Revelation, and again the printed page, with its history
of what seemed at first glance but an interesting
account of the romance and love of an earthly
Isaac and Rebecca, fades away.
We find ourselves gazing into the mirror of
yesterday, which throws back the reflection of
today.
REBECCA RISES with a new dignity the dignity of
the Bride of Christ
AND COMING OUT (separation)
To THE WELL (salvation)
GOES DOWN (humility)
539

THIS IS THAT
AND FILLS HER PITCHER (with joy shall ye draw
waters from the wells of
salvation)

AND COMES UP (the way down is the way up "he
who humbleth himself shall be exalted.")
As the servant runs to meet her; tells her of the
glorious Bridegroom far away, and opens the door
to bridehood, the light of understanding falls
upon him, and we recognize at once the blessed
Holy Spirit sent to guide us into all truth.
(John 16:13.)
KUNNING to meet the pure in heart at salvation's
well
KEVEALING the beauties and attributes of the
Heavenly Bridegroom, and
INVITING all who are willing to bid farewell to
earth's dearest relations and ties, to mount the
bumpy camel of daily tests and trials (knowing
that when we are tried we shall come forth as
pure gold)
LED BY the Spirit, and go forth to meet the
Bridegroom. (Mat. 25:6.)
In Isaac's walking forth in the field to meet
Rebecca at eventide, we see in type our Bridegroom
Jesus coming forth in the clouds to meet His
Bride at the end of her pilgrim journey.
And when Eebecca, lifting up her eyes, beholds
Isaac, and alights from off her camel, our hearts
leap within us at the vision of the day when the
Bride's lifted eyes shall behold her Redeemer.
Then shall she alight forever from the camel of
tests and trials and hardships, and all her tears
shall be wiped away.
In the veil with which she covered herself we
behold the Bride at His coming, completely shut
off and obscured from the sight of the world.

The closing words: "And SHE BECAME HIS
540

THE BRIDE IN HER VEIL OF TYPES AND SHADOWS
WIFE," set the chiming wedding bells of Revelation
19 :7 ringing in our hearts.
The words: "And HE LOVED HER" flood our
souls and overwhelm us with holy joy and rapture.
If, Avhen we were yet sinners, He loved us enough
to shed His blood for us; if He loved us at the
cross enough to wash our sins away; if He loved
us enough to fill us with His Spirit and put the
finely embroidered wedding gown upon us, what
mortal pen can be enough inspired the boundaries
of what human mind can be enough enlarged to
depict the LOVE that will be lavished upon the
Bride when she becomes (O, holy, sacred word)
His wife!
CONSECRATION UNTO LIFE OR DEATH GLEANING
HUMILITY, AND REWARD OF THE BRIDE.
Ruth 1,2,3,4.
Turning to the book of Ruth we again behold
the Bride.
Chapter One, LEAVING HER NATIVE COUNTRY, following the God of Naomi, and making her consecration, which was to be unto life or death.
Chapter Two, GLEANING in the fields, from the
beginning to the end of the harvest gathering
sheaves watched over and fed by the Bridegroom,
Boaz.
In Chapter Three, we behold her LOVE FOR THE
BRIDEGROOM,, and her desire to be his bride, and the
deeper consecration that caused her (verse 3) to

WASH HERSELF (from all her works and labors)
ANOINT HERSELF WITH OIL (the anointing that
abides the oil of the Spirit)
PUT HER RAIMENT UPON HER (the fine linen, clean
and white, which is the righteousness of the
saints, Rev. 19 :8, embroidered with the fine
needlework and wrought gold of Psalms
45:13-14),
541

THIS IS THAT
AND GET HER DOWN TO THE FLOOR (in lowliness
and humility to lie at the feet and mercy of
the Bridegroom, covered with the skirt of
his garment (verse 13) "till the morning' 7
breaks and the shadows flee away.)
In Chapter Four we behold RUTH THE BRIDE,
who, though shut out by her nearest kin the Law
who was unable to redeem her ( Deut. 23 :3 ) ,
was admitted by Grace when wedded to Boaz, who
became at once her Redeemer and her Bridegroom.
What a picture ! Bless the Lord !
THE BRIDE, TRUE IN THE MIDST OF FIERY TRIAL.
PROTECTED FROM ITS BLAST. Dan. 3:21.
The pages turn again. This time we gaze upon
the three Hebrew children, Shadrach, Meshach and
Abed-nego.
Firmly do they refuse to bend the knee in
worship or in compromise to the gods of this
world.
Fearlessly, their words ring out, declaring unswerving faith and allegiance to Jehovah, the one
true God.

Breathlessly, we watch them bound in their
coats, hosen, hats and other garments; cast into
the midst of the burning, fiery furnace, protected,
preserved, and delivered from the heat of the
flame.
Then, all at once, we opened our eyes in amazed
recognition and look again to find, as the burning
flame penetrates the mists of types and shadows,
that these THREE (with the Son of God in their
midst) are none other than the BRIDE herself,
BODY, SOUL and SPIRIT, protected and preserved
amidst the raging flames. (/ pray God your whole
spirit and soul and ~body be preserved blameless
unto the coming of our Lord, Jesus Christ
IThess. 5:23.)
542

THE BRIDE IN HER VEIL OF TYPES AND SHADOWS
Walking unharmed in the midst of temptation
and fiery trial, without the smell of scorching, we
catch a glimpse of the glorious Bride who is
being prepared by the Spirit to abide the "day of*
His coming" (Mai. 3:2), and to dwell with our
God, who is a consuming fire.
Suddenly the furnace door swings wide, and the
voice of the King is heard crying:
"Ye servants of the Most High God, 'COME
FORTH' and 'COME HITHER' \ and with eyes
of faith and hope we see a doorway opening in
the heavens, leading from the furnace of this
world into the presence of the King, and hear the
voice of the Kingly Bridegroom saying :
"Well done, good and faithful servants, 'COME
'UP, higher 'OUT OF' the 'FIERY FURNACE'

and 'TRIALS OF EARTH/ and be thou promoted
in My provinces, even to My throne to reign with
Me."
THE PRAYING BRIDE DWELLS THROUGH THE NIGHT
WITH LOCK- JAWED LIONS, AND IS LIFTED
AT BREAK OF DAY. Dan. 6 :10-23.
Next we catch a glimpse of the praying bride as
revealed through the prophet Daniel.
His eyes of discernment are open wide (Dan.
5:25-28.)
The windows of his chamber (the eyes of his
soul) are open toward Jerusalem (the coming of
the Lord Kev. 21:2).
Neither threat nor cunning of the enemy could
stop this valiant, earnest soul who, down in the
depths of the lions' den, watched and prayed while
the angel of the Lord held and locked the lions'
jaws.
At break of day the stone was rolled away from
the mouth of the den, and the voice of the King
was heard saying:
"It is enough, come up unto me," and Daniel
543

THIS IS THATwas lifted from the lions' den, and stood upon his
feet beside the King.
The BRIDE of King Jesus, though shut in by

the dark night of this world, and surrounded by
raging lions demons and men, who would gladly
gnash upon her and rend her with their teeth is
protected by the Holy Spirit (the angel of the
Lord), who shuts the mouths of all who would
destroy her.
Watchfully, trustfully, she lifts her eyes, clear,
undimmed, luminous with the light of faith, and
fixes them upon the door in momentary expectancy.
Well does she know that He who will come, will
come and not tarry. Well does she know that the
long night will soon be over and that at break of
day the King's voice will be heard calling her from
above, as He rolls back the clouds and opens a
door in Heaven through which He will lift her
forever from the lions' den of this world into His
own glorious presence, in that land where no
ravenous beast can come.
In verse 24 we behold the wicked ones who had
cast her into the den of trials and persecutions,
themselves cast into the midst of the furious,
ravenous beasts. No angel's hand will be there
to stay their fury; all their bones shall be broken
and they shall be utterly consumed.
Here again is the tribulation which immediately
follows the catching up of the Bride into the
presence of the King.
THE SLAIN LAMB MUST HAVE A SLAIN BRIDE THE
RESURRECTED BRIDEGROOM A RESURRECTED BRIDE.
On and on through the long, heaven-canopied corridors of the Word, the Spirit leads, until at last a
hush enwraps our souls, as Ave are brought to a
manger, and our reverent eyes, looking down into
544

THE BRIDE IN HER VEIL OF TYPES AND SHADOWS
its depths, behold the Christ-child cradled in its
soft embrace.
The Holy Spirit Christ-revealing Guide softly
whispers in our ear :
"As He was in the world, so shall you be . . .
that when He shall appear ye shall be like Him
and see Him as He is."
Looking still upon the tiny form, the Christchild fades from our vision; and in its place we
see the Christ-life of the Bride, conceived and
brought forth from a pure and virgin life, o'ershadowed by the Holy Spirit's power. (Luke 1:35.)
As the child in stature grows (Eph. 4:15) from
milk to meat (Heb. 5:13-14), we see him walking
ever in the shadow and the glory of the Cross.
(Mat. 16:24.)
Knowing Him in the fellowship of His sufferings, the Bride dies out to earth and self, until
she cries aloud with Paul:
"I am crucified with Christ; nevertheless I live,'
yet not I, but Christ liveth in me; and the life that
I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of thq
Son of God; who loved me, and gave Himself for
me." (Gal. 2:20.)
Thus we behold the Bride the Lamb's wife,
knowing Him not only in the fellowship of His
sufferings, but also in the power of His resurrection; yielding herself as one who is alive from
the dead one who is risen with Him and shall,
therefore, reign with Him forevermore. Just as
resurrection power preceded the translation of our
Lord, so the Bride, now rising up and coming
forth in resurrected glory, shall soon receive the

translation power of Acts 1:9, I Thess. 4:17, and
rise mid-air, to meet her Lord.
These are but a few of the many mist-wrapt
types unveiled before our eyes a few of the erstwhile concealing shadows now dispersed by the
545

THIS IS THAT
illumination of the Spirit as He reveals the Bride
before our wondering eyes. ( John 14 :26, John
16:13-14.)
We might continue our search of the hidden
treasures revealed through Esther, the Songs of
Solomon, the ten virgins with their lamps, and
many others.
We might press on and gaze through the eyes of
"John the Beloved" from Patmos, the blest and
sea-bound isle, at the glorious, REIGNING BRIDE,
seated with her royal Bridegroom upon His throne.
We might gaze upon the regal power and splendor with which the King hath clothed her upon
the Heavenly Jerusalem in which she dwells, with
its streets of gold, its jeweled walls, its gates
of pearl, its flowers that never fade, and the fruits
that ne'er decay, its sea of glass, its ransomed
throng Avith harps of gold, and its light that never
shall grow dim.
The time for this afternoon talk is gone, however, before our subject is well begun. But get
your Bibles down when you go home, open wide its
pages, take the lighted lamp of Psalms 119 :105 in
your one hand, place the other in the hand of the
Holy "Spirit, and let Him guide you through the
long, begemmed, heaven-lit corridors of God's
eternal Word, that stretch in an unbroken line

from the first verse of Genesis to the last verse of
Revelation.
Then quicken your step, beloved, fasten your
girdle tightly about you; bind your sandals
securely upon your feet; and with spotless robes
and glowing heart, go quickly forth to meet your
Lord, for He is coming soon.

546

ISAAC AND REBECCA.
A REMARKABLE TYPE OF CHRIST AND HIS BRIDE.
(From a sermon, Bethel Temple, Chicago, 111.)
THERE are many beautiful types of Christ
and His Bride in the Old Testament. One
of the most precious and striking of these
types is that of Isaac and Rebecca.
Just as in the Word of God, the whole story and
plan of Redemption circles around a company of
four namely, the Father, the Son, the Holy
Spirit and the Bride so, in this type, the story is
woven around the four central figures of
Abraham, who is a type of God, the Father,
Isaac, who is a type of Jesus, the Son,
Eliezer, the servant, who is a type of the Holy
Spirit, sent from God to search for and bring the
Bride, and
Rebecca, who is a type of the Bridal Body being
called forth to meet the Bridegroom.
ISAAC AND JESUS, BOTH LONG LOOKED FOR, COME AS
A FULFILLMENT OF PROMISE.
For many long years Sarah had looked forward

with intense longing for the coming of Isaac, the
birth of the man-child who was to take away her
shame. Sometimes hoping, sometimes despairing,
she waited 'till finally God spoke out of the long
silence, and Isaac came as a fulfillment of promise.
For centuries humanity had waited and looked
for the coming of Jesus the Son, who was to redeem and bear away the shame of each sinner
w r ho put his trust in Him. Then God spoke, by
His Spirit, to Mary, and Jesus came as a fulfillment of the promise of the Father, and a sacrificial offering to every one that believes.
Who can describe or fathom the flood of love
that must have filled the heart of Abraham, as he
looked upon his son, his only son, Isaac, the son
of promise. As the lad grew, he was the pride of
547

THIS IS THAT
Abraham's heart; he was the treasure of his house.
But much as Abraham loved Isaac, he loved God
more.
The greatest test of Love is Sacrifice, and to
sound the depths of Abraham's love God put him
to the test, by saying to him :
"Take now thy son, thine only son, Isaac, whom
thou lovest, and get thee unto the land of Moriah;
and offer him there for a burnt offering/' (Gen.
22 :2. ) How similar is this verse to John 3 :16,
which says : "God so loved the world that He gave
His only begotten Son."
Abraham stood the test, and rising up early in
the morning, he saddled his ass, and taking with
him two young men and his son, he clave the wood
for the burnt offering, and rose up, and went to

the place God had told him. Then came the long
journey, but though his heart was bleeding with
love for his only son, the steps of the father never
faltered, but he went on and on, surmounting every
hill of difficulty, till he saw the place afar off.
Bless His dear Name. How far God our Father
journeyed to offer His Son Jesus ! He surmounted
every hill; He climbed the mount of Sinai; He
never faltered; but though it meant giving the
richest treasure of heaven, the Son of His bosom,
He came on and on till at last He saw the place,
and Calvary's hill came into view. Still, without
a moment's hesitation, He journeyed on. "For God
so loved the world that He gave His only begotten
Son, that whosoever belicveth in Him should not
perish, but have everlasting life."
ISAAC BEARS THE WOOD TO HILL OF MORIAH, JESUS
BEARS CROSS TO TOP OP CALVARY'S HILL."
"And Abraham took the wood for the burnt
offering, and laid it upon Isaac his son; and he
took the fire in his hand, and tlie knife; and they
went, both of them together." It was Abraham's
own hand that placed the wood upon him whom
548

ISAAC AND REBECCA
he was to have offered, upon the shoulders of Isaac,
as he ascended Mount Moriah. It was God's own
hand which willingly suffered the cross of wood
to be laid upon the bleeding back of Jesus, as He
bore it up Calvary's hill.
"Then Isaac spake unto Abraham his father, and
said, 'MY FATHER* " (O, the great heartfelt cry
of Jesus "MY FATHER, My God, why hast Thou
forsaken Me?" Isaac said:

"My father, here is the fire; here is the wood;
but where is the lamb for the offering?" And
Abraham said:
"My son, God will provide Himself a Lamb."
Ah ! What a Lamb, what a bleeding, spotless Lamb
God did provide when He gave Jesus as a propitiation for our sins!
A RAM TAKES THE PLACE OF ISAAC,,
NONE COULD TAKE THE PLACE OF JESUS.
At last the top of the hill had been reached;
the altar was completed ; the wood had been laid in
order, and Abraham had bound Isaac his son, and
laid him on the wood on the altar. Then, just as
Abraham stretched forth his hand and took the
knife to slay his son, the angel of the Lord called
to him out of heaven (Why, I believe every angel
in Heaven was looking down to see this wonderful
exhibition of faith and obedient love to God), and
the angel said :
"Lay not thine hand upon the child, for now I
know that thou fearest God, seeing that thou hast
not withheld thy son, thine only son, from me"
(Gen. 22:12.)
And Abraham lifted up his eyes, and behold,
behind him was a ram, caught in a thicket by his
horns. And Abraham took the ram and offered
him up for a burnt offering INSTEAD OF HIS
SON. A ram was able to substitute for Isaac, but
none could ever substitute or fill the place of
Jesus. He was led up Calvary's hill, bearing His
549

THIS IS THAT
cross of wood. He was laid like Isaac upon the
wood, the hand with the knife (the hand with the

spear, in Jesus' case) was raised for the blow, but
even though the Father Himself had to turn away
His face, no angel cried from heaven to stay the
blow. It fell, and the blood of Jesus flowed forth
with the healing of the nations in its crimson
flood. Jesus, the Lamb of God, slain from the
foundation of the world, had paid the price; by
His sacrifice brought redemption to all who should
come beneath the cleansing blood forever.
ABRAHAM SENDS HIS ELDEST SERVANT BACK INTO HIS
COUNTRY TO SEARCH OUT A BRIDE FOR HIS SON
ISAAC. GOD SENDS THE HOLY SPIRIT
BACK TO THIS WORLD TO SEARCH
OUT AND BRING A BRIDE FOR
HIS SON JESUS.
Skipping lightly over the intervening years, we
come, in the 24th Chapter of Genesis, to the day
when Abraham called his eldest servant to him
and commissioned him solemnly to go back into
his own country to choose a wife for his son
Isaac. Abraham made the servant SAvear he would
not choose a wife from amongst the Canaanites,
where he then dwelt, but commanded him thus :
"Go unto my country, and to my kindred, and
take a wife unto my son Isaac."
How far beyond our feeble minds is this great
love of God! How the magnitude of His abounding grace o'er whelms us when we remember that
He did not permit a bride to be chosen from
amongst any of the angelic hosts of the heavenly
Canaan, but sent the Comforter, the Holy Spirit,
back into this Avorld, which indeed is His country,
to His kindred brought nigh through the blood
of His Son to call out a people who would follow
Him to the great marriage of the Lamb, not only

as a guest, but as the Bride, without spot or
blemish. Hallelujah!
550

ISAAC AND REBECCA
"And the servant said unto him: ' Per adventure
the woman will not be willing to follow me unto
this land: must I needs briny thy son again into
the land from whence thou earnest?"
"And Abraham said unto him: ' Beware that
thou brine/ not my son thither again. If the
woman will not be willing to follow thee, then
thou shalt be clear of this my oath; only briny not
my son thither again'."
I can never read those words of the servant,
"Peradventure the woman wilt not be willing to
follow me," without tears springing to my eyes. O
the gentle, pleading, wooing draAvings of the Holy
Spirit, as He walks up and down these aisles tonight, enquiring: "Will you go?" There is no
conscription in this Bridal procession only freewill enlistment. But whether the woman says
yes or no ; whether she is willing to go to meet the
Heavenly Isaac who shall soon appear, or chooses
to remain where she now abides, the Son of God
will never be brought here again to plead with
her, or plead His cause other than by the Spirit
sent down by the Father. Jesus has made the
sacrifice; His dear feet trod this earth to be rewarded only by unbelief and spittings and death.
He will never come again to be beaten, rejected,
and nailed to the tree; the next time He comes it
will be with power and great glory. His kingly
robes will be upon Him; His sceptre will be in
His hand. Whether you will be willing to follow
the leadings of the Spirit who has come to guide
you into all truth, or not, must rest with you tonight. What have you decided to reply to this

invitation ?
Each man, woman and child in the world, irrespective of earthly standing, color or creed, is
invited to accept the leadings of the Spirit and
follow Him to meet Jesus, the heavenly Bridegroom. If you would find this heavenly guide I
551

THIS IS THAT
will tell you where to find Him at the well of
Salvation.
ELEIZER WAITS FOR REBECCA AT THE WELL OP WATER.
THE HOLY SPIRIT MEETS AND CHOOSES THE
BRIDE AT THE WELL OF SALVATION.
As Abraham's servant journeys he comes to the
well, where the daughters were wont to bring their
pitchers for water. There he prays, and waits for
the coming of the bride, saying:
"Behold, I stand here by the well of ivater."
Dear child of God, you who have drawn with joy
from the wells of Salvation, lift up your eyes tonight and behold the Spirit, open your ears and
hear Him say:
"Behold, here I stand, waiting to baptize you
and lead you on to meet your Jesus."
"And it came to pass, before He had done
speaking, that behold Rebecca came out." HOW T
similar is this instance to that recorded in Acts
10:44. "While Peter yet spake these words, the
Holy Spirit fell on all them which heard the
Word!" He is speaking to you now; will you receive Him?

"Behold. Rebecca came out" (He is calling a
come out people these days, a called-out, separated
people) "with her pitcher upon her shoulder. And
the damsel was very fair to look upon, a virgin,
neither had any man known her; and she went
down to the well, and filled her pitcher and came
up."
As I look over your faces it seems I can almost
pick out the Rebeccas who have come here tonight
Avith their pitchers on their shoulders, empty
pitchers, clean pitchers, ready to go down in humility to draw from this inexhaustible well of Salvation. If your pitchers or heads are filled with
learning or earthly wisdom, you must empty them
out in order to be filled at this well. No matter
how big or great you may be you must all alike
552

ISAAC AND REBECCA
get down in humility to drA\ r with joy from these
waters. Rebecca went down and filled her pitcher,
and came up! The Avay up is down, bless God.
We read that the servant ran to meet her, just
as the Spirit is running to meet you tonight. At
his invitation she gave him to drink, and all his
camels did she draw for also. The Word says :
"She hasted, and emptied her pitcher into the
trough, and ran again unto the well to draw water
for his camels." Dear ones, is your pitcher empty
enough, are you down low enough, to have this
abundant supply that not only satisfies the demand
of your own soul, but hastens to draw and empty
for others about you, knowing, with unbroken
confidence, that you can run again to the well and
draw again and again from the hidden source that
never runs dry?

8he was fair to look upon. Can the Lord look
down into the depths of your soul and say : "Thou
art fair, My love, there is no spot in thee?" Are
you a virgin, pure in heart, that knows not the old
man of sin and worldliness? Then the Spirit is
calling you to be a member of the Bridal Body.
Earrings, and bracelets and precious gifts were
given to Rebecca, and she returned with the servant to her parents' house, and there the servant
brought forth jewels of silver (which represents
Atonement), jewels of gold (or the Divine nature
of Jesus), and raiment (which typifies the Righteousness of Jesus), and the marriage robe. These
he gave to Rebecca. Then to the brother and the
mother he also gave precious things. But though
there are precious things to be given to those who
do not go all the way through to the perfection of
full sacrifice, the Bride receives the best and most
beautiful gifts. There is no comparison to be
made between the two.
Then before eating or drinking, the servant told
his message, and of the wonderful master Isaac,
553

THIS IS THAT
arid his beautiful home, far away, and of his desire
to take Rebecca to this home to be the son's Bride.
"And they said, 'We will call the damsel and
enquire at her mouth/ And they called Rebecca,
and said unto her:
"'Wilt thou go with this man? 9 and she said:
" 'I will go'. 7 '
This is the great question of today, the question
now facing each one of you, "Wilt thou go with
this man?" Each individual must answer it for
himself and herself. Oh, can you say, as Rebecca of

old, " 'I will go!' Where He leads me I will follow"?
Trust yourself in His hands, and He will never
leave you till you are safe in the arms of Jesus.
As Rebecca journeyed through the wilderness
she did not lose her way; she did not have to run
about enquiring of every passer-by which road to
take ; the Servant had come to guide, lead, yea, and
carry her, all the way to Isaac's house. What
tales he told her by the way, how her heart was
gladdened and lifted above all earthly things, as
she listened to his glowing description of her
Bridegroom and his home awaiting her. I am
sure she forgot the bumpy camels, and the dusty
road, and the blazing sun, as she pressed on toward the longed-for moment when she should see
him face to face.
Just so is the Holy Spirit leading and guiding
all who will receive Him and follow Him, over
every obstacle, surmounting every hill of difficulty,
taking the things of Jesus and revealing them unto
us as we journey, till we cry out in longing :
"O Lord Jesus, how long till we shall see Your
blessed face?" Our hearts swell with love and
gratitude, and unutterable longing, as the Spirit
speaks, "not of Himself but of Jesus, our Bridegroom, and lover divine.
At last, after long days of traveling we read of
that wonderful meeting.
554

ISAAC AND REBECCA
ISAAC MET REBECCA IN THE FIELD. JESUS TO MEET
HIS BRIDE IN THE AIR.
As Isaac went out to meditate in the field at
eventide,, he lifted up his eyes, and behold, the

camels were coming! O Jesus! Jesus! He is lifting up His eyes just now, this very eventide, and
He sees, and beholds the camels are coming. Are
you amongst that little company that is swiftly
coming up the road to meet Him? Steadily,
surely, we are drawing near the glorious day, dear
pilgrims, when the consummation of our journey
will arrive and we, as Rebecca, will lift up our
eyes and see our Bridegroom; and even now, as we
see in faith our Bridegroom from afar, we should
take the vail of greater separation, and cover ourselves, that we shall indeed be a separated people
unto Him.
We read of Isaac that he brought her into his
mother's tent and took Rebecca, and she became
his wife, and He loved her. Soon our Saviour
shall come for His Bride who has set out to meet
Him, come for those Avho have heard and answered
the call :
"Behold, the Bridegroom cometh, c/o ye out to
meet Him" Soon the great song will resound.
"Let us be glad and rejoice, for the marriage of the
Lamb hath come, and the wife has made herself
ready." The tables are being spread, the marriage
is at hand. Beloved, will you go, will you receive
the Holy Spirit and let Him guide you to the
wedding of the Lamb?
If you have not yet found the well of Salvation,
empty that pitcher you carry upon your shoulder,
and get you down in haste to the wells of Salvation, for it is there you will meet and receive the
Holy Spirit, who, if you will follow Him, will lead
you on over the hills and through the valleys till
you meet your Bridegroom in the air.

555

THE LIFE AND GROWTH OF PETER,
IT is not only God's will, but it is absolutely
necessary and essential that every child of God
should grow in grace and enlarge in love daily.
When I -was a little girl my Mother used to stand
me up at the door once in so often and take a
pencil and make a little mark just at the top of
my head on the frame of the door. After a few
more weeks she would again put another mark
above the last one to measure and see how much
I had grown since the last mark was made. It is
a good thing for Christians to measure themselves
carefully and frequently, not by one another, but
by the Word of God. God's Word is a true measing rod, also the life of Paul, of Peter, and many
others. Let us take the latter, the life and growth
of Peter, today, and see whether we have grown
as quickly and as much as he; if not, let us press
on, for God is no respecter of persons, and what
He has done for Peter He is not only able but
anxious to do for us.
Peter's first sight of Jesus came unexpectedly,
one day as he was about to cast his net into the
sea. Jesus saw Peter, and went and spoke to him,
saying :
"Follow me and I will make you a fisher of
men." Peter straightway left his net and followed
Jesus. Dear one, do you remember the day when
first your eyes were opened to the lovely form of
Jesus walking along the shores of time to your
heart, when first you heard that dear voice, sweet
as the sound of rushing water, bidding you to
leave your nets of worldly cares and your sinful
life and follow Him? Praise His name, just one
sight of that lovely face and all other faces lost
556

THE LIFE AND GROWTH OF PETER

their attraction and power to satisfy; just one cadence of His voice, and earthly voices lost their
charm. Hallelujah! No wonder Peter left his
old, worn-out fishing nets and followed; no wonder we left our unrighteousness and accepted His
righteousness.
Straightway Peter left his nets and followed
Him. How eagerly he promised to follow, and
how little he understood just where the following
would lead him. No shadow of the cross did he
see, no whisperings of a dark night when he Avould
deny his Lord, the future with its train of joys
and sorrows, its victories and defeats, its honor
and dishonor; no visions of a cross where he himself should hang, Avere foreseen as he eagerly and
joyfully promised to follow all the Avay.
HOAV little did we realize the mountain tops of
transfiguration and the valleys of trial we should
pass Avhen our hearts said yes to Jesus and promised to folloAv all the Avay. The main and most
important thing is to say an eternal Yes to Jesus,
and Avhether it is Aveal or whether it is Avoe, the
Jesus Avho took Peter through Avill bring us forth
triumphant if Ave trust and folloAv all the AA r ay.
Through the many days that followed, wonderful
days lived in the presence of Jesus, precious days
of submitting to His leadings and dealings, Peter
learned the meaning of faith and trust. He had
seen his , wife's mother instantly healed of the
fever; he had witnessed the healings of many sick,
and the raising of the dead; he had beheld and assisted in the feeding of the multitudes; and noAV
in the 14th chapter of Matthew, we find him in the
ship with the other disciples, tossed and driven by
the tempestuous waves of the sea.
Dimly through the darkness of the night, then
clearer and more distinctly, they saAV a calm figure
in white raiment Avalking to meet them on the
Avaves, and in fear they cried out : "It is a spirit."

557

THIS IS THAT
O, faint heart, tempest-tossed in your frail craft
of faith, have you ever found your Lord walking
to meet you over the roughest wave of trial, surmounting the highest crest of difficulty and tests?
Did you, like Peter, fail to recognize Jesus as you
were passing through the storm? Or have you
learned to see Jesus in every test walking forth to
reveal Himself to you in some new attribute, in
greater beauty and power than you have yet
known Him? And when all around you seemed
turmoil and strife, and you saw nothing but circumstances and trials, did you ever hear His voice
saying: "It is I; be not afraid"? Cease seeing'
waves and tests and turmoil, and recognize the
Jesus that walks to meet us on their billows.
Have you ever, like dear Peter, had your faith
inspired and encouraged by that word, "Come,"
till you swung your feet over the side of your small
craft, and yourself began to walk in naked faith,
with all material and earthly foundations removed
from beneath your feet, to meet the Lord on top of
the waves that so lately threatened to engulf you?
Perhaps you, too, got your eyes on the wind and
the waves, saAv people and conditions and circumstances instead of Jesus, and began to sink. P>ut
Jesus' ear was open to Peter's cry, and is open to
the cry of every follower. "Lord, save me." Peter
cried, and immediately Jesus put out His hand
and caught him, chiding him for his lack of faith.
More blessed days of growing and learning
passed and Peter is found still following Jesus.
He is called blessed by the Lord, for recognizing
the divinity of the Son of God. We find him rebuked in the same chapter for trying to persuade
Jesus from going to suffer that shameful and igno-

minious death upon the cross. Dear Jesus, how
quick He has been with Peter and with each one
of us to praise and encourage that which savoreth
of faith and sacrifice, and to rebuke and chasten
558

THE LIFE AND GROWTH OF PETER
that which savoreth of the humaii and selfishness.
"And after six days, Jesus taketh Peter and
James and John and brinyeth them up into an high
mountain apart, and was transfigured before them,
and His face did shine as the sun, and His raiment
was white as the light." Beloved, how about that
measuring rod? Are you measuring up so far to
Peter's experience? Have you been upon the
Mount of Transfiguration, and seen Jesus revealed
and transfigured in His beauty and loveliness before your amazed and adoring eyes?
Soon after we find Peter receiving another lesson
in faith, when he was sent to the sea to take the
first fish he caught, and in its mouth to find the
needed money to pay the tribute or tax, for himself
and his Lord.
Through the many, but swiftly passing days of
Peter's walk with Jesus, he grows in faith and
wisdom, he hears the preaching and sees the life
of his Master, he sees miracles wrought, sick
healed, demons cast out, and even sees the sick
healed and demons depart through his own prayer
and faith. But now, with ever increasing emphasis Jesus informs and seeks to impress upon the
minds of His little flock, that soon He is to lay
down His life, to be resurrected again and ascend
unto His Father. Moreover, He tells them again
and again that although He departs He will not
leave them comfortless, but will send another
Comforter, even the Holy Ghost to lead them into

all truth, and endue them with power from on high.
Again we find Peter seated with his Lord at the
last supper, declaring that though all men should
be offended because of Jesus, yet would he never
be offended. Upon hearing the warning of the
Lord that he would deny Him, we hear his impassioned denial :
"Though I should die with Thee, yet will I not
deny Thee" How we, too, have promised the
559

THIS IS THAT
Lord iu those precious hours of feasting and communion, that we would never again deny Him in
any way! Truly the Spirit Avas willing, and the
flesh weak.
Then Jesus took His disciples, and went forth
to the garden of Gethsemane to pray through the
great depression and sorrowful heaviness He felt
pressing down upon Him. Leaving the rest behind
with the injunction to "sit here while I go and pray
yonder/- Jesus took with Him Peter and the two
sons of Zebedee, and said to them: "My soul is
exceeding sorrowful, even unto death: tarry ye
here and watch with me." Jesus went a little further, and falling down upon His face, travailed in
prayer. O, the yearning of His soul to have some
one to watch and pray with Him, but coming to
His disciples and finding them asleep, He did not
address the others, but said unto Peter: "\Vhat!
could ye not watch with me one hour?" Again He
prayed, and upon returning a second and a third
time, found them sleeping.
O ? beloved, have you, too, failed Jesus miserably
on this same line of prayer? Now, in this last
short hour before the door of mercy is forever

closed, and intercessors are needed as never before,
have we, too, been guilty of sleeping at our post?
Have we also been overcome with the slothful ness
that has wrapped us in slumbering blindness to
the face of Jesus bending over us, beseeching us to
rise and pray, not only for others but that we ourselves enter riot into temptation? Jesus knew that
Peter was going to be specially tempted and
singled him out with a command to pray. What
dismay it would bring us to hear Him say :
"Sleep on now, and take your rest. The souls
you might have prayed through to salvation are
lost forever, the brand you might have plucked
from the burning is now in hell. Your opportunity for prayer and intercession is past. Sleep on/'
560

THE LIFE AND GROWTH OF PETEK
Peter sprang to his feet, wide awake now. His
Lord was grieved, his beloved Lord. What could
he do to show his love? With zeal he smote off
the ear of the high priest's servant. He would just
prove his love and zeal. But, ah ! Peter, obedience
is better than sacrifice,, and to hearken than the
fat of rams. The ear was restored by Jesus, and
the little procession of captors and captive moved
on to the judgment hall. Jesus was taken inside
to be tried, but Peter remained outside and began
to warm his hands by the fire. Ah ! it is a dangerous place to go to warm your hands by the fire of
this world; and as Peter sat there a damsel declared that Peter had been with Jesus. But Peter
indignantly denied it before them all, and was
ashamed of Jesus.
Peter moved off to the porch, but could not escape the notice of the people, for if we have been
with Jesus and walked with Him the world will
know it. Another maid asked him if he had not

been with Jesus, and soon yet more standers by
asked him if he were not "one of them 1 '. But
Peter began to curse and swear, saying, "I know
not the man."
O Peter, how our hearts have ached for you and
the shameful thing you did in denying your Lord !
Yet, dear ones, how many of us have denied Him?
Just the time we should have been true and witnessed from the house tops that He was our Saviour, how many times we sat silent just too long.
We must either deny ourselves or deny our Lord,
deny the flesh or deny the Spirit. Surely some
thing was radically wrong with Peter, something
was missing that was much needed. O, it was
surely the Holy Ghost that Jesus said would endue
them with power.
Then followed those agonized hours and days of
suffering for Peter, reproach and conviction over
his failure, the crucifixion of his Lord, the burial,
561

THIS IS THAT
and days of utter loneliness and despair. His
Lord Avas gone, the tender voice was hushed, the
face he loved was still in death. And there was a
great, big empty void everywhere that none could
fill. Then out of that black, vacant void, came the
swift, breathless messenger, Mary, with the message that Jesus was risen. Jesus' first words and
thought were of Peter, and now we see him arising, running, out-stripping the others, stooping
down before the sepulchre, looking, wondering in
himself.
Again we find Peter fishing, still discouraged,
for he knew not where his Lord had gone, leaping
from the boat and rushing to the shore at the first
glimpse of Jesus. ^Ye see him eating of the bread

and fish upon the fire, hear him declaring his love
for Jesus, hear His commission, "Feed My sheep,
feed My lambs." Then came the day of departure,
when Jesus was to leave for His Father's throne,
and we hear Him still impressing upon the disciples the necessity of obeying His command to
tarry in Jerusalem until they were filled with the
Holy Ghost, saying: "You shall receive power
after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you."
After Jesus had been caught up, we find Peter
hastening to the upper room, tarrying until the
Holy Ghost was poured out on the day of Pentecost. We picture him filled with the Holy Ghost,
Acts 2 :4, speaking with other tongues as the Spirit
gave him utterance, so filled with the Spirit that
onlookers thought him drunken with wine. Hear
the shouts and praises of the hundred and twenty,
see the multitude come running together, astonished, amazed, in doubt, crying, "What meaneth
this?" O, it meant that the Holy Ghost had come.
that the hundred and twenty, and Peter, had been
endued with power from on high, and were now able
to stand up and witness with holy boldness of
Jesus the crucified. It meant that out of their
562

THE LIFE AND GROWTH OP PETER
innermost being now flowed rivers of the Spirit
that none could check nor gainsay.
What meaneth this? cried some. Others, mocking said : " ' These are filled with new wine. But
Peter, standing up, said, f these are not drunk with
wine, but this is that, which was spoken by the
prophet Joel'."
Peter standing up! O, what a change from the
cringing, cowardly, denying Peter! This new
Peter had received the Holy Ghost and now, in-

stead of fearing a little maid, he stood boldly before this scoffing, doubting multitude of Jews, and
boldly preached in the Holy Ghost, of Jesus, while
multitudes turned to the Lord and accepted Him
as their Saviour.
Are you measuring yourself by the measuring
rod as we go on, dear ones? If you have left all
to folloAv Jesus, have you received the Holy Ghost
since you believed, with the Bible evidence? Have
you felt your lack of power to testify and your
heart has been dismayed when you denied Him oy
failed in prayer, or lacked in power? Then what
you need is the Holy Ghost. Or have you perhaps
been on the mountain top, and beheld Him transfigured before you? Have you been as Peter, used
in praying for the sick and casting out demons?
Have you mistaken these experiences for the baptism of the Holy Ghost? Then measure up today;
compare your experience with the Bible evidence
of the incoming of the Spirit.
If you have measured up so far and have received the Holy Ghost evidenced by the speaking
in tongues, as Peter of old, don't stop there. This
is just the beginning, the preparation for further
advancement and growth, for when He, the Spirit
of truth is come, He will lead you on into all truth.
Behold Peter's life after Pentecost, where he received the Holy Ghost. See him at the beautiful
gate saying to the lame man,
563

THIS IS THAT
"Silver and gold have I none, but such as I hare,
give I thee. Rise up and walk" See the sick
being brought out from all the villages and towns
round about, as recorded in the 5th chapter of
Acts, and when even the shadow of Peter fell

upon them they were healed, every one.
Behold Peter at Samaria, and at Caesarea, laying hands upon the believers in the one instance
and while he was yet preaching, in the other, they
received the Holy Ghost as had the hundred and
twenty in the beginning. Follow Peter through
his imprisonments, his beatings and scourgings,
his shame and reproach. Follow him through his
courage and faith, his love and life of power.
Follow him to his death on the cross, crucified
head downward because he felt unworthy to be
crucified as his Lord. O, dear ones, I fear that
e'er now the measuring rod, upon being applied to
our lives, will find us all far short. But God is no.
respecter of persons, and He who took Peter
through from his first eternal "7 WILL" at the
sea of Galilee to the cross where he laid down his
life, will take us through if we will follow Him.
"Follow thou Me." The future all unknown
and trusted in His hands. Dear Peters, weak in
yourselves, He will make you strong in Him. Follow Him to the cross, to the grave, through the
resurrection, to the upper room and the reception
of the Holy Ghost, on to the gifts and fruits of the
Spirit, perfect development and identification with
Him in His death on the cross, and on to meet
Him in the air.
Let us then press on and follow all the way. Do
not stop short of God's best and perfection.
"Following Jesus day by day,
Nothing can harm while He leads the way,
Sunshine or darkness, what e'er befall,
Jesus, my Saviour, is my all in all."

564

THE TEMPLE.
"Ye also, as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house."
I. Pet. 2:5.
Visions and Revelations of the Temple As Revealed to Isaiah As Seen by John on the Isle of
Patmos The Structure a$ Revealed by Paul The
Temple as Described by Peter The Marvelous
Mystery of the Transformation Wrought in the
Stones from Quarry to Temple Christ* Seeking
and Preparing the Stones Digging, Separating,
and Excavating "Be Still and Know That I am
God^ Hewing and Shaping Then Comes the Polishing The Refiner's Fire, the Crucible The Majesty and Grandeur of the Completed Temple.
THE wondrous Temple great and grand
which has been under construction for almost six thousand years, is now rapidly taking shape and nearing perfected completion.
Of such vast proportions is this temple that
there can be no end of the universe where God is
to which this great temple does not reach.
Of such grandeur is it this temple (with God
for its Architect, Christ for its High Priest made
up of living stones composed of blood- Avashed souls
its domes and arches of divine love and adoration with saints and teachers for its pillars, and
worshippers for its pavement) that it hath need of
neither the sun nor the moon to shine in it, for
the glory of God doth lighten it, and the Lamb is
the light thereof.
So firm and indestructible, so infinitely precious,
so thoroughly tested by fire and by flood, by hammer
and chisel, is each stone that is built into the
great structure, that deterioration and decay will
565

THIS IS THAT
forever be unknown within its walls, and it will
abide the temple of the great God forever and
forever.
Here it is that they which are arrayed in white
robes they which have come up out of great tribulation, having washed their robes, and made them
white in the blood of the Lamb, stand before the
throne of God, and "serve Him day and night in
His temple: and He that sitteth upon the throne
dwelleth among them." Here it is that His people
know neither hunger nor thirst, neither does the
sun light upon them nor any heat, "for the Lamb,
which is in the midst of the throne," doth feed
them, and "leadeth them unto living fountains of
waters/' and here it is that God wipeth away all
tears from their eyes. Rev. 7 :13-17.
VISIONS AND REVELATIONS OF THE TEMPLE.
We lift our eyes in the Spirit and are transfixed
with wonder as we behold the grandeur of the
great completed structure rising before us with its
belfries and turrets, its gold-crowned towers and
domes gleaming through the thick mist of our mortal conception of the great plan of the Eternal
God.
Our hearts are caught up on the wings of heavenly rapture, as we catch the great, swelling waves
of melody bursting forth from a thousand windows
as the singers and players become as one, making
one sound to be heard, praising and glorifying
God, and the glory of God so fills the temple that
the priests and the Lord's ministers cannot
minister.
Isaiah catches us up and carries us to the very
temple, when he declares: "I saw also the Lord

sitting upon a throne, high and lifted
AS REVEALED up, and His train filled the temple.
TO ISAIAH Above it stood the seraphims and
one cried unto another: 'Holy, holy,
566

THE TEMPLE
holy is the Lord of hosts; the whole earth is filled
with His glory/ And the posts of the door moved
at the voice of him that cried,, and the house was
filled with smoke." Isa. 6 :l-4.
John, on the isle of Patmos, brings us right
into the midst of the thunderous praises and the
grandeur and the glory of God
AS SEEN BY within the temple, when the
JOHN ON PATMOS Lord God Almighty taketh unto
Himself His great power and
doth reign. He tells us that : "The temple of God
was opened in Heaven, and there was seen in His
temple the ark of His testament: and there were
lightnings, and voices, and thunder ings, and an
earthquake, and great hail." Rev. 11 :19.
Paul brings us right up to a literal and tangible
examination of the structure and the foundation

itself, and our own part in the
THE STRUCTURE AS building, by the words : "Know
REVEALED BY PAUL ye not that ye are the temple
of God, and that the Spirit of
God divelleth in you?" I. Cor. 3 :16.
Why, 'tis as though the great temple were comprised of myriads of smaller temples, for "to whatever worlds He carries our souls when they shall
pass out of these imprisoning bodies, in these
worlds these souls of ours (if we have submitted
ourselves to His dealings) shall find themselves
part of the same great temple, for it belongeth not
to this world alone" but shall stand through the
ages of eternity.
Peter walks round the temple with us and points
out to those who "have tasted that the Lord is
gracious" that our Lord is Himself
AS DESCRIBED the chief cornerstone, elect, preBY PETER cious, disallowed indeed of men, but
chosen of God. Then, suddenly, Peter
points his finger at each saint individually, and
says: "Ye also, as lively stones, are built up a
567

THIS IS THAT
spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up

spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ/' and "ye are a chosen generation, a royal
priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, that
ye should shew forth the praises of Him who hath
called you out of darkness into His marvelous
light," I. Pet. 2 :3, 5, 9.
THE MARVELOUS MYSTERY OF THE TRANSFORMATION
WROUGHT IN THE STONE FROM QUARRY TO TEMPLE.
Lively stones, living stones, chosen, peculiar
stones, stones called from the depths of the dark
quarries of sin and despair into the marvelous light
of the Lamb which doth lighten the templeStones once all unshapen and rough, and unlovely, now perfect in shape and size, with smooth
corners and mirror-like, polished surfaces
Once piled in confusion, one upon another,
disrupted, without unit}', or promise of ever fitting
together in any semblance of a building,
Now, chiselled, shaped and fashioned under the
skilled hands of the mighty Master- workman, until
each perfect, polished stone slips noiselessly into
place beside its neighbor, there to remain forever,
held fast by the cement of unchanging, heavenborn love.
What a transformation is bespoken in every
stone! What patience, what love, what skill of
Master- workmanship, what dicing- and blasting,
what lifting and carrying-, what chiselling and
polishing, what beauty and praise! Is it any wonder the stone cries aloud and says: "What I am,
I am by the grace of God"?
"How marvelous!" we exclaim, "is the boundless love of God. How unfathomable is the great,
immeasurable grace and mercy that has called
each one of us (no matter how deeply buried in
the dark quarries of sin), to fill our place in the
great and glorious temple which is being built

568

THE TEMPLE
without hands, eternal in the heavens." Is it any
wonder that tears of gratitude and unworthiness
fill our eyes when we remember that He does not
ask us to help ourselves, does not ask us to do any
of the blasting or lifting, or hammering, or chiselling, or polishing or building of the temple. One
thing, and one alone He asks:
"Be still and know that I am God. Be pliable,
be yielded and submissive in My hands." Accept
all things (every bJow of the hammer, every gouge
of the chisel) as working together for good to them
that lore the Lord and are called according to His
purpose.
SEEKING AND PREPARING STONES FQR THE TEMPLE.
His eye runneth to and fro through the whole
earth : "He discovereth deep things out of darkness, and bringeth out to light the shadow of
death," as He searches for material with which to
build His temple. No depths are too deep for Him
to descend into, no trouble or labor too intricate OP
great for Him to undertake, if only the object of
His love be it gold, silver or precious stone be
willing and submissive under the dealings of His
hands. His voice can be heard as He walks
through the earth, searching material for His
temple, saying:
"Surely there is a vein for the silver, and a place
for gold ivhere they find it. He setteth an end to
darkness, and searcheth out all perfection: the
stones of darkness, and the shadou* of death. . . .
As for the earth, out of it cometh bread ; and under
it is turned up as it ircrc fire. . . . Tlic stones
of it are the place of sapphires; and it hath dust
of gold. . . . He putteth forth His hand upon

the rock; He overt-it meth the mountains by the
roots. He cutteth out rivers among the rocks; and
His eye seeth every precious thing. . . . He
bindeth the floods from overflowing ; and the thing
that is hid bringeth He forth to light. Job 28 :1-11.
569

THIS IS THAT
The great, rough, unlovely stones, hard-hearted
as granite, lying in the bottom of the quarry,
buried deep beneath the earth and mire of sin and
self, have but to express the desire and willingness
to be digged for and removed and shaped into His
likeness, and the Lord is at the place, ready to begin the Avork of excavation. No stone is too far
distant, too unworthy, too insignificant, too unpromising, too great or too small for Him to see
the longing to be made worthy for a place in His
temple.
From the moment the stone cries to Him, and
the Lord thrusts the spade of conviction into the
earth of sin which covers the stone,
DIGGING,, He presses it ever deeper and deeper
SEPARATING, with the strong foot of His Word.
EXCAVATING till the stone lies clean and bare before Him.
The stone is entirely too large and too attached
to its surroundings and environment, however,
and in order to dislodge and detach it, great quantities of explosives oft have to be imbedded in the
midst of our heretofore comfortable surroundings.
Blast may follow blast. Huge cracks and splits
may run out in every direction. The trials may be
hard, the separation keen and vitally near our
heart. We may not understand, friends may criti-

cise, misjudge, or offer advice, but one thing only
is required of us by the Lord :
"BE STILL AND KNOW THAT I AM GOD."
He will do all the blasting, all the separating.
Our part is but to be willing and pliable and yielded submissive to His will.
The stone need not worry itself with planning
and foreseeing, but needs only to give itself up to
God's Holy Spirit within, and His dealings and
providence without. Once thoroughly separated
from surroundings, no matter how unshapely and
rugged we be, one has but to look upward to see
570

THE TEMPLE
that the great Master-builder has brought the huge
derrick of His love and power to the place, has
fitted the cords of grace and mercy about the
boulder or rock, and is lifting it from the depths of
darkness into His own marvelous light.
Then the shaping process Oh, those great, jagged, rough, sharp corners that gash the feet and
wound each passer-by one by one
HEWING AND they disappear beneath the daily,
SHAPING hourly, ring, ring of the hammer of
love as it falls with steady blows
upon the chisel of daily tests and circumstances.
That unkind word, the undeserved reproach, that
unmerited rebuke, the hasty tear, that hour you
fled to your room and fell, face-downward, at His
feet in seeming defeat, the opportunity for doing
good, the call for sacrifice, unapplauded, unobserved all these were but hammer and chisel
blows that made rough corners disappear.

Oh, to see the will of God wrought out in blows
and buffetings, in tears and smiles, and in encouragements and discouragements, in wilderness
wastes and Eden's bloom, in fire and water, in
heat and cold, on mountain top and in valley
depths, in lion's den or plains of freedom, in
battle front or isolated dungeon ! Oh, but to recognize His hand in the dealings of .today, is sweetest
balm of Gilead.
Hardness and self-centered aims disappear
mellow tenderness, solicituousness and brotherly
love take their place as we weep with those that
weep and rejoice with those that do rejoice.
Then comes the polishing, the pressure brought
to bear, the continuous rubbing and friction, the
eternal passing to and fro of the same
POLISHING trials and circumstances, of daily
grind and routine. Each day of yielding hastens the work of shaping and polishing.
Each day of murmuring and repining hinders and
-571

THIS IS THAT
stays the hand, mars the work and inflicts deep
scars and scratches that only time and labor can
efface.
In the quarry, in the blasting and in the chiseling process, there is much noise and action, but
when at last the stone is carried to the spot and
slipped into its appointed place in the great temple,
there Avill not be the sound of a hammer to be
heard (that will all have been gone through before) "Work on in me, Oh, Lord, let not Thy
hand be stayed."
From beginning to end it is God. From the
quarry of sin to the beauty of the temple it is God,

GOD, G-O-D. We can do nothing to help but to
yield, submissive and passive to His dealings, as
wrought out hourly, daily in the circumstances
w r ith which He surrounds our lives.
The gold and the silver which adorn His temple
must be refined in the crucible until all dross is
melted aAvay. Only that which can
THE REFINER'S stand in the fire and not be burned
FIRE, AND can abide in His tabernacle, for
CRUCIBLE "Our God is a consuming fire," and
no Avood, hay nor stubble can dwell
in His presence, for Avhen the Lord whom we seek
suddenly comes to His temple we find that "He is
like a refiner's fire, and like fuller's soap" that He
purges us as gold and silver that we "may offer
unto the Lord an offcriny in righteousness." Mai.
3 :l-3.
Each stone must be set and fitted into place by
God man's efforts on this line have ever been but
a failure. Each pillar and support, each decoration, overlaid with gold and silver, each golden
tower and dome, encrusted with precious stones
each gold-embroidered hanging each section of
the building from threshold to the throne, must
be set into its place by the God who has fitted it
for its particular place.
572

THE TEMPLE
Today the building is well-nigh completion
Softly and quickly, yet firmly and with utmost
precision and perfection the last finishing touches
are being added to the temple, the last sections
are being slipped into place. Holy calling You
are called to fill your place in the temple. . Are
you letting Him work His Avill in your life, that
great or small, you may perfectly fill and adorn
the little space He has selected for you?
MAJESTY AND GRANDEUR OF COMPLETED TEMPLE.
No matter where He shall place us in the house
of the Lord (wherein we are to dwell forevermore), we will be able to inquire in His temple;
and behold the Ancient of Days in His beauty, as
He shall sit upon His throne, whose garment is
white as snow, and whose hair is like the pure
wool,, whose throne is like the fiery flame and His
wheels as burning fire, to see the fiery stream that
issues forth before Him, to see the thousand thousands who minister unto Him and the ten thousand who stand before Him (Dan. 7:9, 10.) to
hear the thunders of His praises, see the lightnings of His power, and to hear His voice, sweet
as the rushing of many waters surely one such
moment is worth a millionfold more blasting and
chiselling and polishing. So deal on, O Lord,
deal on.

573

GETTING DOWN.
"For thus saith the High and Lofty One that inhabiteth
eternity, whose name is Holy, I dwell in the high and holy
place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit;

to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of
the contrite ones." Isa. 57:15.
SO much has been said through the Spirit these
last days about the necessity of "getting
down" before the Lord in humility and
adoration, that it is well for us to find out "what
saith the Scriptures?" on the subject.
ZACCHAEUS CAME DOWN.
There are many different ways of getting down
recorded in the Word; there was Zacchaeus, you
remember, who ran and climbed up into a sycamore tree, and Avhen Jesus came to the place He
looked up and saw him, and said unto him :
"Zacchaeus, make haste and come down; for today I must abide at thy house. And he made haste,
and came down; and received Him joyfully."
There are many today who, like Zacchaeus of old,
just literally have to come down down from their
preconceived ideas and notions of themselves;
down from their exalted opinion of their own
righteousness; down from old forms and ceremonies, to humble themselves under the mighty
hand of God. Jesus walked so humbly that those
who walk with Him must get down. Zacchaeus
had put himself higher than Jesus Himself, for
we read that when Jesus came to the place He
looked up. Truly He is still looking up today, and
crying :
"Make haste and come down; for today I must
574

GETTING DOWN
abide at thy house." Make haste and come down
and receive Him today joyfully; He is waiting to

bless thee. Get down ! Get down ! ! Get down ! ! !
THE LEPER KNEELED DOWN.
Then we remember the leper whom Jesus healed,
and we read, with an understanding and sympathetic tug at our hearts, how he kneeled down.
How well we remember the day Avhen we came to
Jesus, full of uncleanness, filled with the leprosy
of sin, and how as we kneeled down at His feet,
our sin was cleansed away and we were made
whole. First of all, dear ones, you must come
down from your own righteousness, which is as
"filthy rags," and secondly you must kneel down
at His feet, humbly crying:
"Be merciful to me a sinner," and He will wash
your sins away, and so fill you with joy that the
tears of love and gratitude will stream down your
face, and your heart will pulsate with the knowledge that you are His child, and passed from darkness into His own clear light. "Old things will
have passed away, and all things become new," a
new world, a new r life, a new light, the Son of
Righteousness.
PETER FELL DOWN.
Then there was Peter. Have you ever ascended
to the top of the mountain of Transfiguration and
beheld Jesus so clearly revealed to your enraptured vision that you, like Peter of old, have fallen
prostrate at His feet? John on the Isle of Patmos,
writes :
"7, John, fell at His feet as one dead." So did
Ezeldel, and many others that walked with Jesus
in the days of old. These frail bodies of ours
are no stronger than were those of the prophets of
those days; and when we come in direct contact
with Jesus or His mighty power, we, like them,
fall down and proclaim Him King and Lord of
575

THIS IS THAT
all. O, it is when we fall down helplessly at His
feet that we see our own helpless condition, and
our utter insufficiency and dependence upon Him.
Then He takes us by the hand and lifts us up.
But He says :
"I will resist the proud and the haughty, but be
(/radons to the humble." Humble thyself to walk
with God. O, never be ashamed to fall at His precious feet, for around the throne myriads of angels
fall before Him, and the twenty Elders are crying:
"Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty."
Then we come to Mary, the sister of Martha.
We are told that
MARY SAT DOWN.
O! the clear vision of sweet communion that
is opened up by these simple Avords: "Mary sat
doicn."
"Sitting at the feet of Jesus,
what words I hear Him say.
Happy place; so near, so precious!
May it find me there each day ;
"Sitting at the feet of Jesus,
1 Avould look upon the past;
For His love has been so gracious.
It has Avon my heart at last."
It is there, Avhile busy Marthas are hurrying all
about us Marthas who seldom find time to pray
or read the Word, Marthas \vho have floors to
sweep and dishes to Avash that Ave steal away, like

Mary of old, and, closeted Avith Him, take time to
"sit down" and learn of Him. HOAV He talks to us
and communes with our souls. HOAV He brings
forth the treasures of the golden divinity of His
nature, fills us Avith the frankincense of praise,
and entrusts us with the felloAvship of His sufferings, and reveals the power of His resurrection to
us. It is to those who find time to sit at His feet,
576

GETTING DOWN
like Mary of old, that He reveals His perfect will.
Beloved, take time to sit at Jesus' feet.
Then, coining to our precious Lord, we remember
that
JESUS LAID DOWN
His life for the brethren, and seek to echo His
word : "Greater love hath no man than this, that
lie lay down his life for his friends."
(), beloved, He is calling a people this day who
will get down before Him. Down ! down ! down !
has been my cry since mine eyes have beheld the
King.
O that it might be no more I, but Christ that
liveth in me for *'*'/ must decrease and He must
increase "Down, down till we follow Him all
the way to the cross, and lay down our lives
gladly at His feet for 'He tluit exalteth himself
shall he abased, and he that humbleth himself
shall be exalted'." We shall be exalted even up to
His right hand upon the throne, lifted from the
depth of the mire to the glory of the cross of
Jesus Christ, washed in the blood, furnished with
the white robes of the wedding garment, and filled
with His Spirit. We are lifted up to heavenly

places to talk and walk Avith Him forever and
forever.

577

COVET EARNESTLY SPIRITUAL GIFTSJUST as God the Father gave Jesus, His only
begotten Son, as His love gift to the sinner,
and as Jesus gave the Holy Ghost as a gift to
the believer, so in turn, the Holy Ghost has gifts
to bestow upon those who receive Him and yield
themselves to His control.
Many baptized believers have made the grave
mistake of believing that when they had received
God's gift, Jesus as their Saviour and had received the Holy Ghost, His gift to the believer,
that they had received all there was for them.
They lost sight of the fact entirely that the Spirit
had gifts and fruits to bestow upon all those who
covet earnestly the best gifts.
After being made recipients of full salvation, and
the baptism of the Holy Ghost they settled down
in contentment, with folded hands, forgetting that
the incoming of the Spirit to lead us into all truth
is just the beginning, just the entrance to the land
of Canaan. The Red Sea has been left far behind,
the desert has been safely crossed, the gates of
Canaan's land have been entered, but now if having gone thus far we sit doAvn just inside the
gates, will we not miss the grapes and pomegranates? Will we not miss the land that flows with
milk and honey?
When He the Spirit of truth is come, He will
lead you into all truth. Now the incoming of the
Holy Ghost is just the coming of the leader, who
can only lead us on, and bestow His gifts upon us

as we submit ourselves to His leading and press
forward. Just as the Father longed to give us
Jesus, and Jesus longed to bestow upon us the gift
of the Holy Ghost, so now the Holy Spirit longs
to bestow His gifts upon the baptized believer.
578

COVET EARNESTLY SPIRITUAL GIFTS
There are nine gifts of the Spirit spoken of in
the 12th chapter of I. Cor. which reads :
"Now concerning spiritual gifts brethren, I
would not have yon ignorant. For to one is given
by the Spirit the
Word of Wisdom to another
Knowledge by the same Spirit to another
Faith to another
Gifts of Healing to another
Working of Miracles; to another
Prophecy to another
Discerning of Spirits to another
Divers Kinds of Tongues to another
Interpretation of Tongues;
"But all these workcth that one and the selfsame Spirit, dividing to every man severally as He
will:'
Surely it is God's plan that each of these gifts
should be manifested in each assembly, and we are
told to covet earnestly the best gifts, and to seek

that we may excel to the edifying of the church.
To one is given
THE WORD OF WISDOM.
If ever there was a time that the church needed
wisdom, it is now. It is not our own wisdom or
understanding that we need but the wisdom that
cometh down from above. "Wisdom is the principal thing/' says Solomon, "therefore get wisdom."
He also tells us to cease from our own wisdom.
The wisdom of man is foolishness to God, therefore if any man lack wisdom let him ask of God
who giveth to all men liberally and upbraid eth not
and it shall be given him.
The Holy Spirit has a real literal gift of wisdom,
for those who seek. Wisdom to speak or not to
speak, wisdom to give or to withhold, wisdom to
understand God's word, and to understand His
leadings, wisdom to discern between the flesh and
the Spirit, wisdom to look above earthly things
579

THIS IS THAT
and circumstances and see no man save Jesus only,
and wisdom to use the gifts the Spirit has given
us. To another is given
THE WORD OF KNOWLEDGE.
Just as the reins of a spirited horse are held in
the hands of a competent driver, so is wisdom to
knowledge, for many have knowledge without
wisdom. Hosea 4 :6 says, "My people are destroyed
for lack of knowledge." Zeal without knowledge
is a hindrance instead of a help. Each child of
God should cry to the Lord for the work of knowledge to be buried deep in his or her heart. Knowledge to know God, whom to know is life eternal,

knowledge to understand and rightly divide the
Word of truth, is needed today as never before.
Paul cried aloud from the depths of his being for
knowledge, saying: "O that I may know Him
and the power of His resurrection, and the fellowship of His sufferings, being made conformable
unto His death."
There is a real gift of knowledge, which is not
gained from earthly sources but which is taught
us from God, for all who covet earnestly to know
Him, and His word. There is a God-taught knowledge that will cause us to study to show ourselves
approved unto God, a workman that need not be
ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth.
In the garden of Eden in the midst of life God
gave a commandment, forbidding man to eat of
the tree of knowledge of good and evil, but now
we are in the midst of death and God commands
us to eat of the tree of knowledge, which is Christ,
in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge. To another is given
FAITH.
Without faith it is impossible to please God.
Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. It is one thing to have
580

COVET EARNESTLY SPIRITUAL GIFTS
faith in God, and another thing to have the gift of
faith that can move mountains small or great.
Faith believes God, takes Him absolutely at His
word, and through faith sees the promises of God
materialize and that for which it prays brought to
pass. Faith believes and can appropriate the
promises of God today as in the days of old.

Faith prays the prayer of faith, and sick are
healed, miracles wrought, and indeed it is impossible to receive any of the gifts of the Spirit without faith. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing
by the Word of God. He that believeth shall be,
saved, he that believeth not shall be damned.
Jesus says, these signs shall follow them that believe, in my name they shall cast out demons, they
shall speak w r ith new tongues . . . they shall
lay hands on the sick and they shall recover, etc.
O beloved, if the children of the Lord would
ask for Faith as earnestly as they sought salvation, and the baptism of the Holy Ghost, sought
by hearing and believing the Word of God, signs
and wonders would be worked in our midst, and
the arm of Jehovah laid bare, and His glory break
forth in a way that Avould be exceeding and abundant, above all we could ask or think. To another
is given the
GIFTS OF HEALING.
Still today as in the days of old the gift of healing is bestowed and operated through yielded vessels by the Holy Spirit. Jas. 5 says, the prayer
of faith shall save the sick, but there is also the
gift of healing that says : "In the name of Jesus,
rise up and walk." This gift of healing was manifested through Peter Avhen in the 5th chapter of
Acts a multitude of sick folks were brought from
the towns and villages round about, and laid in the
streets on beds and couches, that even the shadoAV
of Peter overshadowing them they should be healed,
and they were healed every one.
581

THIS IS THAT
This same gift of healing is manifested today,
cancers, tumors, tuberculosis, all manner of sick-

ness has been healed instantaneously in answer to
prayer right in our meetings, and we give Him all
the glory. For it is Jesus who heals. This gift of
healing should be in every assembly, that the name
of the Lord should be glorified. To another is
given the
WORKING OF MIRACLES.
Miracles that keep oil in the cruse and meal in
the barrel are still witnessed in the lives of those
who live the life of faith. We see broken bones
instantaneously and miraculously set and healed
in answer to prayer, and why not for Jesus is
the same yesterday, today and forever. To another
is given the gift of
PROPHECY.
In Joel 2 :28 God says : "It shall come to pass
in the last days, that I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters
shall prophesy." I. Cor. 14:39 Paul tells us to
COVET TO PROPHESY. He tells us to desire
spiritual gifts but rather that we may prophesy,
for lie that prophesieth speaketh unto men to edification, exhortation and comfort.
In speaking to the Corinthian church, which had
received the baptism of the Holy Ghost accompanied with the Bible evidence of speaking in other
tongues, he urges them not to stop there but to go
on and covet to prophesy, saying: "Greater is he
that prophesieth than he that speaketh with
tongues, except he interpret, that the church may
receive edifying." Therefore the prophet and the
interpreter are placed on the same level.
In prophecy the Spirit takes control of the vocal
organs, just the same as when speaking in tongues,
except that in prophecy the words come out in
English. Out of your innermost being shall flow
rivers of living water, not out of your head, but

582

COVET EARNESTLY SPIRITUAL GIFTS
out of your innermost being. This gift is being restored to the church, and in these days the sons
and daughters prophesy under the power and inspiration of the Spirit as in the days of old. To
another is given
DISCERNING OF SPIRITS.
There was never a time in the history of the
church that the gift of discernment was needed as
it is today. And bless the Lord, the Spirit still
bestows this gift upon yielded, seeking hearts, and
gives power to discern between the flesh and the
Spirit, power to discern the difference between the
spirits, and to see hidden things as did Peter in
the case of Ananias and Sapphira. Power to discern between the voice of the Lord and the voice of
the enemy, power to discern between the genuine
and the counterfeit is surely needed in these last
days when the devil would deceive the very elect if
that were possible. But praise God it is not possible, for His sheep know His voice and a stranger
will they not follow. With the gift of discernment,
surely the Spirit of wisdom is needed, to speak
and reveal when the Lord leads, or to keep silent,
when the Lord so wills. To another is given
DIVERS KINDS OF TONGUES.
Although every one who received the baptism
of the Holy Ghost speaks in other tongues as the
Spirit gives utterance, yet not every one, in fact
comparatively few, receive the Gift of Tongues,
i. e. power to speak at will in foreign languages.
This gift, however, is still given today, and many
whom we know personally have spoken in tongues
to foreigners in their own language, and have told
them of Jesus the might to save.

One dear washerwoman that has never learned
a word of another language in her life speaks to
the Greek fruit store man, to the Chinese laundry
man, etc., in their own tongues, of Jesus, and God
583

THIS IS THAT
sends His truth home. Another young lady we
know preached to the Chinese in Chinatown in the
Chinese language, which she never studied, and
many were saved. To another is given the
INTERPRETATION OF TONGUES.
Cor. 14:13 says: "Let him that speaketh in an
unknown tongue pray that he may interpret."
Also verse 5 of the same chapter says : "Greater
is he that prophcsicth than he that speaketh with
tone/lies EXCEPT HE INTERPRET, that the
church may receive edifying. Verse 27 tells us
that when we come together if any man speak in an
iink-no urn tongue let it be by two or at most by
three and that by course and let one interpret.
But if there be no interpreter let him keep silence
in the church, and Jet him speak to himself and to
(iod. So at once we see the necessity of having the
gift of interpretation in our assemblies. Let us
take Paul's advice, and pray that we may interpret.
When all these gifts are in the church, and the
Spirit has divided to each man severally as He
wills, they (when coupled with the fruits of the
Spirit) form a perfect organism not an organization but an organism, each member is incomplete without the other, and the hand can not say
to the foot I have no need of you. But each member must recognize the ministry of the other, and
all work together as a perfect body, in perfect

unity, for while there are many members there is
just one body. While we are made up of many
members we must all be controlled by Christ who
is the head of the body.
Dear, sleeping, baptized believers wake up and
let us press on into the land of Canaan and possess our heritage, and accept the gifts and the
fruits of the Spirit which God is waiting to bestow upon those who covej; earnestly the best gifts.

584

THE VALLEY OP DRY BONES.
Ezekiel 37: (1:14).
LET us begin this wonderful chapter with
the first words of the first verse and go
down into this valley and its experiences
step by step with the Prophet Ezekiel.
THE HAND OF THE LORD WAS UPON ME:
What a wonderful thing it is for an individual
to know that the hand of the Lord is upon him !
Away down in Florida, when Ave were preaching
to the dear colored people, they used to love to
sing this verse :
"Chil'en, Ah knows de Lawd,
riiil'en, A.h knows de Lawd,
Ah knows de Lawd, 1
Dun got His han ? on me."
and O, this afternoon I am so conscious of the
hand of the Lord resting upon me. Praise His
name.

THE HAND OF THE LORD WAS UPON ME, AND CARRIED
ME OUT IN THE SPIRIT OF THE LORD:
This was by no means the first time the hand of
the Lord had been upon Ezekiel. Had he not been
caught up unto mountain tops of Revelation?
Had he not seen the four living creatures, the
cherubims and the Ark? Had he not beheld the
glory of the Lord? and the mighty movings of His
power? Ezek. 1:28 and 10:4.
Doubtless, when the hand of the Lord came down
upon him and carried him out in the Spirit, Ezekiel longed to be lifted again to some ethereal
height of glory. The Lord was moving him out;
what wonders was the Lord about to show him
now? Have you ever wondered what Ezekiel's
feelings must have been when he opened his eyes
and discovered that the Lord had
585

THIS IS THAT
SET HIM DOWN IN THE MIDST OF A VALLEY.
Being wet suddenly down in a valley after a hi 11 -toy)
experience is bad enough, but that was not the
worst of it, this was a valley
WHICH W r AS FULL OF BONES.
I think that perhaps some of us know in a little
measure how to appreciate and understand what
the feelings of Ezekiel were. We, too, have felt the
hand of the Lord upon us. We, too, have, at many
times, beheld His glory and dwelt in the midst of
life and power. We, too, have had the Spirit of
the Lord set us down in a certain assembly, home,
neighborhood or city, Avherein we have opened our
eyes to discover, Avith a start, that we have been
deposited right in the "midst" of a valley which is

literally "full" of bones.
AND HE CAUSED ME TO PASS BY THEM ROUND ABOUT :
AND BEHOLD THERE WERE VERY MANY IN THE
OPEN VALLEY, AND THEY WERE VERY DRY.
Behold, there were very many. Oh, the pity of
it ! Were there only a few it would not seem so
terrible, but the multitudity of these dry bones is
staggering. There are so many precious Christians
in so many churches, in so many climes, that are
down in the valley, no spiritual strength or meat
to cover their frames of profession, nothing but
bones bones bones.
IN THE OPEN VALLEY.
You need neither a spade nor a pickaxe to find
the kind of bones that I am speaking of. They are
in the open valley. Why, I would not be surprised
if you could turn round and find some of them
sitting right in the seat beside you at this moment.
AND THEY WERE VERY DRY.
So dry they can not say "Amen" or "Hallelujah"
so dry they have not said "Praise the Lord"
since they entered this building so dry that they
can neither shout nor clap their hands themselves,
586

THE VALLEY OF DRY BONES
and would like to stop everybody else shouting and
rejoicing if they could. (They are almost like the
dog in the manger who could not eat the hay himself and would not alloAV the horse to eat it) so
dry that there is no real victory in their lives or
ring to their testimony, or sterling worth to their

profession. Dry ! Dry ! Dry ! You can almost hear
the bones rattle beneath their cloak of profession
whenever they preach or testify or move.
AND HE SAID UNTO ME, SON OF MAN, CAN THESE
BONES LIVE?
What a staggering question it was with which
the Lord confronted Ezekiel a question which
would at once stop his murmuring over the driedup condition of affairs in the bone-yard, and require unlimited hope and faith in the resurrected,
life-giving power of the Lord.
Have you been placed in a valley (be it home or
assembly or neighborhood or workshop) that is
full of dry bones? Is your minister dry? your
congregation, etc.? Then God is confronting you
today with the same question that faced Ezekiel
away back yonder.
"Son of man, have you a faith that can cause
these dry bones to live?" It is one thing to find
fault with and lament over deplorable conditions
of dearth and barrenness; it is quite another thing
to have the prayer and faith and confidence in God
which will bring life and strength and better conditions round about you.
If you have discovered that you are in the midst
of a valley of dry bones, stop lamenting and complaining because you are there and wishing you
had been placed in a different environment on the
hilltop where revival fires are burning and live
armies are marching. Thank God that YOU are
alive and that GOD is alive, and that as you
believe and pray life will vanquish death in those
round about you today as surely as it did in the
587

THIS IS THAT

day of Ezekiel. Your being placed in that hard,
dry, difficult place was not an accident, not an
oversight or a mistake on the part of God. Just
as surely as the hand of the Lord set Ezekiel down
in that valley of dryness and death, so surely has
the hand of your loving Father set you down in
that valley, or position, or home or parish.
"All things work together for good to them that
love God, to them who are the called according to
His purpose/'
And now, having placed you there, He has confronted you with the same question with which He
confronted Ezekiel :
"Have you faith to believe and to lay hold upon
Me, the Life Giver, and claim that life for these
dry bones?"
AND EZEKIEL ANSWERED, OH, LORD, THOU KNOWEST.
Here again many can heartily sympathize with
the hesitancy of Ezekiel, for many children of the
Lord, I fear, have often answered the challenge to
faith in the same way :
"Oh, Lord God, Thou knowest! They are a
pretty dried-up lot of people. There does not seem
to be a spark of life, or even a longing for it. It
hardly seems possible that this church or these
people ever could be brought to a real live spiritual
place. But, Oh, Jesus, increase my faith. Help
mine unbelief, for I long to see them live, Oh,
Lord."
THEN HE SAID UNTO ME, PROPHESY UPON THESE
BONES AND SAY UNTO THEM : OH YOU DRY BONES,
HEAR THE WORD OF THE LORD GOD, BEHOLD,
I WILL CAUSE BREATH TO ENTER INTO

YOU, AND YOU SHALL LIVE:
Poor, dried-up lifeless professor, there is hope
for even you. You dear ones that do not believe
in noise and shouting, you who do not believe in
so much earnest prayer and praise to the Lamb,
588

THE VALLEY OF DRY BONES
He will cause breath to enter into even you (and
you knoAv that Psalin 150 says "Let everything
that hath breath praise the Lord"), and you shall
live.
SO I PROPHESIED AS I WAS COMMANDED.
Ah! there was the secret of the power and success of EzekiePs prophecy in the valley. Do you
see it. A-s I w-a-s c-o-m-m-a-n-d-e-d, not with enticing words of man's wisdom, which seemed wise and
plausible to himself not words to please and
lull his audience into a false security, not yet a
self-righteous tirade of condemnation that merely
showed them their condition and dryness; but a
prophecy that was according to the commandment
of the Lord.
Hallelujah! "The entrance of His Word giveth
light/ 7 and life and liberty. Oh, for more Ezekiels
today who would prophesy according to the commandment of the Lord instead of bringing in side
issues and divisions and strifes then would we
see more shaking in the valleys of dry bones, and
the wind of the Spirit should blow, bringing life to
those that sleep.
AND AS I PROPHESIED THERE WAS A NOISE.
God grant that even as, whilst Ezekiel

prophesied, there was a noise, and as whilst Peter
yet spake the Holy Ghost fell (Acts 10), that while
I am yet speaking, the power may fall upon you
just now. Oh that our words may be so in accord
with the commandments of God that whilst we are
yet speaking we, too, will hear a "noise" of men
and women crying out:
"What shall I do to inherit eternal life, and to
receive the Holy Spirit?' 7 the noise of praise and
intercession, the sound of an abundance of rain,
the sound of His chariot wheels upon the mountains, and the stirring in the tops of the mulberry
trees.
589

THIS IS THAT
AND AS I PROPHESIED THERE WAS A NOISE, AND
BEHOLD, A SHAKING, AND THE BONES CAME
TOGETHER, BONE TO HIS BONE.
You notice that as Ezekiel prophesied there were
three distinct things that took place in the valley
of dry bones three periods that they passed
through. Firstly, the noise : Secondly, the shaking :
Thirdly, the bones came together.
When the latter rain began to fall in copious
showers in 1907, the Spirit moved mightily in
answer to prayer the whole world
FIRST, over, awakening and bringing to life
THE NOISE innumerable valleys of dry bones
there was a noise. Sinners wept their

way to Jesus and cried aloud :
"What shall I do to be saved?" Believers were
filled with the Spirit, shouted, and often talked
for hours at a time in other tongues (Acts 2:4) as
the Spirit gave utterance. The noise of their
joyous praises filled the sky. The glimpse which
believers caught of the body and of the plan of God
to restore the church to her full Pentecostal power
and life caused them to shout aloud before the
glorious vision, and well, it is putting it very moderately to say :
"There was a noise."
But stop! Listen! What is this this remarkable
shaking as of an earthquake, Avhich immediately
follows surely and inevitably everywhere behind
the first noise of the Spirit's outpouring? If you
but open your eyes and look about you throughout
this movement the world over, you too will see,
"and behold a tkaking."
Has your assembly or the company with which
you have been w r ont to worship, been going through
a shaking? Have you personally
SECOND, been subjected to a severe shaking?
THE SHAKING. Has your heart ached? and have
you, too, asked a continual Why?
590

THE VALLEY OF DRY BOXES
Why? and wherefore? when you have seen
brothers, that were bosom friends and comrades

in the battle, separate and drift apart, assemblies
split in two, or half a dozen factions, as the case
may be. Have you wondered why this one doesn't
come back, and that one compromised, and those
two couldn't agree and were so widely divided? I
will tell you why it was. It was because of the
shaking which followed the noise. It is following
in the life of every assembly. It is following in
the life of every believer. A mighty shaking-time
is on.
Just as God shook out of Gideon's army until
there were but three hundred left that could not be
shaken (Judges 7) so the Holy Spirit is today
sifting, purging and shaking, for He "whose voice
then shook the earth . . . hath promised saying, yet once more I shake not the earth only, but
also Heaven, and this word 'yet once more' signifieth the removing of those things that are shaken
. . tha-t those things which cannot be shaken
may remain. Wherefore, we, receiving a kingdom
which cannot be moved . . . may serve God
acceptably." Heb. 12:26-28.
When first one sees the shaking, the splits and
divisions amongst those whom we know should be
bound together in love, it is heart-rending, but
when we begin to see the plan of God as revealed
in His Word, we enter into a place of rest, and
when we read the next clause:
AND THE BONES CAME TOGETHER, BONE TO HIS BONE,
we lift our hands and shout for joy.
There is going to be a coming together after the
shaking, some of these days, dear hearts, and those
that come together will be bound by such cords of
unity and love that nothing can separate them
again, and moreover when the body comes together
it will be "BONE TO HIS BONE."
This is no patched-up affair, no man-made peace,

591

THIS IS THAT
no temporary armistice, but a unity that shall
remain.
"Bone to his bone/' When man in his own wisdom tries to fix the body up by choosing and ordaining, pastors, teachers, evangelists, prophets, helps,
governments, etc., he is almost sure to pick the
wrong bones or else put the right bones in the
wrong places. That is why so many man-made
organizations have the ear where the eye ought to
be, or the foot where the hand ought to be.
Aren't you glad that God sets His own church
in order and that HE sets some in the church, first
apostles, secondly prophets, thirdly
THIRD, teachers, etc. (I Cor. 12:28), and
THE COMING that when He has shaken out all
TOGETHER. that can-be shaken and tossed about
by every wind that blows, and has
gathered together the firm, true, uncompromising,
unshakable bones, He Avill Himself put them in
their appointed places in the body, bone to his
bone. "For as the body is on,c, and hath many
members, and all the members of that one body,
being many, are one body, so also is Christ, for by
one Spirit are we all baptized into one body" . . .
and "now hath God set the members every one of
them in the body as it hath pleased Him .
now ye are the body of Christ and members in
particular."
We will not see the body come together in an
entirety which will be apparent to the human
eye, before the coming of the Lord. This movement, please God, will never be one great organization, but rather an Organism. We arc expecting,

however, a unity amongst the different members of
the body (such as we have never seen before) to
develop right down here in this old world.
One member of the body is made up of many
joints which are in one accord and work harmoniously, one in connection with the other, joined to592

THE VALLEY OF DRY BONES
gether by the cords of love. The members of the
body (that is the assemblies or communities) are
moved and controlled not by their own wisdom or
the orders of one another, but by the Head, which
is Christ. And as each member, moved by the
Head, obeys His will, there will be unity and
harmony and a coming together. Each member is
made up of many smaller members. In the arm
there are the fingers, the hand, the bones of the
wrist, of the forearm, and the shoulder. Today is
the day that the smaller bones and joints are
taking their place in forming the members. When
Jesus shall appear the many members of the body
shall be gathered, and the final great coming together will take place in the air. Hallelujah !
AND WHEN I BEHELD, LO, THE SINEWS AND THE
FLESH CAME UP UPON THEM, AND THE SKIN COVERED
THEM ABOVE; BUT THERE WAS NO BREATH IN THEM.
THEN SAID HE UNTO ME, PROPHESY UNTO THE WIND,
PROPHESY, SON OF MAN, AND SAY TO THE WIND,
THUS SAITH THE LORD GOD, COME FROM THE FOUR
WINDS, O BREATH, AND BREATHE UPON THESE SLAIN,
THAT THEY MAY LIVE.
SO I PROPHESIED AS HE COMMANDED ME, AND THE
BREATH CAME INTO THEM, AND THEY LIVED, AND
STOOD UPON THEIR FEET, AN EXCEEDING GREAT ARMY.

Oh, if there is a soul here tonight who was once
as a dried-up skeleton, has now been redeemed and
has been covered with the sinews and flesh and
skin (the covering of grace and salvation), and
you have been slain by the mighty sword of His
power, what you need now is the baptism of the
Holy Spirit. The same Holy Spirit that filled the
house with the sound as of a rushing, mighty wind
on the day of Pentecost, shall come upon you,
endue you with power, stand you upon your feet,
and join you to this exceeding great army. (Rev.
7:9.)'
Sinner, backslider, luke-warm professor, whoso593

THIS IS THAT
ever and wherever you are, you do not need to
remain in the grave or the valley of dry bones any
longer. The Lord is waiting to bring you up out
of your graves of coldness and death, and cause
you to know Him in salvation, to fill you with His
Spirit and lead you to Canaan's land. Read the
12th, 13th and 14th verses of this 37th chapter of
Ezekiel.
"Behold My people, I will open your graves and
cause you to come up out of your graves'' (sin),
"and bring you into the land of Israel" (salvation). "And ye shall KNOW that I am the Lord
when I have opened your graves, Oh, My people,
and brought you up out of your graves.'' (Notice
He says you will KNOW there will be no "think
so" about your salvation. You will have a definite
knowledge that you have passed from death unto
life.)
The 13th verse is glorious. Do not stop there,
however, but go on into the 14th, "and shall put

My Spirit in you and ye shall live; and I shall
place you in your OWN land; then shall ye know
that I, the Lord, have spoken it and proclaimed it,
saith the Lord"
(Here is another definite experience you will
know about. He does not say you will guess I
have performed it My promise to fill you with the
Spirit or you will take it by faith, but you will
KNOW I have performed it. Then praise the
Lord. When He saves you you know it, for He
has brought you into the Land of Israel, and when
He baptizes you in the Holy Spirit and speaks
through you with other tongues you will know it,
and He will bring }^ou into your own land, the
land of fruitfuluess and victory which He has
made as a promised land to those who will obey
Him.
And you, dear child of God, no matter how dead
and dry the bones in your particular valley may
594

THE VALLEY OF DRY BONES
be, do not be discouraged or question the divine
wisdom that set you down, just where you are, but
respond to the call of faith the Lord is sending
you, and prophesy as His Word commands, and
if you, hidden behind the cross, lift Jesus up, He
will shine down into the cold, benighted hearts
round about you, bringing healing and life and
filling with His Spirit until from that valley of
dry bones a transformed, triumphant army shall
rise and inarch forth to join the great body (for
now are they many members, yet but one body. I
Cor. 12:20).
The great, final coming-together day when the
many members of the same body shall be united,
and when the body sfiall be united to the Head, is

at hand. What a wonderful day it will be when
Jesus speaks from the heavens the NOISE of His
triumphant shout shall be heard (I Thess. 4.16) ;
the graves shall be SHAKEN wide, fetters of mortality shall be shaken loose; and from the four
quarters of the earth, from the dead and from the
living, each bone, each member of the body SHALL
COME TOGETHER and rise to fill its allotted
place in that body, bone to his bone.
The time is short now, dear ones. Each setting
sun brings us just one day nearer the catching-up
of this triumphant body who shall rise to meet the
Lord in the air. 'Twill be a body of overcomers,
a band of people who have been tested, shaken, and
proved who have washed their robes in the blood
of the Lamb and come up out of great tribulation.
Will you yield yourselves as never before to the
dealings of the Lord, and instead of murmuring
at His shakings in your life, cry unto Him :
"Strip me, Lord, of everything,
Of this world and self, and sin,
That I may see the coming King,
And a crown of glory win."

595

"DEATH IN THE POT."
"And Elisha came again to Gilgal: and there was a dearth
in the land; and the sons of the prophets were sitting before
him: and he said unto his servant, Set on the great pot, and
see the pottage for the sons of the prophets.
And one went out into the field to gather herbs, and found
a wild vine, and gathered thereof wild gourds his lap full,
and came and shred them into the pot of pottage: for they
knew them not.

So they poured out for the men to eat: and it came to
pass, as they were eating of the pottage, that they cried out,
and said, O thou man of God, there is DEATH IN THE POT.
And they could not eat thereof.
But he said, Then bring meal. And he cast it into the
pot; and he said, Pour out for the -people, that they may eat.
And there was no harm in the pot." II. Kings 4:38-41.
"" YLISHA came to Gilgal and there was a
IH dearth in the land 7 ' There had not al"" ways been a dearth in Gilgal :
Gilgal had once been wondrously blessed of
God. Blessing and bounty had walked its streets
hand in hand. Had they not echoed and resounded
with shouting and rejoicing and the marching feet
of four thousand men of Avar, as the priests, led
by Joshua, had borne the ark of the covenant of
the Lord thither?
After they had pitched camp and set up their
twelve stones as a monument of Jordan's parted
waters (Jos. 4:3 and 20), and kept the Passover,
had they not eaten of the old com of the land and
the fruit of the land of Canaan? The long-lookedfor promised land had been reached. No more
need for wilderness wanderings, "and the manna
ceased on the morrow after they Juid eaten of the
old corn of the land; neither had the children of
Israel manna any more, but they did eat the fruit
of the land of Canaan that year/ 7 (Jos. 5:11, 12.)
Was it not at Gilgal that, after the Lord had
appeared as Captain of the host (Jos. 5:14), and
596

"DEATH IN THE POT"
Joshua had fallen on his face to the earth, the

Lord said unto hini:
"Loose thy shoe from off thy foot; for the place
whereon thou standest is holy?"
And after Samuel had anointed Saul, did he
not send him unto Gilgal to "tarry until" the
"Spirit of the Lord" should "come upon" him with
"signs" following, that should give him "another
heart" and turn him "into a new man?" (Read
I Sam. 10:6-9.) What a wonderful type of Pentecost ! Later Samuel said to the people :
"Come, let us go to GILGAL and renew the
kingdom there" even as the early apostles had returned to Jerusalem for fresh anointings of the
Spirit.
"A DEARTH IN THE LAND/'
But behold, now, something has happened. The
children of the Lord have become cold, lukewarm,
backslidden. Such a great dearth has come to
Gilgal and the surrounding countries that they
have "cleanness of teeth and want of bread"
(Amos 4 :6.) "Transgressions have been multiplied "
but in Hosea 4:16, the Lord promises Israel (who,
in her iniquity, He has likened to a backsliding
heifer and forbidden to enter Gilgal), that if they
will folloAv Him He will feed them as a lamb in a
large place.
During the former rain outpouring of the Holy
Spirit, which began on the day of Pentecost (Acts
2:4), the ark containing the glory of the Lord
(spiritually speaking), rested in Jerusalem as in
Gilgal of old. Even as Saul had been sent to
Gilgal to tarry till the Spirit of the Lord was
come upon him and till the signs came to pass,
so the hundred and twenty had been commanded
to tarry in Jerusalem until the Holy Spirit should
come upon them with signs following.
The long-looked-for, long-prophesied (Isaiah 28:

11, 2:13; Joel 2:23 and 28; Zech. 10:1; Mat. 3:11;
597

THIS IS THAT
Luke 24:49; John 14, 15, 16; Acts 1:5 and 8)
promised land had been reached. True, God had
kept them whilst in the wilderness, and manna had
come upon them, as the inspired words fell from
the mouths of the holy prophets of old as they were
moved by the Holy Spirit true, the words of
Jesus had been as manna from heaven, whilst He
walked this earth in the fleshly body, but now
now the Holy Spirit had come N-O-W they
had entered Canaan's land, and instead of the
manna which had been taken away, and fell no
more upon them (Jesus being returned to the
Father and His voice being heard no more), they
had corn and oil and wine ( Joel 2:19), as the
Spirit spoke through them of Jesus and His coming kingdom. "And they did eat the old CORN
of the land' ( Jos. 5 ill, 12 ) "neither had they
manna any more, but they did eat the fruit of the
land of Canaan." (See fruits of the Spirit, Gal.
5:22.)
Jerusalem (as Gilgal of old) rang with the
praises of the Lord, and with the marching feet of
new converts, new men of war, who went forth to
follow the Captain of the host. On the day of
Pentecost three thousand souls were added to the
church ; with pure hearts overflowing with joy, and
with unshod feet, His people walked softly before
Him and fell upon their faces in adoration. Just
as the twelve tribes erected their monument of
twelve stones, so the twelve disciples stood as a
monument of the mighty power of the great and
holy One who had parted the waters of the Red
Sea "Salvation" and parted the waters of
Jordan to bring them to Canaan's land "The
Baptism of the Holy Ghost." Each time did the

Lord Himself have to part the waters before His
children could cross over into the new experience.
Humanity could neither swim nor ford the Red
Sea The Lord Himself miraculously opened,
598

"DEATH IN THE POT"
through His blood, a path salvation which
meant at once deliverance and Life to repentant
believers and Death to unrepentant unbelievers.
Mankind could not cross the judgment of old
Jordan's waves, nor make themselves worthy to
enter Canaan and, again through parted waters
(His GRACE and His WORTHINESS, which towered
on either side) He led His people forth to the
promised land, and filled them with the Spirit.
Here are two experiences Salvation and the
Baptism of the Holy Spirit which we could not
have brought ourselves into, therefore did He part
the waters each time. Bless His name.
"ELISHA CAME AGAIN TO GILGAL."
After the disciples and apostles had fallen asleep
in the Lord, and the many years of blessing wherein the power and glory of the Holy Spirit had
been manifested, came the gradual falling away of
the spirituality of the church. The apostacy and
dark ages followed, but holy, inspired prophecy
had said :
"He who sent the former rain moderately shall
send you the rain, both the former and the latter
rain together in one month,'' and "It shall come to
pass in the last days, saith God, I will pour out
My Spirit upon all flesh," etc.
"AND ELISHA CAME AGAIN TO GILGAL," Hal lei Ujah ! The time for the latter rain outpouring

of the Spirit which was to take place in the
last days had come, and Elisha (who stands for
the visual manifestation of the power of God in
signs and wonders) came A-G-A-I-N to Gilgal.
And when he came he found that "THERE WAS
A GREAT DEARTH IN THE LAND. 7 '
Ah, yes! What a dearth there was in the land!
What a crying out for food, and pottage, and bread
and lentils in and just prior to the years 1905
and 1906.
How many churches and saints cried to Heaven :
599

THIS IS THAT
"Oh, for the old-time power! Oh for another
Pentecost!" The Methodist church, the Salvation
Army, the Holiness church, and many others sang
and prayed these words over and over (but Oh,
how few really recognized the answer when it
came, "wrapped in swaddling clothes and in a
manger" ) . Nevertheless the AVord of God said :
When you call upon Me I will answer, and in
the day that you seek Me ivith your whole heart I
will be found of you; turn unto the Lord with
weeping and mourning, and . . . "He will return and repent and leave a blessing behind Him,
even a meat offering and a drink offering."
"SET ON THE GREAT POT."
Therefore, when Elisha came again to Gilgal,
that is when the Holy Spirit, at the specified time
for the latter rain, found the hungry saints sitting
before Him with one accord and one desire, even as
the hundred and twenty had sat in waiting expectation of old, "He said unto his servant:

"Set on the great pot and seethe the pottage for
the sons of the prophets." "Blessed are they that
do hunger and thirst, for they shall be filled."
Oh, glory to Jesus ! I can just close my eyes as
I write, here before my open Bible tonight, and
see the great Pentecostal pot (the entire Pentecostal movement), being brought out and set upon
the fire the Holy Spirit is, of course, the fire our
prayer, and praises are the WOOD (and Oh, it
takes good dry wood, full of pitch, to make a real
red hot fire water-soaked, rotten wood of worldliness and unbelief will only smoke and smudge and
hinder).
Once suspended over the fire of the Holy Spirit,
the Pentecostal pot soon began to boil and simmer,
as hungry saints came together, each bringing a
contribution of carefully tilled vegetables in their
hands as an offering.
600

7< DEATH IN THE POT"
What a mixture, what a conglomeration came
together in that pot !
Perhaps there is not another movement on earth
made up of such a varied assortment of teachings,
creeds and organizations, yet all melt and blend
into one when put into the WATER of the Word,
and boiled over the fire of the Holy Spirit.
It was as though myriad streams, corning from
myriad fountain-heads, had met and mingled together, and NOW flowed on in ONE great stream
as though they had never been divided.
Its fire was as that of a great burning pile of
WOOD, hewn and gathered from many sources

from varied kinds of trees from widely separated
forests, now leaping heavenward in one great
flame of love and devotion.
It was as many VEGETABLES, planted, watered,
cultivated, tilled and brought from many fields,
put into one pot, and now forming, with the
strong meat of the Word, and the water of the
Spirit of life, a rich, nourishing food, whose
appetizing and inviting fragrance was wafted to
all about upon the vapor of praise and testimony
which arises from the dancing, joyful mixture
within.
With lightning rapidity the Pentecostal revival
has encircled the world; thousands and thousands
of hungry souls have been filled with the Spirit.
Wait a moment ! You who are investigating, or
gazing curiously into the lively, bubbling, dancing
Pentecostal pot. Let us halt and examine some of,
the people the endless procession of people who
are coming to contribute some edibte to the movement. Let us begin with this man hurrying along
toward the pot, laden with vegetables and bread
of the first fruits, and see what he has to say.
THE METHODIST.
Q. "Halt! Who goes there? From whence do
you come?"
601

THIS IS THAT
A. "I am a METHODIST. I come from a
church founded upon the sound doctrines of
Justification and Faith in the present Power of
God, as revealed to John Wesley a church where
the power of the Holy Spirit used to fall in bygone years, until saints shouted, and sinners wept,

and the joyful danced before the Lord."
Q. "O? And what bring you in your hand?"
A. "I bring with me carefully tilled vegetables
and bread of the first fruits, from a grand old field
a little sparsely 'sprinkled,' and well a little
'short of water' nevertheless, diligently cultivated by watchfulness and the Word of God."
"Our harvests come from various gardens and
are tilled by different gardeners, some of which
are known as 'The Epworth League," 'The Free
Methodists/ The Ranters," "The Shaking Methodists/ etc., yet 'tis the same sun of righteousness
which, from the lofty heavens, shines upon one
and all."
"Coming out from the parent field I bring with
me an appetite whetted by the cherished memories
of how God once did work in the old-time Methodist church; for, alas! Dearth and formality came
into our field, and many therein were anhungered."
"Kindly excuse me, and allow me to pass, for in
these last days (Acts 2:17) the great pot of blessing has been set upon the fire of the Spirit, and
thither do I hasten that I may find this old-time
power increased an hundred fold."
(There! He is gone! I would that I could have
detained and conversed with him a little longer.
Let not our hearts be troubled, however, for lo, one
goeth, and behold, another cometh.)
THE BAPTIST.
Q. "Halt! Who goes there? And whence come
you?"
A. "I am a BAPTIST. I come from a garden
602

"DEATH IN THE POT"
whose original plan of gardening (as recorded in
our book of instructions) was patterned by the
Word of God, the planting and springing up of the
seeds required Justification and a Change of Heart.
The young plants were well watered, too in fact
'completely immersed' in the beginning of their
growth, but as the plants grew and developed, and
had need of the wind of the Spirit and the falling
.of the latter rain for developing the harvest.
Alas! between the high, well-guarded fence of
'close communion- and the heavy overhead trellis
of theology and forms and ceremonies, neither
wind nor rain could reach the garden."
"Consequently, many of our gardeners, realizing
that the fruit of their labors was exceedingly
'hard shelled/ and that some life and breaking of
the dry stiffness was needed, tried an artificial
irrigation process of worldiness and structural
magnificence. Lectures, concerts and amusements
were recommended" and tried as fertilizers. The
spiritual life of the plants, however, did not thrive
well under this method, and many withered and
pined away, and there was a dearth in the land."
"Coming forth from behind our 'close communion' fence, I am hastening toward yonder
brightly burning fire, for I do both 'see and hear'
that the great pot has been set upon the flame.
Hark ! Can you not hear its dancing and bubbling,
and see the vapors of praise rising, even from
here?"
Q. "And what bring you in your hand to
contribute to the Pentecostal pot?"
A. "I bring with me, as bread of the first fruits,
the knowledge of the scriptures, sound doctrine,
and a firm stand on Water Baptism as set forth
by our forefathers. I bring with me a hunger for

the real, tangible power of God."
"But, Ah ! I catch the fragrant odors rising from
yonder steaming caldron."
603

THIS IS THAT
"Please allow me to pass, that I may receive my
portion from the great pot."
THE SALVATIONIST.
Q. "Halt! Who goes there? From whence
come you, and why do you come?"
A. I come from the SALVATION ARMY, that,
m obedience to the call of God, marched fearlessly
beneath their banner of 'Blood and Fire/ into the
very heart of the enemy's territory, taking captives and making love-prisoners for King Jesus."
"I come from a people who in their extensive
gardening found labor for both the 'servant and
the maid/ a body of people who were once deeply
spiritual and prayerful, and entirely separated
from the world and its earthly lore."
"True, amidst persecution and trial, they sowed
the seed and gathered the harvest not behind
fenced enclosures, but in the streets and marketplace, the slums and the hovels."
"I come from a people that used to stand for
the manifestation of the Spirit, and many there
were among them who shouted and danced, and fell
prostrate under the power, and saw visions of the
glory of God."
"Why do I leave? Why, because there is a
dearth in our land the old-time pOAver is sadly

lacking today, times and business are so pressing,
pressing, popularity our war work in the great
world contest never-ending financial needs new
barns for the extended harvest fields have been as
quick-growing weeds that have sadly choked and
crowded out the old spirituality and whole-hearted
abandonment and humble dependence upon God."
"Seeking and hungry for the old-time power, I
come for food to the great pot which has been set
over the fire of this Holy Ghost movement."
Q. "And what bring you in your hand?"
A. "I bring with me the first fruits of our
labors. Our field of vegetables had a wonderful
604

"DEATH IN THE POT 77
beginning; the planting was beyond criticism, and
if our field had been watered according to the
instructions of Chief Gardener Jesus, none should
have excelled it. Our under gardeners, however,
felt neither the prescribed water baptism nor the
latter rain outpouring (The Baptism of the Holy
Spirit, as recorded in Acts 2 :4) to be necessary.
"Our vegetables were not even sprinkled,
Nevertheless they contain a real zeal for souls
and a courage to go after them. I bring in my
hands the old 'Amen Corner' and the ringing
Hallelujahs, singing and music, and a faith and
perseverance that sow beside all waters."
On and on they come!
They are flocking in from every direction, each
bringing some contribution to the Pentecostal Pot.
Here comes the staunch

PRESBYTERIAN the old Scotch
COVENANTER the
HUGENOT, and the staid
EPISCOPALIAN follows after pride and formality forgotten.
One breath from the fragrant, boiling Revival
on the fire brings back a rush of memories that recall the Faith and Power which rested in their
midst in days of yore, when steadfast, persecuted
forefathers fell upon their knees in caves and dens
and dungeons, where plush and padded prayercushions were unknown memories of old-time
power and glorious blessing that followed in the
days w T hen "they who lived godly suffered persecution" memories of long nights spent in prayer
the sincere unaffected heart's devotion of the
Saviour and His love.
Ah, no ! Neither gilded dome, nor frescoed arch,
nor rolling tones that throb and thunder in the
organ loft, nor surpliced choir, nor e'en the college-moulded, eloquent 'divine' (?) who speaks in
modulated tones from flower-embowered canopy,
605

THIS IS THAT
can still the longing for the old-time power that
glorified the sacrifice, surrender, prayer and faith
of the Pilgrim Fathers' day.
Devoted saints come from the
HOLINESS church, bringing the message of
Heart-Purity and the Coming of the Lord, and
wonderfully blessed of God, as fruitage needing
but one thing the latter rain.

The ADVENTIST adds his teachings on the
Coming of the Lord, deep study of the Prophetic
Wordy teachings of Holiness and Freedom from
Worldiness.
The QUAKER hastens up deep wells of joyous recollections rising in his soul eyes alight,
beneath his broad-brimmed hat, with the memories
of how HIS church, once shaken and controlled by
the Spirit's power (before the dearth), had
walked so close to God. Glowing coals within his
heart, long banked and smouldering, now burst
forth in flames again as he hastens to the Holy
Spirit's fire and the great Pentecostal pot suspended thereupon. He adds the fruitage from his
field 'sterling qualities of truth,' 'unswerving
faith' and 'yielded ness to the in or ings of the
Spirit.'
And, would you believe it, here comes the
ROMAN CATHOLIC not one, but many of them,
leaving the old church, many have come to the
Saviour, have been redeemed, filled with the
Spirit, and bring with them a Holy Reverence
and Obedience and deep appreciation of this newfound reality and life in Jesus to add to the happy
mixture bubbling in the pot,
So many come from every quarter that it is
impossible to halt and question them all. Then
comes
THE SINNER Yes, what lines and lines of them.
Attracted by the reality and the mighty moving
606

of the Spirit, they bring with them the Fruits of
Repentance and First Love.
"And Elisha said:

SET ON THE GREAT POT, AND SEETHE POTTAGE FOR
THE SONS OF THE PROPHETS."
Oh, what a glorious feast we are going to have!
What wonderful pottage !
Lift up the cover and peep in at the dancing,
joyous mixture. See how, when boiled over the
great FIRE OR THE SPIRIT and with the
WATER OF LIFE, with the MEAT OF THE
WORD and the SALT which has never lost its
savor, a great, change comes to all the viands
within the pot; the fruits of the fields, the vegetables and the barley, lose their "hard shells,',
slip out of their Avails of differences,, creeds and
forms forget they came from widely separated
gardens and were tilled by gardeners who never
could agree as to methods, and soon they burst
with praise as their innermost hearts flow forth
in love.
Then, as the fire burns on, they melt and melt
and M-E-L-T until the pottage is but one united,
savory mixture. Outside walls crumble and fall
away, for vegetables must be peeled before entering
the pot (that is barriers of organizations and differences must be left outside; peelings do not make
good pottage). Then, as the fire still continues to
burn and the pot to boil, each vegetable and fruit,
in melting, has lost its own identity and has so
united and merged itself into the other broken,
melting hearts round about it, that 'tis hard to
realize they ever were divided.
THE MAN WITH THE LAPFUL OF GOURDS.
Many eyes and many footsteps were turned
eagerly toward this Pentecostal movement;
brethren patted each other on the back and said :
607

THIS IS THAT
"No more need of hunger or separation or
dearth. Here is unity everlasting with nothing
to mar/ 7
Hungrily, servants and handmaidens alike
dreAV near with clean plates and shining spoons.
"What a wonderful feast we are going to have,"
they said.
But stop! Who is that man, slipping in so
stealthily behind the others, carrying something
in his garment? Let us question him.
Q. Halt! Who goes there? From whence do
Y-O-U come?
A. "Me? Oh I come from no particular
garden. I am the 'ONE W T EtO WENT OUT IN
THE FIELD TO GATHER HERBS.' "
Q. "And what sort of vegetables do you bringin your lap?"
A. "Why er that is, I It is not vegetables
I bring. Vegetables must be most carefully planted
in prepared ground, tilled and cultivated (study
to show thyself approved unto God, a workman
that needeth not to be ashamed). Whilst wandering yonder I found a Avild vine full of nice, fat
gourds, no trouble to till them at all. They were
there already, and all I had to do was to pluck the
wild gourds in passing. "See? I have a good big
lapful here. Fine looking specimens, are they
not?"
Q. "Good specimens of 'gourds,' yes, but I am
not so sure of their being good to eat, or being
a desirable addition to yonder feast. I fear that
they are poisonous?"
A. "Oh, no, they are not poisonous, I assure
you."

Q. "Well, what are the names of these different
gourds?"
A. "Why a This one is called 'Falun Tcachitif/:' this one is called 'Error': whilst this prickly
one is known as 'Doctrinal Issues.' This puffy
608

"DEATH IN THE POT"
fat one is 'Lover of Power and Recognition.'
Then there is ( Self -Righteousness/ 'Formality"
"Preconceived Ideas and Teaching,- 'Fear of Manifestations/ 'Flesh' and 'Fanaticism.' There are
many other gourds, and amongst their number are
'Lack of Brotherly 'Love/ 'False Reports/ 'Harsh
Criticism' and 'Tale Bearing.'
Q. "Why, Man ! You would never think of
bringing such things into the midst of a Pentecostal gathering!
You are wrong, and the gourds are poisonous.
They will destroy unity and curdle love and make
endless confusion and trouble.
Surely you do not realize what you are doing ?"
A. "Oh, yes I do. The Lord (?) revealed this
thing to me and I know this new idea is the only
right one. I know these gourds are perfectly all
right and you can't teach me anything about them.
Kindly allow me to pass."
Q. "Wait, wait, come back. There, he is
gone' he worms his way into the inner circle, gets
close to the pot, lifts his lapful of gourds, and in
they go, the whole lot of them, into the pottage.
On-lookers innocently allowed the gourds at first
to pass them, and even

Shred them into the pot of pottage, "for they
knew them not." So they poured out for men to
eat ; and it came to pass as they were eating of the
pottage that they cried out and said:
OH, THOU MAN OF GOD, THERE IS DEATH IN THE POT,
and they could not eat thereof."
Amidst the many who come with good contributions to the pot, here and there steals up a man or
woman with a lapful of gourds, which they have
plucked from some wild vine as they journeyed,
and they are thrown, sometimes ignorantly, sometimes knowingly, into the great pot upon the fire.
"Oh, what a distressingly large lapful of poisonous gourds !" exclaims the on-looker who had been
609

THIS IS THAT
approaching with his empty dish and spoon, ready
to dine, and who now draws back in fear.
"Horrors the whole thing is spoiled!"
There is false teaching and error in that movement, and I am afraid to have anything to do
with it.
There is "So and So," Avho did "such and such"
a thing and if that's Pentecost, or if that's the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, I for one, don't want it.
There's Mr. "So. and So" in our assembly, and
there's that one who professed to be a Holy Ghost
preacher did you hear Avhat he did?
Did you hear of the gourd that he brought and
dumped into Pentecost?

No, Sir! The Avhole pot is contaminated and
poisoned. I tell you there's DEATH in the pot,"
and they are in a straight between two, whether to
try to overturn the whole pot or to walk away and
leave it, warning others as they go.
Some say, "Come on, let's fight this movement.
Let's write some tracts against it and do what we
can to overturn the whole thing." Others who
walk away, warn everyone they meet by saying:
"Did you hear the news about that Pentecostal
movement down there? Why, 'So and So' has just
brought the most distressing lapful of gourds and
dropped them into Pentecost; unity is disrupted;
love is curdled, the people are made sick at their
very hearts. Don't you go near that place."
Perplexity and confusion falls upon many an onlooker, some stay to criticise; others to wring
their hands and weep.
What shall YOU and I do? We know that the
movement is ninety-nine per cent pure, but Oh
that lapful of gourds has brought so much trouble!
Of course we know that "WHEN THE SONS OF
GOD CAME TOGETHER THE DEVIL CAME
ALSO/' and that there never was a movement but
where someone came in to bring reproach, and
610

"DEATH IN THE POT"
that even amongst the twelve disciples one was a
Judas. We also know how one who does not
measure up to the standard is singled out from the
ninety-nine others and enlarged upon until the
"ninety and nine just ones" are forgotten in pointing to and discussing him who went astray.

"Well, we know the thing is not right anyway,
as it is, and I guess we better go away. Too bad,
isn't it?"
"But wait a moment
"Who is this so swiftly approaching with a wellfilled sack clasped tightly in his arms?"
Q. "Who goes there, and what do you bring in
your hands?"
A. "I am the man with the sack of meal. The
meal is the Word of God. I go to cast it into the
pot. This meal will simmer down to the bottom
of the whole affair and settle all disturbances. It
shall cry aloud :
" 'What saith the scriptures? Bring forth the
plumb line. Let God be true and every man a
liar. Prove all things. Abhor that which is evil;
cleave to that which is good. Be not overcome of
evil, but overcome evil with good.' '
This word is quick and powerful and shall not
fail, if cast into the pot, to purify and bring order
out of confusion.
BRING THE MEAL THE WORD OF GOD.
"And EHsha said, bring meal, and he cast it into
the pot; and he said, pour out for the people that
they may eat, and there was no harm in the
pot."
Oh hallelujah! The Word of God is being
poured into this movement and His Word is
accomplishing that whereunto it has been sent.
The Holy Spirit today is calling as did Elisha
of old:
611

THIS IS THAT
"POUR OUT FOR THE PEOPLE THAT THEY MAY EAT."
I can seem to see the surrounding circle of
empty plates and see the hungry faces of the dear
ones as they are partaking themselves and calling
to others to come, "taste and see that the Lord is
good. 7 '
"POUR OUT TO THE PEOPLE THAT THEY
MAY EAT." Oh, yes, that is the greatest mission
of the hour. Give unto the people that they may
eat.
If you have discovered something somewhere in
your vicinity or in the movement at large, which
looks to you like a gourd, instead of turning your
back and your judgment and wholesale condemnation upon the whole thing, go bring the meal
(II Kings 4:41), get the Word of God and find
out w T hat saith the scriptures. "If this work be
of men it will come to naught; but if it be of God,
ye cannot overthrow it, lest haply ye be found even
to fight against God. 7 - (Acts 5 :38-39. )
Get out the meal if you see this Baptism of the
Holy Spirit with the Bible evidence, speaking in
tongues, in the WORD, with the accompanying
gifts and fruits of the Spirit, believe God and
come boldly to receive this Bible experience even
though every one round about you seems to be in
error or falls below the standard.
INSTEAD OF BEING THE ONE WHO CRIES
-THERE 18 DEATH IN THE POT/ 7 BE AN
ELI8HA WITH A SACK OF ME A L; receive YE
the Holy Ghost; let God make YOU to measure
up to the Word. All your criticising or scolding
or telling where the trouble is or even trying to
fix it, can never help. The Meal of the Word will
alone avail.
Pour out for the people that they may eat.

Dear Avorker, what are you feeding your hungry
people on? Are you telling them and repeating
over, meeting after meeting, every story and inci612

"DEATH IN THE POT"
dent that has come to your knowledge where
gourds have been put into the pot? If so you are
guilty and putting gourds of doubts and discouragement in the pot yourself.
When you set the table for your guests that hunger all about you, do not frighten people away by
bringing up from your cellar the poorest potatoes
or the mouldy preserves, or the mildewed bread
from your larder THEY DO NOT WANT TO
HEAR ABOUT MAN'S WORST; THEY WANT
TO HEAR ABOUT GOD'S BEST. What are you
feeding your people on? Relating the worst things
you ever heard of man doing or the best things
you ever heard of God doing? The former makes
poor fighting food the latter makes firm spiritual
muscles and makes strong, developed, matured
nien and women who grow quickly under such
teaching "unto a perfect man, unto the measure
of the stature of the fulness of Christ." (Eph.
4:13.)
Remember that by relating past wrongs, etc.,
you are as guilty as those who committed them,
and are only frightening people away by crying:
"There's death in the pot." Go bring the meal :
preach the Word. Lift up the pure standard and
God will vindicate and honor His Word.
Does it seem sometimes that you have very
little to set before the people and do you feel your
own lack and insufficiency? Remember that the
servant felt it that day, too, when he said:

(II. Kings 4:43) "What, should I set this before
an hundred men?" And Elisha said: "Give the
people that they may eat; for thus saith the Lord,
they shall eat, and shall leave thereof. 80 he set
it before them, and they did eat, and left thereof,
according to the word of the Lord."
The Word of God rights every wrong, dispels
all darkness, removes all impurities, settles all
misunderstandings, and \vhetlier it dissolves or
613

THIS IS THAT
eliminates all the gourds or just what becomes of
them I cannot exactly say, but at any rate I know
that after the meal was cast into the midst
"THERE WAS NO HARM IN THE POT."
If you have been standing afar off in doubt and
are an hungered, hesitate no longer but bring your
meal with you and come and dine, for there is no
harm in the pot.
With all the gourds (and indeed they are comparatively few in number, considering that this
movement has enveloped the entire globe, and into
it have come streams of people from every creed
and clime and color), this great pot set upon the
fire, this Holy Spirit movement is the best thing
in the world and contains the best food on earth.

614

REJOICE IN THE LORD.
"Rejoice in the Lord alway: and again I say, Rejoice."

Phil. 4:4.
IT is the will of the Lord that His people should
praise Him and rejoice in Him at all times,
in all places and under all circumstances, rejoice in Him with a joy so deep, and springing
from such an inexhaustible fountain-head, that it
is as an artesian well that rises upward day and
night unceasingly, unchanged, by summer's heat
or winter's cold, sunshine or clouds.
"Rejoice in the Lord ahray: and again 1 say,
Rejoice. Pray without ceasing, and in everything
give thanks. Let His praise be continually in your
mouth/' This does not mean a spasmodic praise,
here today and gone tomorrow, that shouts with
joyous gladness when all goes well and the sea is
calm, only to fret and pine and murmur when the
sky is o'ercast with darkness and the surrounding
seas are lashed to foam. It is not a joy that flows
only when showers of blessing are falling, but
which flows even-tempered, unhindered, with a
stream of just as great volume, its quantity and
quality unchanged, when drouth and barrenness is
all about it,
WHY is this stream unchanged by circumstances and outward change in the elements?
Why, because of its source, of course, because of
the fountain-head from which it flows. Rejoice
IN THE LORD not in circumstances, not in
blessings past or present, not in money, not in
popularity, not in numbers, not in good or evil
report, but rejoice IN THE LORD.
"Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither
shall -fruit be in the vines; the labor of the olive
shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat; the
flocks shall be cut off from the fold, and there
shall be no head in the stall: yet I will rejoice
in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation."
Hab. 3 :17, 18.
615

THIS IS THAT
? Tis here, in this land of continual, unmolested
joy, 'tis here by the rivers and streams of Godinspired praises, that the Christian finds deepest
peace, peace that passeth all understanding, peace
immeasurable and fathomless as the billows of the
sea, peace that emanates from the Prince of Peace
Himself.
ABOVE CIRCUMSTANCES.
Kejoice IN THE LORD. You will no longer
deal out your joy or praise in the stinted little
measuring-cup of your own feelings or circumstances. The words, "I do not feel like it," will
be eliminated from your vocabulary. You will no
longer say: "I could rejoice if such and such a
thing had not happened,' 7 or "I could have rejoiced had not 'so and so' said such and such a
thing." 8o and So' 7 and "Such and Such" Avill
have nothing more to do with your rejoicing, for
your eyes have been lifted above circumstances
and surroundings and been riveted upon the Lord.
He will hold your eyes with adoration when He
stands revealed in His power and beauty before
you. When there is nothing else to rejoice in
you cannot rejoice in circumstances, nor in earthly
gain, and there seems to be nothing in yourself or
life to cause rejoicing, and when you see your efforts, strivings and plans crumbling about you,
when you have seen the King and caught a vision
of your OAVU nothingness and insufficiency, and
have abhorred yourself if your eyes are fixed unwaveringly upon the Lord and His righteousness,
holiness and mercy, you will still be able to lift
your head and rejoice IN THE LORD.
Joy in the night, joy in the hard places, joy in
misunderstandings, Avhen you did your best and
seemed to fail, such joy gives "beauty for ashes,

the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise
for the spirit of heaviness." Well did David knoAV
the security of this hiding place when he said:
616

REJOICE IN THE LORD
"In the shadow of Thy icings will 1 rejoice"
From such a retreat one can look out through His
feathers and laugh at the futile attempts . of the.
enemy, and rejoice that his life is "hid with Christ
in God."
CHASTENING, HARD PLACES, AND OVERCOMERS.
Has the chastening rod fallen upon you? Then
rejoice IN THE LORD, for he whom He loveth
He doth rebuke and chasten. Have you been
going through testings and hard places in your
home life, and does it seem that no shoulders but
they of the Master Himself e'er bore a cross so
heavy as that which has been given you? Then
rejoice in the Lord, for He has put you in a place
wherein you may be more than conqueror, and win
an overcomer's crown. If you had nothing to overcome, then how could you ever be an overcomer?
Never hath He allowed a temptation but what He
hath provided a way of escape. And have you
failed in that home, in that appointed place, again
and again until the tears of discouragement have
filled your eyes and you have felt that it was of no
avail? Have sharp \vords been spoken, of which
you have instantly repented with bitter tears?
Then arise, Oh captive daughter of Jerusalem,
shake thy garments from the dust, lift up your
head and your hands, and rejoice IN THE LORD
who hath bidden you, "forgetting those things
which are behind" to press on "toward the mark
for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus."

Put your hand in His, plead the blood, and He
will undoubtedly bring you up again and again to
that same testing place, that same peculiar set of
circumstances, until you shall emerge a triumphant victor and just such a conqueror as He seeks
to reign with Him on His throne.
When you have conquered, after many failures,
you will not rejoice in yourself, your own strength
617

THIS IS THAT
or prowess, but will rejoice IN THE LORD, without whom you could have done nothing. The
harder- the battle the greater the victory, the
harder the home life or environment, the brighter
the victor's crown. When reading of the victor,
the overcomer, and the conquering warrior in his
armor of steel, one naturally calls to mind an army
with flying banners waving in the breeze, music
and cheering. We have longed and asked the Lord to
make us overcomers, but when He has taken us at
our word and in order to answer our prayer has
placed us just where we are, in just these circumstances, how many times we have failed to see God
and realize that the conflict in which we are now engaged is but a living answer to that prayer, is just
the place and just the conflict where God has put
us and where He wants us to overcome and keep
rejoicing in the Lord.
Have you suffered earthly losses and bereave^
ments? Have you been stripped of that which
life held most dear, in a way that you could not
understand? Then rejoice IN THE LORD, for
"the Lord gave and the Lord taketh away, and
blessed is the name of the Lord."
"Yes, Oh yes, He understands,
All His ways are best,

Hear, Oh hear, He calls to you,
'Come to Me and rest.'
"Leave the unknown future,
In the Master's hands,
Whether sad or joyful,
Jesus understands."
BOAST NOT OF THYSELF.
Has God been blessing your labors and the fruit
of your vine? Has He permitted you to be a soulwinner for Him, and given great results and numbers from the sowing of the seed with which He
has entrusted you? Then rejoice I-N T-H-E
618

REJOICE IN THE LORD
L-O-R-D, not in your own works (for man's works
shall be burned up as by fire), not in your own
strength (for without Him we can do nothing),
not in your own power (for the Lord will not give
His glory to another, and all flesh, even good flesh,
is but as the grass of the field that withereth
away), not in your own righteousness (for all our
righteousnesses are as filthy rags), but rejoice 1
in the Lord. He is the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end; in Him is all righteousness
and power, honor and glory.
Have you been used in your assembly in teaching, in admonition, in leading souls to Christ, in
praying for the sick, in casting out of demons, in
interpretation or prophecy, or discerning of spirits? Do men and women look up to you and speak
well of you? Rejoice IN THE LORD. Take
heed rejoice in the Lord alone, be careful to give

Him all the glory, as did Peter when he cried :
"Why look ye so earnestly on us, as though by our
own power or holiness we had made this man to
walk? Acts 3:12.
Look to the Lamb of God, who said, "'The words
tJuit I speak unto you I speak not of myself; but'
the Father that dicelleth in Me, He doeth the
works." John 14:10. Many, O so pitifully many,
have lost out with God and man, have lost their
gifts, lost their usefulness, because they rejoiced
in themselves and in the approbation of people 1
rather than in the Lord. The joy of the Lord is
your strength ; take away this joy and, like Sampson of old, you will be shorn of your locks, your
eyes put out so that you can no longer see His
face, and you will soon be bound with fetters of,
brass (bondage), grinding in the prison house,
round and round, round and round, the same old
grinding machine, all you will have to tell, or testify of will be the same old story of healings, that
used to be and the victories that once were yours.
619

THIS IS THAT
SEEKING -WITH REJOICING.
Would you receive aught from the Lord? Then
rejoice in Him. "Let the heart of them rejoice
that seek the Lord/' I. Chron. 16:10. Are you
seeking healing? Do not look at symptoms, or
rejoice even in the prayers of the saints alone,
but fix your eyes upon Him who hath borne all
your sicknesses in His own body on the tree, and
by whose stripes ye are healed, and rejoice in the
Lord until His life and strength and joy flow
through every avenue and enter into every fibre of
your being.
Are you seeking The Baptism of the Holy Spirit?
Then rejoice in the Lord who hath said : "Every one

tJiat a$keth receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth;
arid to him tliat knocketh it shall be opened." Mat.
7 :8, and ttf/io is more willing to give the Holy Spirit
to them that ask Him than earthly parents arc to
give good gifts to their children.
Yes, dear seeker, enter in through the gates of
praise, rejoice in the Lord. Let your praise fill
every corner of the room and echo out into the
surrounding atmosphere until it rings in the high"est heavens. Open your mouth wide and He will
fill it. And when the Comforter has come, if you
will let Him, He will teach you to rejoice in the
Lord in a way of which you have never, dreamed.
And this joy is the privilege of every child of
God, the joy of the Lord. Enter into your joy, and
into this kingdom which the Lord wants you to
possess, where shadows and obscuring clouds are
unknown, and the sun is never dimmed. Fix your
eyes upon Jesus, dig deep in humility till you
reach the fountain-head, the inexhaustible source
of supply, then through the golden pipe of your
life, every day, every hour, shall leap up a deep,
ne'er-changing stream of joy, a joy that neither
adversities nor trying circumstances can suppress
or keep doAvn, because it is a JOY IN THE LORD.
620

PRAISING THE LORD.

the Lord has ever been to me one
the most inspiring and exalting of themes.
Oh ! how I love to praise Him and hear Him
praised.
It has been my privilege, on several occasions,
to witness, the never-to-be-forgotten scene of one

thousand saints standing on their feet with uplifted hands, and tears streaming down their radiant faces, praising the Lord with all their might
and soul and voice, with one accord, till the great
volume of thunderous praises blended into a sound
as of rushing mighty waters as it rolled majestically heavenward. It went up as one voice, of one
people who were one in heart and adoration of the
Most High God and His Glorious Son, Jesus
Christ.
It is when praising the Lord thus, as at no other
time, my spirit catches the greatest revelationthe greatest vision of the mighty, omnipotent King
of the Ages, high and lifted up. 'Tis. then that the
very atmosphere seems electric, charged with the
mighty power of the great God, and I catch the
sound of His chariot wheels leaping o'er the mountains, ever coming nearer as His 'saints continue
to adore Him, till I hear the stately steppings of
the King in the midst of His holy tabernacle
then, as the cloud of glorious adoration still rises
from the hearts of the people, I see Him robed
with Honor, crowned with Glory, seated upon a
jewelled throne of adoration which His people have
builded for Him by their praises.
The Lord inhabiteth the praises of His people.
Where real praise is, there God is.
It is impossible to over-estimate the power, victory, blessing, healing, encouragement and inspiration embodied in this wonderful secret of praising
the Lord.
621

THIS IS THAT
PRAISE THE LORD AT ALL TIMES.
"Oh! but you know that I could never put anything on, I never could praise the Lord unless I

f-e-e-1 like it," someone exclaims.
Unless you feel like it ! ! Oh ! Is that the gauge
by which you measure your offerings of praise?
Is that the foundation upon which your Christian
experience is based? My dear Brother, Sister,
feelings are a poor and a very uncertain guide
upon which to rely when it comes to praising the
Lord, or any other Christian experience. Only one
man in the Bible that I know of went by feeling;
that was dear old Isaac, and you remember how he
f-e-l-t the hands and arms of Jacob, his son, and
how deceived he was. Oh, dear hearts, praise Him,
NOT BECAUSE YOU HAPPEN TO FEEL LIKE IT,
but praise Him at "all times," and let His praise
"be continually in your mouth,"
BECAUSE HE IS WORTHY.
Begin to praise Him whether you feel like it or
not, and you soon will feel like it. Why, it is impossible for me to lift up my hands and begin to
praise and adore my Master without a downpour
of His blessing that is as rain to the thirsty fields
and flowers, or as the anointing-oil upon my head,
running down to the borders of my garments.
"Let everything that hath breath praise the
Lord." Why, according to David, the only excuse
you have got for not praising the Lord is being out
of breath !
"Oh, Sister, I praise Him in my heart. I could
never shout aloud or be demonstrative. It is not
my make-up or disposition."
Beloved, when you have put on your beautiful
garments of praise (for no matter how homely
you may be to the natural eye, you are beautiful
to the Lord when you have put on praise as a
garment), you are lifted above your own "make-up"

622

PRAISING THE LORD
and "disposition" and swing far out into the realm
of the Spirit. As for praising the Lord in your
heart, why, your heart is no different from anyone
else's. When it gets just so full of glorious praises
and adoration and He becomes so real, so fair as
to be altogether lovely, the chiefest of ten thousand
to your soul, your heart will run over and you
will shout His praises, and your voice will be
blended with the voices of all the other redeemed
ones and soar upward to the Lamb that sitteth
upon the throne.
I was much impressed recently, while in New
York, by the notices posted on the subway and
places, Avarning the people of the severe penalty
elevated trains and in other prominent public
awaiting anyone who should try in any way to
break the morale of the soldiers by talking of possible defeat, or failure, or by lauding the strength
of the enemy. This should be a warning to Christians also.
DO NOT BREAK THE MORALE OF THE CHRISTIAN ARMY.
Two saints attend the same meeting. Probably
you have these two saints in your assembly (for
almost every assembly has them).
One enters with a long face, takes her seat, looks
solemnly about, and if the meetings seems a little
stiff or in need of a blessing, or lacking in praise,
or "tied up," this dear one, meaning well enough,
begins to be burdened and sigh, to pray aloud, or
exclaim in this manner :
"Oh, Lord, what is the matter here? Oh, there
is such a binding spirit, such a power of darkness.
It seems as though the room were filled with

demons. Lord, help," etc. Immediately every
eye and every thought is directed to the devil, to
darkness and binding spirits, and of course (like
Peter when he got his eye on the waves), when we
get our eyes on the devil we have them off Jesus.
When we advertise and meditate upon the great623

THIS IS THAT
ness and strength of the devil, and show fear, we
underestimate the power of the great / AM, the
Mighty Conqueror who never lost a battle. Such
despondency and burdened agonizing is contagious,
and soon everyone is moaning and crying and miserable, and it is not until someone begins "seeing
and praising Jesus" that the cloud lifts.
The other saint enters the same meeting, where
it seems that not one breath of Heavenly gales is
stirring, feels the same pressure upon the meeting,
and refusing to look at or recognize the enemy,
says :
"This is the time to praise our Jesus. This is
the time to see our God arise and scatter His
enemies. He has told us that he will do great and
mighty things if we will but praise Him, and we
know that the enemy cannot lodge or abide in an
atmosphere that is filled with the praises of the
Lord." This saint straightway begins to shout :
"Hallelujah! We rejoice in Thee! We glory in
Thy might, Oh, our King! Victory and honor ever
attend Thy troops. Power and dominion envelop
Thee. Thy glory and presence fill the heavens and
the earth. It fills my heart just now. It over :
flows and fills the room. Why, glory to Jesus!
Beloved, the Lord is in our midst. Do you not feel
Him? Why, this atmosphere is just like Heaven !"

Such faith and praise is contagious. The fire of
unwavering confidence in God that burns within
this temple soon leaps over its parapets, spreads
first to those in the seats nearby, then on to the
farthest corner of the room, inspiring, encouraging, lifting up drooping heads, strengthening feeble
knees, and in a moment every eye is fixed on- Jesus,
His praises fill the tabernacle, souls are blessed,
vessels, are filled to overflowing, the Latter Rain
is hearcl pattering on the roofs, running down the
troughs, overflowing the rain -barrels, the dry
624

PHALSIXG THE LOW)
ground is saturated and the wilderness and the
desert places are blossoming as the rose!
What Avas the difference in the two saints? The
one recognized and saw only the power of the
devil, and straightway began to bemoan the sad
state of affairs, depressing everyone who listened,
while the other saw only Jesus in His all-conquering, invincible might and splendor, riding on to
sure and certain victory.
MY VISION OF THE DEMONS AND THE ANGELS.
The Lord taught me a wonderful lesson sometime ago, demonstrating the majesty and power of
praise. I was seated on the rostrum in my tent
during the evening meeting. Not only was every
seat in the big tabernacle tilled and crowds standing in the aisles, but all about the outside of the
tent hundreds and hundreds stood closely packed
together. It was the early days of the meeting and
conviction had not yet taken the place of curiosity.
Therefore, as a great many of the onlookers were
Roman Catholics, and the balance unused to any
demonstration of the power of God, the very air

was filled with unbelief, skepticism, scoffing and
ridicule. The people would listen as long as we
sang (or was it because that drowned their murmurings?) But as soon as anyone endeavored to
speak, the whisperings and the murmurings would
begin until another song was started.
As I stood there on the platform, with my eyes
closed, I saw the entire tent surrounded with great
black demons, with huge, bat-like wings. Each
demon seemed to stand about ten feel tall, and as
they stood in a circle, completely surrounding the
tent, they were so close together that their wings
touched, tip to tip. They stood close to the border
of the tent, and with my eyes still closed, my heart
began to cry out :
"Oh, Lord, what shall I do?" And He spoke to
625

THIS IS THAT
me in such a real way, ill that calm, undisturbed
voice which those who love the Prince of Peace
know so well :
"Just begin to praise Me. I will do the fighting.
You do the praising." So I began to praise Him.
"Praise the Lord! The first time I said it I
noticed the demons seemed to tremble.
"Praise the Lord!" The second time I shouted
it. I am sure my voice was heard above every
other sound, and I saw each demon take one step
backwards, away from the tent.
"Praise the Lord! Praise the Lord!! Praise the
Lord!!!-' Each time I said "Praise the Lord" the
demons took another step backward, until I lost
all sight of them in the distance.

"Praise the Lord !" The next time I said it I
saw in the distance a circular band of angels
standing around the tent.
"Praise the Lord! P-R-A-I-S-E T-H-E L-O-R-D!"
Each time I praised Him they took one step nearer,
another step nearer, still another step nearer, till
at last they stood at the very border of the tent,
such tall, wonderful-looking angels, with their
beautiful white wings spread so wide that the
wings of each touched, tip to tip, the ones of the*
next angel on the right and on the left. Father
had sent one of His legions of angels to guard the
tent.
Perhaps not another person in the tent saw the
vision of this great shining band of angels, yet
everyone inside and out must have sensed the presence of the divine, for not only did a great peace
steal over my soul, but the whole audience was
hushed. When I opened my eyes I could see only
the people looking with rapt attention, but closing
niy eyes again I could see the angels just as plainly
as I could see the people.
Is it any wonder that I believe that
625

PRAISING THE LORD
THE POWER OF PRAISE DRIVES BACK THE ENEMY AND
BRINGS DOWN THE BLESSING.
Jesus says : "What things soever you desire
when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye
shall have them." Now, if we ask God to give us a
certain answer to prayer, and we then proceed to
believe we have it, it is only polite to begin to
thank Him for it, in other words, shoot upward
through the prayer zone into the praise zone, and

thank God beforehand that, according to His word,
it is done.
When contending with sickness, trouble, misunderstanding, discouragement or depression, begin
to see Jesus. Praise Him with all your heart, and
the upward flight of His praises will lift you as
with the wings of a great eagle, above the woes
of this earth till sorrow and sighing are lost sight
of and consolation and joy unspeakable fill their
place as you exalt and magnify the Lamb for sinners slain.
PRAISING HIM IN THE FLESH.
"But I do not want to praise Him in the flesh,"
says someone. Ah, but we walk no more "after
the flesh, 'but after the Spirit," and all this poor
flesh of mine is fit for anyway is to praise Jesus,
and if you never do anything worse in the flesh
than to praise the Lord you will never be displeasing in His sight.
When the Comforter abides and has His way, it
is so easy to praise Jesus, for "He, when He has
come, icill glorify Me" and "out of your innermost
l)<'iny shall flow rivers of living water"
BRING THE OFFER OF FRANKINCENSE.
You may have but little gold or silver a little
of this world's goods to offer but there is no excuse for being sparing or miserly with His praises.
Heap up His praises upon the glowing altar of
your soul, and pile His adoration a-top of that,
627

THIS IS THAT
crown Him Avith glory, laud and magnify His name

until His burning praises rise in precious frankincense, as a sweet-smelling savor to be caught in
the golden censer of the angel who offers unto the
Lord much incense (praise), Avith the prayers of
all saints upon the golden altar which is before
the throne. Rev. 8 :3.
IN TUNE.
Let your heart be tuned up until it shall be as
a harp of a thousand strings swept Avith melody by
the fingers of the Holy Spirit.
If you have hung your harp on the willow-tree,
if the rust of coldness or self or formality has
formed upon the strings, or if they are broken or
out of tune,
GO GET YOUR HARP !
Take it down from the willows, clean away the
rust Avhich has gathered from long disuse, let the
Holy Spirit tune up each string until again the
music Avill spring forth at His slightest touch.
Remember it takes but a slight jar to put the most
costly harp out of tune; walk softly, dear heart,
with unshod feet before Him.

628

THE FOUR-FOLD MESSAGE OF THE HOUR
(For Fishers of Men).
SALVATION, THE BAPTISM OF THE HOLY SPIRIT, SOON
COMING OF JESUS, AND THE PREPARATION
OF THE BRIDE.
THERE is no time for mincing words or

beating round the bush, or sugar-coating the
Word of God now.
The time for quick action has come!
This is not a time to be indefinite or vague, or
come at the message in a round-about way not a
time to come to the door of a man who, unconscious of his danger, rocks in the easy chair of his
drawing room, and say :
"Fine day, Sir."
"Good weather we're having."
"Yes, yes, prospect of good crops," etc.
"But the fact is, Sir, I come to bring you a little
news don't want to alarm you at all hope you
will pardon my intrusion and taking the liberty,"
etc.
"But I fear you should notify your household
and send for assistance, for er a I regret to
tell you but the whole upper story of your house
is on fire and I fear 'tis almost too late to save it."
N-O ! ! This is a time to ring the alarm with one
hand, batter upon the man's door with the other,
and shout: "FIRE1 FIRE!! F-I-R-E!!!"
So many sermons are preached, so many articles
written, that when boiled right down and analyzed,
have not enough real warning and invitation to
show the sinner his awful condition and invite him
to the Saviour's feet
629

THIS IS THAT
Not enough real, definite explanation of tlu>

Holy Spirit, and how to receive Him, and the necessity for His incoming, to bring one sonl to the
place of understanding or seeking for the SpiritNot enough about the soon coming of Jesus
Christ for His waiting church, to explain to that
soul how we know He is coming, or how to prepare to meet Him and yet other themes, eloquent, educational, or studious as they may be,
fade into insignificance and step aside before this
four-fold message of the hour.
The consecrated soul who can preach simple,
plain, old-fashioned Salvation, according to John
3:16.
The Baptism of the Holy Spirit, according to
Acts 2 :4.
The Coming of our Lord, according to Matt. 24,
I. Thess. 4:16.
And the Preparation of the Bride, according to
I. Thess. 5, becomes at once (in the closing hour
of the Church's stay upon earth) a man or a
woman with a message.
It is one thing to write, and write, and write, or
to talk, and talk, and talk most admirably and
interestingly, we grant you, but it is quite another
thing in writing or preaching to be a man or a
woman with a real message for this hour.
Take down the double-barreled Word of Godtake a deliberate aim, and fire straight at a given
mark, with a message so simple that, had the sinner (who comes within the reach of your words)
never heard of the love, sacrifice, and precious
blood of Jesus, or of his own dire need of a
Saviour, he would know it e'ej* you got through
A message so plain that had the believer in your
midst, like those at Ephesus of old, never heard of
the Holy Spirit, there would be enough real definite
information in your words to let that seeker know

of how our Lord, ascending to His Father, poured
630

THE FOUR-FOLD MESSAGE OF THE HOUR
out the gift of the Holy Ghost, who when He is
come, convicts the sinner of his sin, bears witness
with the new r ly born-again, blood-washed soul that
the work is done, baptizes believers with the Holy
Spirit, speaking- through them Avith other tongues,
according to Acts 2 :4, and is the lifting power
which will quicken these mortal bodies when Jesus
comes
So plain and scriptural that your uninformed
reader or hearer, who never before had heard the
message of the soon coming of the Lord for His
waiting church, would have heard, before your
words had ceased, what these awful things that are
coming upon the earth in these last days meanthat you believe Jesus is coming soon your scriptural ground for such a belief, and the signs of the
times, linked up with the signs of the Word of God,
which confirm your assertion that He is coming
BOON.
He would hear, also, of the necessity of getting
ready to meet this Jesus in the air, what the preparation of the Bride means, and how it is brought
about.
Oh Ye Bride of the Lord
Ye Translation Company
Ye who Love His Appearing poised on one foot,
ready for instant flight, your trumpet in your hand
for one last warning note to a lost world e'er you
depart what will your message be?
Will you come at the real truth in a long, round-

about, polite, apologetic Avay, talking of non-essentials in these last moments? Or will you shout
aloud in explicit, clear, definite, concise words,
this four-fold message of the hour?
SALVATION.
In order to make the message of Salvation so
clear and plain that a wayfaring man, though a
fool, cannot err therein, there are a few definite,
631

THIS IS THAT
scriptural facts that will have to be explained to
him.
1. What sin is and God's attitude towards it.
2. How it came about that all were born in sin
and shapen in iniquity, and therefore need a
Saviour.
3. Just what Salvation is; how it is wrought;
how to be saved; how to keep saved and what Salvation will do for him.
THE BAPTISM OP THE HOLY SPIRIT.
In order to convey a clear, definite conception
of the Baptism of the Holy Spirit to a believer,
and create a faith and hunger in his heart for this
experience, it is necessary to explain clearly the
"what saith the Scriptures" upon this subject :
1. Who the Holy Spirit is, and Avhat His Office
Work is to the Sinner, to the Believer, to the baptized, preparing Bride.
2. What the Baptism of the Holy Spirit is; how
it was received in Bible days, and how the believer

of today may know when he receives the Holy
Spirit.
3. What is the benefit and necessity of receiving the Holy Spirit? What does He do for the
soul in which He has taken His abode, and whom
He has made His temple?
THE COMING OP THE LORD.
It is not enough merely to make the statement
that Jesus is coming soon, and tell the hearer to
get ready to meet Him. If you would convince
and electrify the unprepared soul into action
Be DEFINITE, be EXPLICJTTell him the true facts of
1. What are your scriptural grounds for making the statement that Jesus is literally coining
back to this earth in clouds of glory for His
people?
2. How do you know He is coming soon? What
632

THE FOUR-FOLD MESSAGE OF THE HOUR
are the signs of His appearing? And which of
these signs have been already fulfilled?
3. What will happen when and after He does
come?
THE PREPARATION OF THE BRIDE.
In admonishing those about you to prepare for
the coining of the Lord there is also a great need
for the clear, unmistakable directions, given in
the Word, to be demonstrated.

1. Who will rise to meet the Lord when He
comes? Everyone that professes? The hypocrite?
Faultfinder and backbiter? Everyone that claims
to be filled with the Spirit? NO?? Then who
will go?
2. Whom did the Lord send down into this
world (John 16:13, 14) to prepare the Bride?
And of what does that preparation consist?
3. What must be the life, conversation, daily
walk, clothing, attitude, etc., of the Bride?
Beloved, this Four-Fold Message should bait the
hook of every fisher of men ; it should load the gun
of every hunter who would bring back precious souls
for Jesus.
Time is passing the last hours with their golden opportunities are slipping by. Soon our Saviour will appear. If you would have souls with
which to greet Him, golden sheaves to lay at His
feet, be DEFINITE, be ZEALOUS, be INSTANT
IN SEASON AND OUT OF SEASON. Whether
you in your corner are called upon to write or
preach or just to give a plain testimony to those
about you, don't ramble vaguely here and there,
but for Jesus' dear sake, and the sake of lost souls
all about you, be definite and clear, and lift the light
embodied in this Four-Fold Message of the Hour.

633

Part IV
Visions, Prophecies, Messages
in Tongues and Interpretation
Given by Sister McPherson

EXPLANATORY NOTE
God, in speaking through the prophet Joel, says:
"And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out
my Spirit upon all flesh and your sons and your daughters shall
prophesy. And also upon the servants and upon the handmaids
will I pour out my Spirit." (Joel 2-28, 29.) The gifts of the
Spirit are being restored to the church and amongst their number
is the gift of prophecy and also that of tongues and interpretation. (I Cor. 12.)
It is as a direct result of the restoration of these gifts
and operations of the Spirit that the following messages and
visions are recorded. Sister McPherson claims no authorship, as
when these messages were spoken through her, she was completely
under the power of the Holy Spirit, her tongue and voice
were controlled by the Spirit as though speaking in tongues, only
that they came in English. Those who were present copied down
the messages word for word as spoken.
Regarding Interpretation, see I Cor. 14:13, 27. "Wherefore
let him that speaketh in an unknown tongue, pray that he may
interpret. If any man speak in an unknown tongue, let it be
by two, or at the most by three, and that by course; and let
one interpret."
Poetry or Blank Prose was given in Prophetic song in tongues
and interpretation.
"And the same man had four daughters, virgins, which did
prophesy." Acts 21-9.
"Then Jeremiah called unto Baruch and Baruch wrote from
the mouth of Jeremiah, all the words of the lord, which He had
spoken unto him, upon a roll of a book." Jer. 36-4.

The Former and Latter Rain

Tune "Brighten the Corner Where You Are"
It was on the day of Pentecost so long ago,
Christ the Holy Spirit did bestow;
It was with the mighty rushing wind, and tongues of flame,
First fell the promised former rain.
CHORUS
Lift thine eyes, and behold the latter rain, .
Falling today to ripen up the grain;
Jesus is coming soon and with Him we shall reign,
Jesus is coming soon again.
It was after Jesus from death's lonely tomb arose,
Rose triumphant, victor o'er His foes;
He ascended up unto His Father's throne again,
And poured out this glorious former rain.
Then with mighty power and holy boldness did they go,
Precious seed of Jesus Christ to sow;
Sick were healed, lame men leaped, danced, and walked again
When fell that glorious former rain.
Now the great and mighty harvest day is drawing nigh,
And the Lord is pouring from on high
Pentecostal showers to ripen up the golden grain.
Have you felt this glorious latter rain?
Still today on hungry, blood washed saints the Spirit falls,
And to you the loving Savior calls,
Just look up in simple, childlike faith, and in My Name,
Receive this glorious latter rain.
O the joy of those endued with power from on high,
As we see our Saviour draweth nigh.
When the Spirit comes, we speak in other tongues again,
Have you received this latter rain?

637

KHAPSODY OF PRAISE
At Mt. Forest, Out., Can.,' August, 1915.
Shout aloud, my soul, and sing
Joyous praises to my King;
Just and holy is His Name,
Shout,' my soul, and sing His fame.
Now my longing, weary eyes,
Wistfully do search the skies,
Looking for my Lord and King,
While my raptured heart doth sing.
To whom shall I compare my Love.
Who fills my heart from Heaven above?
Shout, my soul, and sing His praise,
All throughout eternal days.
Fair to look upon is He
Who from sin hath set me free,
Pure and spotless, kind and true,
And, my friend, He calleth you.
Soon He's coming back again
To call His own with Him to reign.
Shout, my soul, hold not thy peace
Till thy bonds He shall release,
Till I fall before His feet,
And my rapture is complete;
And there, beside the glassy sea,
I'll live with Him eternally.

638

THE MEETING IN THE AIR.

To whom shall I compare my Love
Who came from Heaven above?
Who sent the blessed Heavenly Dove,
Revealing Jesus' holy love.
Chorus :
To whom shall I my Love compare,
The Fairest of the fair;
Soon I His Glory '11 share,
In the meeting in the air.
To whom shall I compare God's Sou,
Glorious as the noonday sun,
Who bowed His head and cried " 'Tis done,"
And final Victory won.
To what shall I compare His might,
As clad in Robes of light,
He rides victorious in the fight,
Dispelling gloom and darkest night.
To what shall I compare thine arm,
Laid bare 'gainst sin's alarm.
To guard His people from all harm,
With its might their souls to charm.

SONG OF PRAISE AND WORSHIP.
Who is this clad in the splendor of the Sun?
It is Jesus, the Holy One.
The Rainbow of Peace is under His feet,
And in Him the Godhead Power complete.
Hark the tread of a thousand feet,
Gathering before the mercy seat;
Prostrate before Him there they fall,
Proclaiming Him King and Lord of all.
Lo, He conies enveloped in Glory's thick cloud,
Mystery and splendor His visage shroud.

One foot on the sea, and one on the land,
He stands with the world in the palm of His hand.
639

AWAKE, O EARTH ! JESUS 18 COMING
SOON.
AWAKE, O earth! Arise thou that slumbereth ! Let the eyes of the blind be opened, let
the deaf ears be unstopped. Come forth
from the grave, O thou who are dead in trespasses
and sins. Weep and howl, O thou reveler at thy
banqueting hall, for thy day of destruction is at
hand. Lo ! the voice of thy laughter shall be turned
into wailing. Thy dazzling garments of shame
shall be removed.
Behold destruction cometh upon the earth, and
the hand of Jehovah is heavy upon it. Hearken !
the sea groaneth, travailing for the pain which
shall shortly come upon thee, O thou wicked
nation, which hath forgotten thy God. Yea, the
mountains from their snow-capped summits, weep
tears for the destruction and the curse of an angry
God, that shall descend upon thee as the lightning
from a darkened sky. The stars in the heavens
hide their faces before the vials of wrath that shall
be poured upon thee.
O thou nations, thou art bathed in iniquity.
Yea, O earth, thou art drunken Avith the wine of
thine own iniquity, and with the blood of thy fellow men. Awake and howl and lament aloud, for
the day of judgment is near at hand. The sword
of Jehovah hangeth over thy head. Misery, devastation and death shall be fulfilled. The earth shall
rock and tremble with fear before the approach of
the mighty tread of an angry God. The mountains shall melt with fire before the thunder of
His voice of wrath. The time of reckoning has

come.
In love, in mercy unbounded as the infinity of
space, did I shed my blood for thee that thou
mightest be saved, but thou wouldst not. This
day shall thy blood be shed, yea, it shall cover
the fields. Thy garments shall be saturated and
640

AWAKE, o EARTH! JESUS is COMING SOON
heaped with the blood of the nations, who have
spurned the blood of Jesus. Lo, the sky has darkened. The heavens are overcast with the darkness
of the frown of God. O thou wicked nation, thou
shalt surely die. The way of escape is cut off.
Where is thy hiding place? Or whither shalt thou
flee from the Avrath of thy Creator? In life thou
shalt find no hiding place. Yea, even though thou
seekest rest in death, thou shalt not find it.
The hand of Jehovah is upon thee, O land ;
The hand that was wounded for thee ;
The hand that has been outstretched in love,
pleading before thee all the days of thy life;
The hand upon which I would have engraved
thy name;
The hand that would have upheld thee in weakness, and guided thee over the rough and darkened
places ;
The hand that would have caught thee up and
thrust thee into realms above.
The hand which thou hast scorned and spurned
and spit upon,

This hand, O nation, have I now turned against
thee in wrath and anger.
Thine eyes are blinded that they cannot see.
Thine ears are stopped that they cannot hear.
Through the night of gloom and sorrow peals a
sweet voice of love; for a short moment shall I
spare it to thee, if perchance that thou mightest
listen. An open DOOR have I set before thee, but
now the door that is gently and surely closing is
still before thee, lest perchance the feet which are
hastening to shed blood should turn to enter before
it is closed forever, and the gate of mercy which
has swung wide before thee all thy days, shall soon
be closed. That voice shall soon be hushed and
heard no more. The door shall soon be closed and
no man shall open it thereafter. The open portals
shall soon be locked forever, and none shall enter
therein.
641

THIS IS THAT
O foolish nation, thou who hast chosen the pleasures of this world, when I have pleaded with thee
to flee from destruction, to hasten from the valley
of death, to flee to the arms of refuge, to hide in
the rock that is higher than thou, to flee as a man
pursued by sudden death, thou wouldst not
hearken. Thou sat thee down in thy gilded banqueting hall, and became drunken with the wine
of the devil's pleasures and inducements, and went
into slumber.
Lo ! the heavens are filled with the displeasure
of thy God. Verily the heavens which today are
filled with clouds of richest blessing ready to drop
milk and honey, wine and manna upon the seeking
soul, tomorrow shall rain forth with wrath and
displeasure, the fire and brimstone of a just and
avenging God.

Awake! O thou that sleepest. Cast aside thy
garments, O thou drunkard ! Flee into the haven
of rest, O thou of the bloody sword. Make haste
to pass through the door before it is too late. Although the day of God's mercy is almost gone, it
is not yet too late.
THE NIGHT IS UPON THEE.
Destruction pursueth thee diligently. The lightning of God's wrath shall smite thee. All thy
labors and works shall vanish away, and fade as
a flower. Thy greatest creation shall I crumble
as dust in my hand. Too late shalt thine eyes be
opened. Too late shalt thine ears listen for my
voice. Too late shalt thy feet search for the narrow path. Too late shalt thou knock at the gate
which is barred forever. Too late shalt thou listen
for the voice of thy God in heaven. Thou hast not
heeded the voice of my servant which called thee,
now will I refuse to listen to thy voice that calleth
me.
Nay, though thou fliest from coast to coast, with
the speed of an eagle, in search of the Avord of
642

AWAKE, EARTH ! JESUS IS COMING SOON
mercy, thou slialt not find it there. Yea, though
thou search diligently from shore to shore, thou
shalt not find the narrow way, which today thou
despiseth. One short season more have I spared
thee. KEPENT! KEPENT!! REPENT!!! O,
thou who hast shunned and forgotten thy God.
REJOICE, O THOU WATCHER IN THE NIGHT.
Be glad, O thou of the weeping eye.

Sing aloud, O thou who hast travailed in Spirit.
Dance and sing, O thou redeemed of the King.
Thy day of sorrow is ending.
Thy eternity of joy is dawning.
The night has been long, but the morning cometh.
Thy path has been strewn with thorns, but lo!
I have prepared for thy feet paths of purest gold.
The valley has been dark, but lo!
I come to take thee where darkness shall never enter.
In sackcloth and humility thou hast bowed
before me. In radiant robes of light will I transport thee. Yea, in the twinkling of an eye, shall
I change thee. Lift up thine eyes, let them be cast
down no more. Lift up thy voice, let it be heard
from shore to shore. Lift up Holy Hands, for lo!
thy days of sorrow are ending.
Lo! the King calleth for thee!. Slumber not,
neither let thine eyes grow heavy, for lo ! He cometh in an hour when ye think not. BEHOLD HE
COMETH! Yea, when darkness covereth the
earth as a mantle, when wailing, bereavement and
sorrow shall be heard in every land, then shall the
Son of Man appear, and gathering thee quickly
together, all ye who are ready and watching, He
will draw thee unto himself. The open gate shall
close forever. Doom and destruction shall settle
down upon the earth; but unto thee shall I show
the glory of the home I have prepared for thee.
Be watchful! Be vigilant! Be careful! Slumber not ! For lo ! I come quickly.
643

THE VOICE OF THE LORD TO THE
NATIONS AND TO THE SAINTS.
PROPHECY TO THE NATIONS.
HEARKEN to the voice of the Lord, ye nations ! Hearken ! Give ear, O ye lands !
Lift up your eyes, O ye people, BEHOLD
OF THE LORD, for it is seething with the wrath
of His indignation. O the seething, boiling cauldron
of His wrath! Who hath considered? Who hath
understood? He upholds it by His hand, the fires
of His fury are kindled underneath it. All the
nations that have forgotten God must be thrown
into the pot,
His hands are turned against thee, O wicked
nations; HIS HANDS loving hands, tender
hands, pierced hands. His hands are turned
against thee at last. O, His hands. They are now
stern hands, strong hands, avenging hands, punishing hands. His hands are upon thee, O earth,
in judgment. AVho can hide from His hands?
Who can conceal themselves from His searching
gaze? Though thou hidest in the depths of the
ocean, His arm shall reach thee and bring thee
back to judgment. Though thou sittest upon
the throne, and thy seat is among the haughty;
though thou buildest thy nest in the mountain's top
with the eagles; though thou gayest I am high, and
none shall bring me IOAV ; though thou sayest I am
secure and none shall make me fall; HIS HAND
SHALL LAY THE MH1HTY LOW.
How are the mighty fallen, and the wicked
brought to judgment ! All shall taste of the cup
of His fury, and enter the cauldron, the seething
pot of His wrath. The king on his throne, the
peasant in the field, the judge on his seat, the
prisoner at the bar, the rulers of the lands, and
the poor man in his shop, and all they that have
forgotten God, shall enter the cauldron of His fury.

644

THE VOICE OF THE LORD TO THE NATIONS, ETC.
The eagle fighting the bull, both shall be cast into
the pot together. The eagle with her brood; the
lion with her whelps; the unicorn in his power;
the beaver in his home ; the bear shall be thrown in
by His hands; the dragon that seeks to run away
shall be gathered into His hands and cast alive
into the cauldron. And you, O land of the eagle
spread wings, must taste and drink and enter.
All these, the lion, the unicorn, the two eagles, fighting in the field, the beaver, the bear, the dragon, the
crescent and the star all must drink, all must be
broken and cast down and melted and ended.
Then shall the kingdom of the Lamb the white
Lamb, the meek Lamb, the slain Lamb be established. Then shall the lion and the lamb lie .down
together. Thou hast refused Him in the form of
the Lamb, the slain Lamb, but NOW thou wilt
receive Him in the form of a lion. He shall rend
thee with His teeth, and devour thee with His
fury. He sought to conquer thee when He came
as a Lamb, now He will conquer thee as the lion
of Judah that knows 110 defeat. All nations shall
bow their knee and admit that He is Lord, when
He is conqueror. Then shall the lion and the lamb
lie down in peace together.
O thoughtless people! O foolish lands, why hast
thou not considered? Open thine eyes, behold the
wine press of the Lord. He treadeth His wine
press in fury. The clusters are gathered from
the vine, the clusters from the vine are the nations,
they are cast together into the wine press of His
wrath. He has risen up to judge the world, the
prince of this world is judged.
Who shall stay His step? Who shall cause Him

to withdraw His hand? His love have you rejected, His kindness have you spurned. He would
have covered you with His mercy and His forgiving love, but you Avould not. But now He shall
cover you with judgment, as the waters cover the
645

THIS IS THAT
sea. O think not that He shall stay His step, His
wine press is not yet full.
All nations shall enter, and be judged, and
tried, and broken. They refused His broken body
and shed blood, now their bodies shall be broken
and their blood shed. He would have taken your
place but ye would not. Hear the sound, the
rumbling of the earthquakes and the overflowing*
of the volcanoes; blood and fire and vapor of
smoke. Like thunder of the cannon, His voice
shall thunder before His army, and when the hills
are laid low and the mountains overturned by the
root and the hidden things revealed, the high laid
low, and the haughty in the dust and all nations
brought low, then shall the King come forth in
His beauty, with a conquering tread and a marshal
step, clad in glory and power.
TO THE SAINTS.
His kingly garments are upon Him, His scepter
is in His hand. His crown is on His head; the
government is upon His shoulders; His face is
most fair. In Him is light and truth and beauty.
O, the reins are in His hands, He shall drive aright.
The sun shall withdraw his shining, and the moon
shall not need to shine by night, for He is the light
of the world and in Him is no darkness at all.
We are now the temple of the Holy Ghost, and the
Lamb is the light thereof. A spiritual house of
the Lord, O building most precious, I have gath-

ered my stones from the quarry, I have cut them
and chiseled them, but O, little people, I want
cement to bind my people together.
I must have sand, I must have water, I must
have love. Sand is made out of stone ground to
powder and sifted most fine. As I put the stones
into the crusher, one must crush the other.
There is a creaking, a rumbling, and groaning;
but IF YOU WILL HOLD STEADY IN MY
HANDS I WILL USE ONE STONE TO CRUSH
646

THE VOICE OF THE LORD TO THE NATIONS, ETC.
AND GRIND ANOTHER. You may not love
each other at the time, but O be patient with my
dealings. After I have ground thee and sifted
thee fine, you will all come together as fine sand.
I Avill mix you with the water of salvation. I am
the water. O, why can ye not understand my
plan? I cannot use big stones or even pebbles in
cement; only that which will pass through the
sieve. I shall have a people as numberless as the
sands of the sea shore. O, I Avant cement, I will
have cement. A PEOPLE CEMENTED TOGETHER IN LOVE. I will put together my spiritual house quickly, when I can get cement of
love to bind my lively stones together, saith the
Lord of Hosts. Masons do not use a hammer to
lay cement. There shall be no sound of hammer to
lay cement when I complete my temple.
Behold I come quickly! O let the murmurers
murmur no longer. Let the groaning ones groan
no longer, for soon I will come, for my temple is
almost complete. O submit to my will. With mine
own hands I have digged thee from my quarry. I
have shaped thee and chiseled thee; but if thou
wilt not submit to my hands I must lay thee aside
in spite of my love for thee and take another who

will let me have my way; even as I laid the Jews
aside, and chose the Gentiles, for the time is short
and I come quickly. I will have a perfect house,
my love. HOLD FAST THAT WHICH THOU
HAST that no man take thy crown. The number
is fixed, and if thou layest down thy crown, another shall take it and put it on. If thou layest
aside thy mantle of overcoming, it shall fall upon
another.
O consider whose ways are best, your ways or
my ways. The Lord is at hand. Be patient yet a
little while and He who shall come, will come, and
will not tarry. O rejoice ! the day of redemption is
at hand! The King is coming, coming SOON.
HOLD FAST ! HOLD FAST ! HOLD FAST !
647

PRESS ON TO PERFECTION.
PROPHESY AND VISION.
IT was the night, and darkness was upon the
face of the earth, yea, gross darkness covered
the people. Behold a light coming out of the
darkness, a voice calling through the gloom. I lifted
my eyes, and beheld the presence of the Most High,
the Holy One of Israel, the Lamb without blemish.
His glory, and the brightness round about Him,
outshone the brightness of the noonday sun ; as He
drew near me I hid my face before the radiance
of His coming. He spoke, and my soul fell within
me at His voice. My strength departed from me,
and I fell at His feet as one dead.
I heard His voice saying: "Fear not, Oh, my
child, Stand upon thy feet and follow tkou Me."
But my strength had departed, and I could not
stand. Then put He His arms about me, and behold, we were lifted up from the earth. He carried
me in the Spirit and sat me do AMI upon my feet

before a small hill, saying: "Hast thou considered this hill of blessing?" Then measured He the
hill round about, and I beheld the measure thereof,
and it Avas one hundred cubits. Flowers of praise
bloomed on its sides, tiny streams of praise issued
therefrom.
Then caught He me up again in the Spirit, and
sat me doAvn upon the earth, at the foot of a very
high mountain whose top I could not see, for it
Avas beyond the clouds; its measure could not be
taken. An exceedingly high mountain floAving
Avith milk and honey; trees Avere laden with fruit,
Avhose clusters hung upon the A r ine, the mountain
of the Lord which He builded for His people.
Then said He unto me: "Why haA T e My people
stopped at the small mountain of small blessings?
648

PRESS ON TO PERFECTION
I, even I, have come to lead them forth to My
great mountain, from weakness to strength, from
defeat to victory, from showers to torrents, from
the brooks to rivers. Oh, why have My people not
gone on to the fulness? I have said greater things
than I do, shall ye do because I go to My Father.
Speak unto My people; cry out: 'Leaving the
things that are behind, let us press-on to perfection.'
"Oh, my people, I am longing to show forth My
power. I am waiting to do My strange acts. I
am waiting for a yielded people, yea, even a worm
with which I can thrash a mountain. I seek not
wisdom, nor thy strength. I seek humility and
yielded hearts."
Then spake the Lord: "Look -at thy side the
altar of the Lord which My people have builded
for me." I looked, as He commanded, and lo! a

bright fire was burning upon the altar; sacrifice
and praise, through the Holy Spirit, arose, as a
sweet-smelling savor, to the throne. But lo ! as I
looked, the fire sank lower, and died away in
strength 'till only the coals were left.
Then said the Lord, with sadness: "Go, speak
unto My people :
" 'Wherefore hast thou ceased to offer thyself
as a sacrifice, . with thy praise as a sweet-smelling
savor, upon My altar? Return thou unto thy
first love, unto thy whole-hearted sacrifice, also
the sacrifice of praise, and behold, I will send an
awakening among the people. The flames shall be
kindled upon My altar, saith the Lord.
Behold, the time is short. Whatsoever thou
doest, do quickly. Behold, at thy gates lie all
manner of precious fruit. Hasten ! Hasten ! Enter
in, My children. Behold, I come quickly, and My
reward is with Me. Seek My fulness. Enter thou
in, for lo ! I come quickly. Even so. Amen/ "

649

PERFECT FRUIT.
IVE Me thine ear, O My people. Lend Mo
thine ears, for Lo ! I would speak unto My
children. I would reveal Myself unto Mine
anointed.
O My People, behold the vineyard of the Lord.
Behold the Redeemer walking up and down between the trees of His vineyard. He is searching
for the perfect fruit. Lo! here the tree is filled
with leaves. But where is the fruit? Here is a tree
filled with blossoms, but w r here is the fruit? O

My people! the spring is past, the summer is over,
the fall has come. Where is the fruit? Here another tree stands with tiny, immature fruit, but O !
the time has come for the perfect fruit.
O, little company! little flock! Lo, thou hast
been considered the least of all, but thou art
worthy. O little vineyard, how long have I walked
up and down in thy midst. My pruning-knife has
been in My hand. I have not spared thee. It has
not all been pleasant, but I have been working
with thee, little vineyard. But now, hear ye My
words: the time has come for the fruit-bearing.
Long have I patiently waited. The spring is over
and gone, the summer has come, and the fall is
upon us. I am coming soon for developed, pruned
and ripened fruit.
/ have seen thy patience, and have written it
in thy book of My remembrance.
/ have seen thy tears, and I have saved them in
in the sealed vessel of My remembrance.
/ have heard thy prayers, and have I not risen
up to answ r er thee? Behold the clouds, the bright
clouds of blessing. I have rolled them over thy
heads; I am watering thee with the pure water of
650

PERFECT FRUIT
the Spirit that ye might grow." (O, the sadness
on the Master's face ! O, the sorrow in the Master's
heart ! So many trees, so many vineyards, but
no ripened fruit}.
"O, little people, may I have this corner in the
vineyard with the perfect fruit? I have called
unto My people in other places, beseeching them to
lay all on the altar. I have pled with them many,

many years. I have waited, but they have forgotten to seek Me in humility daily. I am waiting
for a perfect tree with perfect fruit. Little people,
will you also fail Me? O, will you go all the
way?"
"O, My people, seek no longer fleshly things;
seek not earthly things; but seek thou the things
of the Spirit. Be not encumbered with many
cares. O, for a people with one accord, in one
place, with all things in common, none calling
aught they possess their own ! How I could
show forth My glory. Yea, they would move
heaven and earth with their prayers.
Can you not perceive My plan? Can you not
understand My workings? Behold I show you a
mystery :
I have called nations from nations.
I have separated people from people.
I have called churches from churches.
I have called out the sanctified from the lukewarm.
I have called out a baptized company from the
sanctified.
But now, behold, I do a new work.
I AM SEEKING TO CALL A BAPTIZED PEOPLE FROM A
BAPTIZED PEOPLE, WHO WILL GO ALL THE WAY TO
THE STANDARD OF MY PERFECTION.
All have failed as a complete body to go all the
way, and to measure up to the Word; but I will
have a people who will not be satisfied with aught
but My best perfection, a people who will not
651

THIS IS THAT
slumber nor sleep, but who will watch with Me
this one remaining hour. Through this people will
I show forth mighty signs and wonders. The
people shall marvel before them, saying:
"What manner of people are these?"
They will seem but folly unto the world; but
through them shall the wisdom of Jehovah be made
manifest.
Weak in themselves, but in Me they shall be
strong and do exploits.
Dumb in themselves and their own words, S!OAV/
to speak, few in words, but they shall speak forth
My words in the power and demonstration of the
Spirit,
O, little, called-out people, I am here tonight.
Have I not called thee out from the people, from
earthly bodies, to serve Me? Has it not meant
persecution? But thou hast been willing to pay
the price thus far. Behold, My heart is pleased
with thee; but will you go all the way? Behold, if
thou wilt walk with me this way, I will show thee
what great things thou must suffer for My name's
sake. But I AVI 11 cause thee to overcome even
as I overcame. Thou shalt sit with Me upon My
throne even as I sit upon My Father's throne. O
keep humble! Keep low at My feet! Trust not
in the arm of flesh, even good flesh. Look upon
Me. Stand in the bonds of love and unity, with a
whole-hearted surrender of everything, and I will
do the rest.
Behold great blessings are in store for the overcomers THE OVERCOMERS. Behold T come
quickly to take My perfect fruit and the full overcomers.

652

JESUS IS COMING SOON GET READY.
VISION AND PROPHECY.
THEKE came a great voice from Heaven as
of a trumpet, crying: JESUS is COMING SOON
GET READY TO MEET HIM.
My soul longed to see His face. My heart had
been cleansed by His blood, and the Spirit had
entered the tabernacle. I cried out :
"Yea, Lord/' and ran to meet Him.
"Get ready ! Get ready !" cried the great voice,
again and again. "Get ready! Get ready!!" yet
echoed over the hills and through the valleys.
"Get ready!"
"O ! Lord, Lord !" I cried, "Wherefore sayest
thou unto me, 'Get ready?' Have I not left all
for thee? Didst Thou not wash me in Thy blood?
Wherein shall I get ready?"
He held an open Bible before my face and it
shone as a mirror. Then showed He me myself,
dark and tanned, and uncomely.
"O Lord," I wept, "have thy way. Get Thou
me ready, I pray."
Then I lifted up my eyes and beheld a man,
tall of stature, clothed in raiment of light, that
shone as the sun. A sharp sword gleamed in His
hand. I beheld His brightness, and saw His
armour gleaming upon Him. He advanced and

drew near me. He towered above me. His beauty
was of such brightness my eyes could not gaze
upon Him. Then I saAV my own imperfections, my
blemishes, my failures. I withered under His
gaze, and Avas ashamed in His presence. I wept
for my foolish blindness, that had boasted of
readiness.
653

THIS IS THAT
Who can dwell in His brightness without showing a blemish?
"O, Lord/' I cried, "I am a failure. I am all
blackness. I am undone." Then He spake: "Wilt
thou let me have My way? Wilt thou let Me make
thee ready, no matter what the cost?"
"O Lord," I cried, "I am utterly unworthy, but
have your way."
I saw him in my vision that the open Bible
which He held had been transformed into a flashing, two-edged sword. Then He lifted His sword,
and placed it upon my lips. It burned as a
coal of fire. My lips, my tongue, were utterly consumed. Then He raised His sword and placed it
upon My eyes, and I was blinded unto the world
and the shortcomings and failures of all mankind.
Then His sword shone as it turned in His hand
and He smote off mine ears, so that I could hear
no earthly voice, but only His voice, sweet as the
rushing of many waters. Again His sword whirled
through the sunlight, and this time my head was
cut off, that I should think no more in myself.
Then He severed my arms and my limbs, that I
should move no more in my flesh.
In my heart I cried: "O! Lord! there will be
nothing left of me if You have Your way much

longer." My soul failed within me, and I beheld
myself as from a distance lying at His feet as one
dead, broken in fragments, undone. It seemed that
I was utterly undone, and I murmured at His
dealings. But He spake and said :
"Thou shalt walk no longer in the flesh, but in
the Spirit. Out of death shall come life. This
corruption shall put on incorruption. This mortal
shall put on immortality. Then shall be fulfilled
this saying, f O Death! ivhere is thy sting? 0,
Grave! where is thy victory?' That which is flesh
must die. Only the Spirit can inherit spiritual
life."
654

JESUS IS COMING SOON GET READY
Then I looked and behold! a New creation, as
of a beautiful woman. I beheld her coming from
the West, and walking towards the East. She
approached. I beheld her white raiment, dazzling
as the snow in the sunshine. Her movements were
gracious and tender. Her voice was mellow and
full of sweet fragrance. I smelled the fragrance
of her garments, as sweet lillies grown in the
valleys, and as the rose of Sharon. Her eyes
beheld no guile, but they were tender as a dove's
eyes. Her lips were pure, and dropped as the
honey-comb. No foolishness, no criticism marred
their sweetness. No fleshly words, her ears were
kept for His alone, her Lover, her Bridegroom,
her King.
As she drew nigh, I gazed with amazement into
her face, and saw that it was myself. I heard the
voice of the Master speaking unto me, saying:
"This is My beloved. How far you have fallen
short of the standard of my perfections !"
TO THE SAINTS.

O AWAKE! AWAKE! AWAKE!! Thou that
sleepest. Jesus is coming soon. Get Ready! Get
Ready!! His bride must be without spot or
wrinkle or blemish, or any such thing. Her eyes
must see Him only. Thy words shall condemn
thee if thou speakest ill of thy neighbor. Thine
ears shall testify against thee if thou shalt hearken
to any voice but His. I will have a separated people, saith the Lord, a people who will walk before
Me in holiness, in the beauty of My perfection. Lo !
I stand before thee. My sword is in My hand.
Wilt thou let Me have My way? It means death
to the natural life, to be spiritual. It means
putting off the old man, with the lusts thereof, and
being clothed upon with the heavenly building
which is of God.

655

JESUS IS COMING SOON GET READY
Beauty for ashes,
Praise for murmuring,
Love for . backbiting,
Sweetness for unsweetness,
Victory for defeat,
Brightness for shadows.
O beloved, will you let Me have My way?
Over the hills in glory,
Over the mountains bright,
Hear the glad, sweet story,
He cometh with power and might.
Lift up your heads, ye pilgrims,
The Master draweth near;
Weep no more, ye pilgrims,
The Lord is almost here.
AM EX.

656

THE SIEVE OF THE LORD.
PROPHECY DURANTj FLA.,,
BEHOLD, two hands strong hands hands of
the Lord; and in His hands a sieve. He is
sifting, sifting, sifting His people.
Once they were small, and but as dust then
could God use them, but when they ceased to be
small and helpless, when they gathered themselves
together in separated lumps, they became big and
hard and unyielding, and the Lord wept over them.
He could no longer mould or shape, or fashion
them.
There were the lumps of unbelief, and the lumps
of pride. (), those lumps of skepticism ; those
lumps of self and doubts and fears; those lumps of
formality and ceremony; God could not put them
into the body. He could not form them into that
glorious, Bridal Body, for they were no longer
yielded and submissive in His hands.
Once they were small, but now harder and larger
and wider the lumps had grown, until they were
blind, deaf and dumb and slow of understanding
Then were formed the lumps of organization and
Catholicism. Oh, the stiffness and hardness of
those lumps. "I must break them; I must smite
them with the hammer of My Word. I must have
a broken, sifted people through whom I can have
My way. I must separate a peculiar people unto
Myself."
THE GREAT SIEVE.

Behold the hands of the Lord. He put the
broken lumps into the great sieve He held in His
hands. The sieve had large meshes, and as He did
shake and begin the work of separation, many of
the smaller lumps and dust went through the sieve.
657

THIS IS THAT
Many hearts were broken and contrite under His
dealings; but the bigger lumps of doubts and fears
and unbelief, He had to throw them away. He
loved His people, but those who would not become
broken, He had to throw aside.
Many went through the sieve, in those early
days. Many of the smaller lumps passed through
the coarse sieve, but they were still hard and
lumpy.
THE SECOND SIEVE.
So He made another sieve of smaller meshes,
and put in His people, who had passed through the
first sieve. He shook them and tried them, separated them and sifted them. Many rebelled and
refused to go through, so He had to lay them aside.
But some went through this second sieve, and
precious were they in His sight.
Those who went through the sieve had to go
through the world. They had to let go one of
another; they had to let go of themselves and of
the opinions of people. They who passed through
the sieve had to let go all foolishness and pride.
O, that sifting that separating! The Lord
gathered them in His hands. There were still a
few little lumps. They were still His people; but
those who would not believe and be broken, He
had to throw aside.

THE FINE SIEVE.
Those who had gone through the sieve were not
sifted fine enough, nor little enough to be moulded,
so the Lord made for Himself a still finer sieve.
Who can understand the plan of the Lord?
Into the finer sieve He put His people, and He
is sifting and trying people, who will let Him
have His way. All doubts and fears must be
eliminated. All selfishness, the old nature, all
desire for earthly honor, popularity and recognition, must be taken away. All hardness, stiffness
658

THE SIEVE OF THE LORD
and stubborness must be taken away. All flesh,
even good flesh, must be left behind. All selfish
ambitions, all gossip, all earthly, idle words and
foolish communication, all falseness and shallowness, and desire for earthly leadership, must be
gathered together and cast out.
But His people, He will try again. He will sift
them the second, the third time. The fourth time
and the fifth time shall He sift His people. Ah!
He shall have a people who can go through the
finest sieve pass the finest test, whose hearts are
broken, whose spirits are mellow and yielded and
who are abandoned to His will. He shall gather
them together; not a grain shall be lost. But He
shall gather His people together from the East
and from the West, from the North and from the
South from the uttermost parts of the earth He
shall gather them in. He shall hold and mould
them in the palm of His hand as fine dust.
Once the lumps were large. They were big and

great, but He could not use them. His people are
a peculiar, sifted, tried people, who are as the
dust of His glorious feet; and with that dust He
shall form a ~body, even as He did from Adam in
the beginning, so shall He form this body. They
shall be yielded in His hands ; they shall be pliable
under His dealings. He shall make them into
members of the body and fasten them together
with cords of love.
FORMING THE BODY.
The Head shall be joined to the neck the neck
to the shoulders. The arms shall take their places
in the sockets, and they shall not be stiff, but shall
be oiled, and soft and mellow with the Spirit.
Their breasts shall be of Faith and Love, and shall
be full. All the parts of the Body shall be in their
places. The spine shall be formed together, and
the loins shall be formed and rest in their sockets.
659

THIS IS THAT
From yielded dust shall be formed strong limbslegs as pillars of marble, not to be removed. Of
the humble members shall He form the feet; they
shall be humble, and bear about the other members,
yet without feet the body could not walk.
GIVING LIFE TO THE BODY.
Then shall He breathe upon this Body upon
His yielded, slain people. He shall breathe life
into the nostrils, and the Body shall become a
living soul controlled not by self, but by the
Spirit. They shall walk not by flesh, but by the
Spirit of the Lord. They shall be strong and do
exploits. From the Head shall grow the long hair
of separation and praise to God not one missing.

COMING FOR THE BODY.
Soon He coineth ! Ah, soon He cometh this
King of glory. Soon shall He part the clouds and
descend with a shout. His sifted, humble, tried
little people He shall take by the hand, and stand
them upon their feet many members, but one
Body, and catch them up to reign with Him upon
His throne.
O, My people, be little enough to go through the
sieve. O, let go everything that would hinder, and
go through. Go THROUGH.

660

WILL THOU WATCH WITH ME ONE LITTLE
HOUR?
PROPHETIC SONG.
The night is dark. The sun hath long since hid
his face.
The Master cometh forth into the garden to pray;
He bringeth forth His chosen ones to pray with
Him.
O ! dark is the night, their eyes are heavy with
slumber.
"Will you watch with Me one little hour?
Will you stay awake and resist the tempter's
power?
Will you watch with me this little hour?

Soon the watching will all be o'er."
O hear the Master praying for you;
Praying for a world steeped in sin.
Hear the moaning and the groaning as He travails
for the lost.
Weeping, wailing, sobbing, hear the Master now,
As the sweat drops of blood appear upon His brow
in the moonlight's glow.
"Will you watch with me one little hour?"
The World has forgotten. See them slumbering, .
fast asleep.
And still He prays, and still He prays, and cries
to God.
Behold the shadows deepen, and the cup is in His
hand.
O must He drink it all alone? None to share or
bear the burden?
661

THIS IS THAT
Lo! He is bending over you; He is speaking in
your ear.
Canst thou not hear? O, watch and pray,
O watch and pray, lest thou should enter into
temptation.

"Nevertheless, not my will, but thine be done."
O hear the cry; He is praying for the world.
Wilt thou not watch and pray, until the breaking
of the day?
Jesus approacheth again and saith, " Sleep on now
and take your rest,
The blessing you might have is fled away.
Alone I prayed with none to stand with Me.
Sleep on, sleep on, and take thy rest."
O, will you too fail Him, will you, too, sleep in
slumber deep?
Or will you watch and pray? 'Twill soon be day,
and He is coming soon.
Beloved, if ever there was a time for the followers of the
Lord to resist the slumber that the enemy would put upon
them, and pray, it is now. What a type the sleeping disciples in the garden, and the sleeping virgins with their
lamps, are of the church today. The same Jesus who
prayed in the garden of old is making constant intercession at His Father's throne today. The same Jesus who
besought His disciples to watch with Him and pray that
they enter not into temptation, is still calling for intercessors, through whom the Spirit can pray with groanings
that cannot be uttered.
It is only a little hour now till He shall appear. Let us
be faithful. Awake and pray.

662

THIS IS THE WAY, WALK YE IN IT.

PROPHECY.
This is the way, walk ye in it ;
Out of defeat, into victory,
Out of the mire, into purity,
Out of darkness, into light,
Out of sin, into Righteousness,
Out of the Valley, into the extended plain,
Out of death into Life yea, life everlasting,
This is the way, walk ye in it.
I am the way, follow thou me; yea, follow in My
footsteps.
Lift up your eyes : behold !
Who is tills that cometh with clouds and great
glory?
Who is this that rideth upon His horse?
His face shineth as the sun in noonday splendor.
His garments are white and dazzling as the snow :
His voice is as the rushing of many waters,
His words, sweet and gracious and tender.
Who is this?
His feet shine as burnished brass;
His appearance is as gold in a burning furnace.
Behold He cometh!
He cometh with ten thousand thousands of His
saints.
Behold they are coming, riding upon their chariots.
Hear the treading of their horses.
Their spears are gleaming in the sunlight;

Their swords are swinging by their sides.
On and on they come.
Behold the heavens are filled with their glory.
663

THIS IS THAT
Behold the King cometh with ten thousand times
ten thousand of His hosts.
His glory is bright. He is as a burning light ;
Who shall be able to stand in His presence?
His beauty, who shall declare it?
His beaut} 7 , who shall describe it?
Who art Thou whose glory doth fill the heavens?
Whose light breaketh forth as the morning?
I am the first; I am the last;
I am the beginning; I am the end.
I am the Alpha; I am the Omega;
I am He who was dead, but behold
I am alive forever.
I am HE who passed through defeat, and entered
into victory;
I am He who passed through the valley and the
shadow of death, into the wide plain forever.
I am He who came through darkness and passed
into light.

I am He \vho did swallow up death and brought
forth life, yea, eternal life.
I am He, who passed through the mire of this
Avorld, with its slander and rebuke, and
have been made white and stand in righteousness forevermore.
YEA, AND AS I AM, SO MUST YOU BE ALSO,
That Avhere I am, there may you be forever.
O, Behold, I AM the way, follow thou ME.
I AM the Way, follow thou Me.
I AM the Way that leads from earth to Heaven :
I AM the Waj r , the narrow way
That leads from death to Life, from defeat to
victory.

664

THIS IS THE WAY, WALK YE IN IT
Ueliold the KING is riding forth in His Glory !
For whom art Thou coming, O KING of Heaven
and of earth?
I am coining for those who have walked in the way ;
Who have followed Me; who have been faithful
unto death
And art alive for evermore."
Who is this that cometh forth out of the wilderness?
She leans upon the arm of her beloved.
There are tears upon her face.
She is foot-sore and weary.

Her back is bowed with a burden.
Her garments are torn and muddied,
But He will give her a white robe of His righteousness.
She climbeth the mountains, and passeth through
the valley.
She crosseth the wide, extended field, she journeys
o'er the plain.
Before her lies a tunnel, a deep valley bathed with
the shadows of night.
She will not falter, even though the way is dark,
and the lions roar.
He will not allow her to stumble nor dash her
foot against a stone.
He bringeth her through the darkness into the
light.
He bringeth her to the boundary line between the
two countries.
There she must be searched; there she must be
stripped.
She must not bring any message from the
country of darkness into the country of
light. Even as your countrymen halt, at
the boundary line, all that would enter from
665

THIS IS THAT
the enemy's country, and search them, so

shall she be searched and stripped.
(New garments shall be given her, His righteousness and joy.)
But she will go through, even as He hath said.
I AM the WAY, walk thou in Me and be thou
perfect.
Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a
crown of life.
Go through. Go through the gates; enter thou in.
Be faithful yet a little longer, the darkness is
almost over.
The day of thy humiliation is almost ended.
No more shalt thou be footsore and weary, for I
am come to give thee rest.
Even as I washed the feet of the disciples, so shall
I wash thy feet,
And I will wipe all tears from all faces.
There shall be no more pain.
Behold, SOON the clouds shall part, and thine
eyes shall behold the coming of the KING,
saith the Lord.
Behold I come quickly; My reward is with Me; J.
neither slumber nor sleep.
Make haste, O beloved of the Lord; He shall
remove thy burden and cause thee to
shine as the Light forevermore, even the
Sun of Righteousness.

This is the WAY, walk ye in it.
Even as I overcame, so must ye overcome.
Even as I was faithful unto death, even the death
of the cross,
So must you be, even to the putting away of the
old nature, and I will give you eternal life.
Even as I was misunderstood and mocked,
Even as I was cast out of the synagogues,
666

THIS IS THE WAY, WALK YE IN IT
Even as I was lifted up, a gazing stock, and was
spotless, so must ye be.
Even because I AM THE WAY, follow thou Me.
Lift up the hands that hang down, and strengthen
the feeble knees.
Be patient yet a little longer, only a little, for behold I come quickly.
O, can you not see?
If you would open your eyes you would see the
heavens are filled with My chariots and My
horsemen.
If your ears were open you would hear the rejoicing and victorious shouts of My hosts.
Behold I am coming soon; My victorious armies
are with Me; they shall avenge Mine elect.
"O," saith the Lord God Jehovah, "I will avenge

Mine elect,"
Soon shall go forth My swift lightning, the
lightning of My sword among the nations.
But because thou hast followed Me, thou shalt sit
with Me in the heavens and laugh.
I shall tread My wine-press, and it will be full of
the blood of those who rejected Me and thee.
Fear not, My little ones, but GO THROUGH, even
as I went through.
He that saveth his life shall lose it; save not
thyself.
Behold they will say unto thee, as they said to
Me"8ave Thyvelf,"
But go through. Go through.
Vengeance is Mine; I will repay.
Behold I have rolled away the Ked Sea. I have
opened a way.
As I rolled back the Red Sea and drowned
Pharaoh's hosts of old,
So shall I consume thine adversaries from before
thine eyes.
667

THIS IS THAT
I AM THE WAY.
I have made a straight path through the Red Sea,
Even through the Red Sea of My Blood, I have
made a way.

Pass over, My people.
I have removed the stiug of death for thee; for
thee there is victory.
I will remove the armies that molest thee, if thou
wilt only follow Me.
So many hard things came because thou didst not
follow ME. '
I have opened a way, follow thou in My footsteps.
I, who have overthrown the walled cities, even
I, shall overthrow the Avails of opposition
I, Avho locked the lions' mouths
I, who brake the chains of brass
I, who led armies to victory
O follow thou Me !
Follow Me through into Glory;
Follow Me through the Garden;
Follow Me through the Judgment ;
FolloAv Me through to Calvary;
FolloAV Me through the tomb;
FolloAv Me through the resurrection,
And thou shalt folloAV Me through the translation ;
Yea, thou shalt follow Me FOREVER,
THIS IS THE WAY, WALK YE IN IT.
AMEN.

668

THE VINEYARD OF THE LORD.
TONGUES AND INTERPRETATION.
LIFT up thine eyes and look to the East, to
the West, to the North, and to the South;
behold the vineyard of the Lord.

His vineyard is before Him ; He walketh up and
down in the midst of it. Oh, how long, Oh, how
long, Oh, how long He has waited for the perfect
fruit?
Oh, thou vineyard of the Lord, Jehovah is in
the midst of thee. He has never forgotten thee;
He has never neglected thee. With His love has
He built a wall about thee; He has fenced thee
about on every side and sheltered thee from the
world. With His own hand has He digged and
turned thy soil ; by His own power has He sown
thy seed, and cared for thy tender plants; He hath
watered thee with showers of blessing and times
of refreshing from the presence of the Lord.
How earnestly He watched thy budding forth,
oh, vineyard of the Lord, when thou didst first
receive the former rain ! He hath digged about
thee; He has caused the sun to shine upon thee;
and now behold, He sendeth the latter rain upon
thee that thy fruit should come to full perfection,
even the perfection of the Lord.
I have let the winds, yea, the North and South
winds, blow upon thee that thou might be established, and thy roots sink deep into me. The sap
of my life have I sent coursing through thy
veins ; thy tender leaves have been put forth and
developed, and now behold, the time for the
ripening of the fruit is here.
The Lord of the vineyard has come forth into
His garden to seek precious ripened fruit. He
669

THIS IS THAT
seeketh the perfect fruit. He turneth to the East,
to the West, to the North, to the South. Where,
oh, where is the perfect fruit?

Here the fruit is marred, with blemishes upon
it. He passeth by. He seeketh not the blemished,
but perfect fruit to take to Himself.
Yonder the fruit is small and undeveloped.
Where is the perfect fruit? He seeketh not small
and undeveloped, but perfect in measure and stature for Himself.
There the fruit is growing, but so slowly. He
is standing, waiting, waiting, looking for the perfect fruit.
He cries unto His vineyard,
Oh, my vineyard, how long, how long, before I
shall receive my perfect fruit? Why tarriest thou
so long and withholdest thy perfection from me?
Have I withheld my hand from thee? Have I not
sent thee the former and latter rain in the first
month? Have I not caused the sun to shine on
thee by day and the moon to watch thee by night?
And, now, behold, the husbandman, waiting for
His Fruit.
W r oe unto thee thou barren and unfruitful trees \
Surely thou shalt be cut off from the garden of
living trees, and the place where thou art shall
know thee no more. Cursed art thou among trees,
for thou hast borne me no fruit.
And thou, trees of the blemished fruit, and the
undeveloped fruit, mine eye hath seen thee, mine,
eye hath searched thee out.
But Oh! Thou tree of the growing fruit,
thou art nearing the days of thy perfection.
Surely thou shalt grow up before me as a tender
plant, as a tree planted by the living waters. Thy
desire is toward me, my desire is toward thee.
And I will gather thee unto myself in the day of
thy perfection. AMEN.

670

THE STORM AND THE WHITE LAMBS.
TONGUES AND INTERPRETATION.
The clouds are dark. The sky is filled with
rolling tempest of darkest clouds. Great bolts
and strokes of lightning flash from the heavens.
The lightnings flash as visible signs of the wrath
and fury of Almighty God. Listen ! The thunders
are rolling and resounding from hill to hill.
Below is a green pasture field, and in its enclosure a beautiful flock of white lambs. Surely
they shall know no fear nor terror, for there is
One in their midst who holds in one hand His
crook, and in the other a cruse of oil.
Some of the lambs leave the enclosure. The
lions, the wolves, the hosts of darkness pounce
upon them and the place wherein they dwelt
knows them no more. O, stay within the enclosure
of His will and protecting grace. 'Twill not be
long till the Deliverer will come. He sends not
His sheep forth to fight wolves; stay thou within
the enclosure.
The storm increases, the winds howl, the waves
roll, the lightning flashes, the enemy draws nearer,
emboldened by the darkness. Whither shall they
go? There is no escape to the right nor the left.
There is a barrier before and behind. Stand still,
little flock, the indignation of the Lord is being
poured out upon the wicked, but He will pass over
thcc. The storms are raging, but behold the
heavens are rolling apart. There cometh One
whose appearance is all glorious, His garments
are as robes of light, His face is filled with
tenderest compassion. His arms are outstretched

<Tis the Shepherd of the sheep.
671

THIS IS THAT
They are surrounded before and behind on the
right and the left, by the hosts of darkness. The
lions roar, the serpents hiss, the wolves bare their
fangs, the enemy rages against the righteous, but
they shall know no terror, for there is an invisible
power betwixt them and their enemies.
IT 18 THE BLOOD OF JE8U8, AND THE
POWER OF THE HOLY SPIRIT.
Their Leader is with them, even the Spirit, to
lead them. A lamb is on his bosom. He speaks to
the flock that they should wait and be patient a
little longer. The Leader is the Holy Spirit.
Soon will the Shepherd come to gather the sheep
of His pasture away from out of the dark and the
cloudy day, and take them to that fold where the
sun never sets, and they will be with Him, forever.
He poureth in the oil, He bindeth up the wounds,
yea, He will heal thee.
Ah, little flock, He cometh, He coineth, ABIDE
WITHIN THE POWER OF HIS BLOOD AND
SPIRIT. Soon thou shalt hear His voice saying,
"Come home, my sheep, come home." To the
world destruction cometh, but to the flock the
Shepherd cometh. Look up.
How the hilltops sing together,
Angels strike their harps of gold.
Let His saints all shout together,
In love and praise and joy untold.
Soon He comes o'er hills immortal,
Clad in garments pure and white ;
Soon He comes to take His pilgrims,

There to reign in power and might.

672

MESSAGE GIVEN IN THE SPIRIT.
(July 27, 1918.)
Behold the day of great darkness, the day of
gloominess, of mourning and weeping, the day of
wailing, the day of the treading of the wine press
is upon thee, O earth. Hearken ! Hear the sound of
the cannon, the voice of thunder echoing and
reverberating through the hills and the mountains.
Behold ! The arm of Almighty God is lain bare.
His sword is glittering and glimmering in His hand.
O, thou earth, filled with unbelief and scoffing, if
thine ears had not been stopped thou wouldst have
heard the heavy treading of His feet, the falling of
His footsteps.
Judgment follows swiftly in His wake. He will
recompense, He will repay, He will judge. Had
thine eyes not been bound, thou wouldst have seen
the clouds rolling over thy lands, black and filled
with the lightnings of His wrath. -Ears thou hast
had but Avould not hear. Eyes thou hast had but
would not see. The time of thy tribulation has
come.
Weep, O lands, and wring thy hands, saith the
Lord. Turn unto Me with repentance, with sackcloth and ashes; but thou hath said, "We will
dance and make merry, we will sing and drain the
wine-cup to its dregs/' Too long, too long hast
thou sat in the banqueting house. Thou hast
desecrated the holy vessels of the Lord. Thou hast
used My house, the house of the Lord for merrymaking. Thou hast used it to consume it upon

thine own lusts. Behold, there cometh forth a
hand, it is even now writing upon the wall of thy
lands. Behold, thou art weighed in the balances
and found wanting. My hands have been outstretched to thee, but thou hast spurned them, thou
hast pushed them aside, and now My hands are
turned against thee. Thy judgment cometh.
673

THIS IS THAT
Behold, limb is today being torn from limb,
member from member, blood is flowing forth in
a crimson stream and encircling the whole earth.
Judgments are thundering forth their voices from
ten thousand cannons.
Ah ! fools, hypocrites, slothful of heart, despisers
who wonder and perish. Behold, o'er thy head
hangs the great sword suspended by a single
thread. Judgment is begun.
In thy midst behold the great wine press. His
feet are treading it. Blood is issuing forth, yea,
thou hast rejected the blood of Aty Son Jesus
Christ. Now shalt thy blood be shed. Rachel,
Rachel weeping for thy children, they are not.
Behold the day of the Lord cometh. It is nigh at
hand.
Beset on every hand, surrounded on every
quarter, threatened from every side, yet His people
shall never be ashamed. Protected by His hand
they shall abide in the day of His wrath, and He
shall take them to Himself purified. Not a hair
of their heads shall be destroyed, neither shall
the sandals be worn out upon their feet, neither
shall spots be found on their garments nor blood
upon their hands. Behold, His people stand in
the midst of a perverse generation, but they are a
sign post, a wonder to all who look upon them.

They are a puzzle to the world, but to Me they
are all fair.
Open up thine hearts, for He will cleanse. He
will purge, He will purify His temple, He will
drive out all that which is unlike Himself, if thou
wilt yield to Him. Behold that which has been
whispered in the ears, in the closet, shall be made
known on the house-tops. Open up thy being to
the Lord. Open up the door, my beloved, and He
will purge His threshing-floor. He will iron away
all thv Avrinkles.

674

REIGN, SILENCE, REIGN.
PROPHECY. Nov. 22. 1918.

Reign, Silence, reign !
Peace, be still!
Hold thy peace, thou billows of the sea !
Reign for a space of time, O Silence !
Spread thy pinions, one o'er the land, and one
o'er the sea.
Hush! Cease thy striving, O thou four winds of
the Heaven.
Be still, tempestuous clouds!
Enter thy sheath, O sword !
Be silent, thou thundering cannon !
For the Lord would speak once more to the earth;
Once more would He send forth the cry :
BEHOLD THE BRIDEGROOM COMETH, HE IS EVEN AT
THE DOOR.

Spring forth, ye green blades of the grass, upon
the meadows and the hills. Yea, bloom forth, ye
hills and valleys. O thou hast been held fast in
the grip of War's giant clutch. Bright, crimson
drops of blood have been wrung from thy sides
and have flowed forth in gory streams.
O, ye torn and devastated forests, be healed of
thy wounds for a short space; for the Lord would
speak His final word of warning to the earth before
the great and notable day of the Lord, for it is
near, It Is-Near.
Hold back the winds, O Angels, for a little moment, ere they shall burst in redoubled fury upon
the world that has forgotten Christ, our Redeemer,
that my children may cry aloud that they may
lift up their voices and spare not, that they may
proclaim, for a little moment, "the coming of the
Lord."
675

THIS IS THAT
Awake! AAvake!! O ye children of the most
High God, for in My hands I am holding back the
wrath and the indignation, the wars and
the pestilences, the plagues, the earthquakes and the suffering, and the fiery
indignation that shall soon envelop all those who
have forgotten God.
"PEACE/' do they cry?
Lo, there is no peace outside of Him who is the
Prince of Peace.

"PEACE," do they cry?
But the cries of peace shall fall upon their heads.
Today is the day of salvation.
Proclaim ye the Word.
Yea, declare it from the early morning, even unto
the setting of the sun.
Yea, hold not thy peace.

PROCLAIM
THE WORD

Cry aloud in the night watches.

Warn the people, warn the people.
Let the message ring forth o'er the land.
Let it echo through the hills.
Let it resound in the valleys,
For the day of the Lord is at hand.
The deliverance of His people hath come.
But, sorrow shall fall upon the heads of those who
have forgotten God.
As the avalanche sweeps down the mountain side.
Hear the roaring of His voice?
'Tis the Lord, who is uttering His voice before His
army.
He is leading them forth in triumph,

Their's is the crown of glory;
Their's is the victory,
Through Him who has overcome,
Subdued His enemies,
And who shall reign forevermore.
676

REIGN, SILENCE,, REIGN
Make haste ! Make haste ! My little ones.
Make haste! There is no time to spare.
For behold, I am coming soon,
To meet you in the air.
Lift up thy voice, My Love, My Choice,
Unto Me thy praises bring.
Rejoice, My Love, rejoice,
In the praises of your King.
O, SEND FORTH THE MESSAGE.
Shout it from the housetops,
Proclaim it from the steeples,
Declare it in the tabernacles,
Proclaim it in the highways and the hedges,
In the streets and the lanes,
In the city marts, aiid in the desert lone.
Reign, Silence, reign, a little space, 'till My children shall send forth the last, final call, for I am
coming soon. Amen.

677

LOVE'S PINIONS AND THE CHURCH
TRIUMPHANT.
Los Angeles, Cal., January 7, 1919.
Out of the verdant fields it came, and soared aloft,
Above the trees, all laden with their fruitage rich
and rare.
On milky, snow-white pinions did it soar
This dove, so gentle and so pureIts wings spread wide, its pinions long;
Higher and higher did it rise,
Until it sailed "midst clouds and sunlit skies.
His people, His people are as the dove
The pinions upon which they fly are Love.
But now, brought IOAV, O Dove,
Thy pinions clipped; thy wing- feathers plucked; ;
Thy love destroyed and lost; how canst thou fly
aloft, as in the days of yore?
I saw the dove brought low buffeted thrust at,
Unable to escape the prodding stick
Of error and false doctrine
With which inquisitive, experimenting children
tortured it in passing.
But behold, the feathers have again begun to grow ;
Her pinions Spring in snowy whiteness forthStronger than before.
Love and praise shall cause thee to arise,
And soar into the very skies, My Love.
Let not thy wings be clipped away,
For I am coming soon, at Break of Day.
How canst thou rise to meet Me in the air.
If thy pinions are destroyed, O Love most fair?
The Lord, in the midst of His people, seeks to do a new
work, to reveal Himself in might and in power. Let, therefore, thy love abound. Love thy God with all thy heart, and

thy neighbor as thyself. Little children, love one another
then shall thy wings be spread wide, and thou shalt be lifted
up above the petty things of earth, and thou shalt see the
glory of the Lord, and soar through the vast expanse of
Heaven into His very Presence. Selah!
678

THE BRIDEGROOM AND THE BRIDE.
PROPHECY.
Great, Eternal Love of God,
Who shall measure thee?
Divine, Omnipotent, Glorious Love of God,
Who shall fathom thee?
We descend into the depths of the sea, and ask,
"Is God's Love here?" The creatures of the
deep all cry aloud and say, "Great, great, great
Love of God, it watches over me."
Behold, we ascend into the heavens, where the
birds with outstretched pinions sail through the
azure blue. We ask, "Is Thy Love here?" They
cry aloud, "Yea, yea, yea, His love upholdeth me."
We climb on into the heights of the ethereal
canopy of heaven, and exclaim:
"Surely, His Love hath not mounted to such
heights." But the stars burst forth into singing
in their glory, together, and assure us, "Yea, Y r ea.
It is His great Love that upholds us and causeth
us to shine and reflect His glory."
Then down and on, far into the silent wastes of
the desert we tread, and our hearts cry :

"Great Love of God, surely it hath not reached
this barren land." But the sands cry aloud, "Yea,
Yea, He is here with His Love outpoured, and
His Love shall cause the desert to bloom as a rose ;
there shall be pools in the wilderness and floods in
the dry lands."
O boundless Love of Thine, Eternal God e'en
though the story be told through fathomless,
eternal years, 'twill yet be all untold. Thy pinions,
and outspread wings reach to the ends of the eartV
Thou dost brood over it as a hen upon her nest.
Thy golden streams of love flow down upon us
679

THIS IS THAT
from every feather. Thy people are protected from
the heat of the sun, and from the ragings of
storm 'neath the shadow of Thy wings, forever and
forever.
With outstretched hand hath He led His people
forth,
Through parted floods, dry-shod ;
Their enemies hath He consumed before their eyes.
Manna did He pour out from heaven upon them,
Fresh every morning.
Unto a large land did He lead His hosts.
Unto a land which flows with milk and honey
A land of pomegranates and vintage of the vine
A land of grapes, precious fruitage,
Did He lead His people forth.
Glorious has been their portion,
Righteousness and Peace has been their garment.

Surely His people shall rejoice in Him,
And shall exalt His name forever.
Fair is He, as the morning dawn,
Bright is He, as the noonday sun,
tiweet is He, as honey in the comb,
This Jesus, the Lamb of Glory.
Tender is He, as the Mother that holds her babe,
Strong is He, as the mountains that guard thy
coasts.
Mighty is He, as the sea whose billows break upon
thy shores,
Glorious is He, this King of kings the Lord of
Hosts.
He it is who led His people forth with singing,
He is the Captain of the King's Hosts.
His people shall follow after Him,
And His troops shall shout His praises.
680

THE BRIDEGROOM AND THE BRIDE
Hark ! Hark ! He is speaking unto His people r
saying, "Dost thou behold this narrow stream
shining in the sunlight and liftTHE STREAM iiig up thine eyes dost thou beAND hold the great, sweeping expanse
THE OCEAN of the mighty ocean? Thy present

borders are but as the narrow
stream, but if thou Avilt follow me I will enlarge
thy borders; grace and power and glory shall be
multiplied unto thee, and as the ocean is more
mighty than the stream, so shall thy latter glory
be greater than thy former. "
"Dost thou behold yonder sapling of the oak?
and have you considered the mighty parent oak,
rising in lofty maturity far above
THE SAPLING it? My children are at present but
AND as the sapling nourished by the
THE OAK. former and the early latter rain;
but O! if they would lift up their
heads and open wide their mouths, to receive the
latter rain in its abundance, they should be made
to grow up and up until their branches should rise
above every hindrance, and tower in regal authority
over every obstacle. The fowls of the air should
nestle amongst its branches, and the herds should
lie down in great delight beneath the shadow
thereof."
"Dost thou behold the babe, taking its first steps,

upheld by its mother's hand? Hast thou beheld
the mighty giant striding across the
THE BABE field, upon whose broad shoulders
AND the heaviest burden seems but a
THE GIANT, feather's weight?
The Body is today as that of a
little child beginning to take its first steps forward
into the strength and life of the Spirit-controlled
realm. But if my people will but look unto Me,
and lean no more on the maternal arm of human
flesh, I will cause them to tower as a giant; they
681

THIS IS THAT
shall move forward in conquering strides; their
reproach shall be taken away from before the
heathen, they shall no more ask, "Where is thy
God?" but shall say, "We have seen His light from
afar off/ 7 Then shall the Lord take His Church
unto Himself, mighty, strong, conquering, and allglorious.
The night with its shadows is fleeing away; the
sun is rising in splendor o'er the eternal hills, tho
day is breaking; the tidal waves of blessing are
rolling in ; the shoAvers of blessing shall come down
in torrents, for behold, midst sunshine and rain
the glory of God is rising and bursting upon His
people. They shall show forth mighty signs and
wonders through His Spirit's power.
Rejoice, O thou Bride of the Bridegroom ;
Be glad, O virgins clothed in white;
Rejoice, rejoice, and dry those tears;
For the long, long night is at an end.

See! the light of an eternal dawn is breaking,
The Sun of Righteousness is rising with healing
in His wings.
Yea, the Sun is rising, even the Sun that shall
never set;
The light is breaking, the light that shall never
fade away.
Hark! the trumpet is resounding and echoing
through the holy mountain of the Lord.
The bugle! canst thou not hear its clear, swift
voice coming o'er the billows?
'Tis echoing down from the land where tears never
flow.
Stand, therefore, clad in the robes of love, truth,
and praise, thy sandals upon thy feet.
Let thy veil of separation be upon thy face.
The Lord cometh quickly for His beloved. .
682

THE BRIDEGROOM AND THE BRIDE
Thy veiled face is but as a hidden and foolish mystery to the world,
But to Me thy face is fair and comely, O chosen
one.
Those that love not Me nor thee have cast thy
name out as evil,
But I have called thee by My New Name, and thou
art Mine.

I have engraven thy name upon the palms of My
hands.
I have entwined thee in the cords of My heart.
The golden chains upon thy neck, and thy fair
jewels, adorn thee, My beloved.
Thy rubies are as drops of blood, My blood that
was shed for thee;
Thy pearls as tear-drops shed by one who walked
with Me and fellowshipped My sufferings;
Thy diamonds are priceless souls which thou hast
won for Me.
Thy heart shall be filled with righteousness, thy
face with joy,
For thine eyes have caught the earliest rays of
dawn.
I am coming, little child ren, I am coming in the
morn.
Balm of Gilead, Who art Thouf
Thou art the Prince of a mighty host that leadeth
His people and healeth them from all their
sorrow.
O thou mighty Victor, who cometh with conquering tread, and laden with the trophies of
Avar, Who art Thouf
Thou art our Bridegroom, the King of Righteousness.

683

THIS IS THAT
O thou Ray of Glory, that shineth down -twixt
parted clouds, piercing the darkness of sin's
night, and dispelling the gloom of sorrow,
Who art Thou?
Thou art the Sun of Righteousness, the Lord of
Glory is Thy Name.
O! radiant Path, that leads from earth to heaven,
O glorious Way, that leads from darkness
into light, Who art Thou?
Thou art Jesus, the Way, the Truth, and the Life,
and beside Thee there is none other.
O Door, swung wide upon Thy hinges, through
Whose portals are revealed blest, sparkling
streams and fragrant meadows, Who art
Thou?
Thou art the Door, by which, if any man shall
enter in, he shall go in and out, and shall
find pasture.
O thou Ltiy of the Valley, thou Rose of Sharon.
thou Bright and Morning Star, thou Fairest
of Ten Thousand to the souls of Thy people, Thou art surely our Jesus, the King in
royal garments, the Lamb slain from the
foundation of the world.
And thou, who comest up out of the wilderness,
leaning upon the arm of thy Beloved, thou.
upon whom the first rays of the rising sun
are falling in transforming glory, Who art
Thou?

Thou art the Church, the chosen bride of the Lamb,
the Body of overcomers, the tested, tried
people who have passed through the waters
and walked through the fire. Thou art the
espoused wife of thy Beloved, the Son of the
Living God.
684

THE BRIDEGROOM AND THE BRIDE
What are these white robes that clothe thee, and
that shine with righteousness?
These are the robes of His righteousness, with
which He didst clothe us in the day of oui;
nakedness.
A Vha t are these shoes that adorn thy feet, studded
with precious jewels and bound with lacings of Love?
These are the shoes of Salvation, with which He
hath shod His people whom He leadeth
forth.
Her garments are embroidered with the fine needle
work, and each stitch is worked in gold,
the victor's crown of righteousness shall be
placed upon her head, and she shall reign
with the King upon His throne.
come, come, my beloved, the time is short, I
long to lead you quickly forth to greater
power and victory.
ijuicken thy step, O church of the Living God.
Press closer to Me. Lean hard upon Mine arm.

1 will lead thee forth to the more excellent glory;
Thus shall we hasten on to the end of the way,
Till, with My hand I shall sweep back the flaming
curtains of eternal dawn, as WE pass
through the portals of OUR ETERNAL
AND VICTORIOUS DAY. AMEN.

END OF BOOK.

